Belgrade Orders Army to Return To Its Barracks
The Prime Minister of Yugoslavia and the leader of the breakaway republic of Slovenia announced late Sunday night that the Yugoslav Army had been ordered to withdraw to its barracks in an effort to ease the country away from the edge of civil war.
Early this morning, the Government in Belgrade took another important step toward restoring order when it installed a new head of the federal presidency, ending a six-week impasse that weakened the federal Government's authority to deal with separatist challenges from Slovenia and Croatia.


Lebanese Army Prepares to Move Into Southern Lebanon


Market Place; Slumping Peugeot Is Recommended
ALTHOUGH the Peugeot automobile group has taken a beating this year as Europe's economic slowdown has cut into car sales, many analysts are recommending its stock.
They expect the sales and profits of Peugeot S.A. to rebound nicely next year, once Europe's economy starts to recover.
"We're positive on the stock longer term," said Stephen Reitman, an analyst with Phillips &amp; Drew in London.
"But near term you are likely to get a bit of weakness."


WSMP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 17


Hua-yu Li, Doctoral Candidate, Wed To H. J. McLendon Jr., Harvard Aide
Hua-yu Li, a doctoral candidate in Chinese politics at Columbia University, and Dr.
Hiram James McLendon Jr., the assistant director of the Reischauer Institute of Japanese Studies at Harvard University, were married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
David Dodson, a Baptist minister who is a cousin of the bridegroom, officiated at the ecumenical ceremony.
The bride graduated from Sophia University in Tokyo and received a master's degree in East Asian studies from Harvard.
She is a member of the industrial research staff in the New York office of the Sanwa Bank of Tokyo.
She is a daughter of Emi Fujita of Tokyo, who is a consultant in the China Trade Office of Nissho Iwai, a trading company in Tokyo.
Her father, the late Shaopeng Li, was a professor of Russian studies at Beijing University and the Beijing Institute for Foreign Trade.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets  Mexico held its position as the world's top-performing stock market, as investors continued to bet that it would benefit from economic reform and a free-trade agreement with the U.S. and Canada.
But many of the world's markets underwent consolidations and disappointments in the last three months, after rallies fueled by the allied victory in the Persian Gulf and the anticipation of an early economic recovery in the U.S.
Stocks fell 3.6 percent in France, 2.5 percent in Britain and 7.4 percent in Japan.
In the U.S., stock investors caught their breath after a strong previous quarter.  [ Page D3. ]  The Dow Jones industrial average closed 7.11 points lower for the quarter, and other indexes posted small declines.
The New York Stock Exchange composite index was down 0.9 percent, while the American Stock Ex change index was down 0.3 percent and the over-the-counter index was down 1.3 percent.
Of 3,999 stocks tracked by Media General, 1,891 were up in the quarter, and 1,951 were down, although more over-the-counter stocks rose than fell.
The technology sector had a particularly bad quarter, with Compaq Com puter down 50.3 percent, Commodore Inter national down 36.7 percent and Silicon Graphics off 28.8 percent.  [ D3. ]


WTD Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Reviews/Television; A Cowboy Meets a Lady And the Indians Attack
Anyone wanting to put the television western back in robust business would be hard pressed to come up with a better winning combination than a Louis L'Amour novel and a Sam Elliott performance.
L'Amour, who died in 1988, has more than a hundred books in print, going back to 1953's "Hondo." Mr.
Elliott has frequently ridden tall in the saddle for the cameras, most prominently in three L'Amour-based television productions: "The Sacketts," "The Shadow Riders" and "The Quick and the Dead."
So, encouraged by the author, Mr.
Elliott acquired the rights to L'Amour's "Conagher," tonight's new movie on TNT at 8 and 11.
The actor is not only the star but also executive producer and a co-writer, along with Jeffrey M. Meyer and Katharine Ross.
Ms.
Ross is the film's other star and, as it happens, is married to Mr.
Elliott.
Clearly, the Elliotts have taken pains to preserve the spirit of the novel, and they succeed splendidly in this handsome production.


Waste Technology reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Jocelyn Virgil Marries Brian Phillips
Jocelyn Marie Virgil, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Howard Virgil of Metuchen, N.J., was married yesterday in New Brunswick, N.J., to Brian Conrad Phillips, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Phillips of Jersey City.
The Rev.
Buster Soaries, a Baptist minister, assisted by the Rev.
Clarence Crawford, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Voorhees Chapel on the Douglass College campus at Rutgers University.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from Rutgers.
She is an assistant casualty analyst at the Prudential Insurance Company in Morganville, N.J.
Her father is a high school teacher in Metuchen, N.J.
Her mother, Daisy Virgil, is a technical employment representative for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in Holmdel, N.J.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet New York State Theater
Some of the quieter pleasures of New York City Ballet-going were evident in performances in the closing weekend of the company's spring season.


Winnebago Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


SIDELINES: Working on a Long Shot; Once a Star; Still a Competitor
DAVE KUFELD , once voted small-college Jewish player of the year, was 10 years removed from competitive basketball when he was leafing through a newspaper recently.
"It said something about the Maccabiah Games, and I thought, 'Who am I kidding?' " recalled the 32-year-old Kufeld, now president of a New York City advertising agency, Gross/ Kufeld &amp; Company.


SIDELINES: Imagine the Homecoming Parade; Home Is Where Most Fans Are
Northwestern University, hoping to restore its faded football glory, expects 80,000 fans for its home game against Ohio State in October.
The Wildcats will draw 65,000 against Notre Dame for another home game.
Not bad considering that Northwestern's stadium in Evanston, Ill., doesn't even hold 50,000 people.
It's all easily explained.
Northwestern's creative athletic director, Dr.
BRUCE CORRIE , has discovered that home is where the money is.
So when the deal is right, he is taking Northwestern on the road for home games.


A Period of Retrenchment for the World's Stock Markets
The second quarter was one of retrenchment for most of the world's major stock markets.
After first-quarter rallies fueled by the allied victory in the Persian Gulf war and the anticipation of economic recovery in the United States, many markets experienced consolidations and disappointments in the last three months.
And with the absence of a hoped-for decline in interest rates in Europe, most of the Continent's markets suffered.
Mexico Still on Top
According to an index compiled by The Financial Times of the performances of the stock markets in 24 countries, 18 declined in dollar terms in the second quarter, compared with 3 in the first, and half declined when measured in their own currencies, compared with none in the first quarter.


Information Management Technologies reports earnings for Year to March 31


Gandhi's Widow Is Serenaded Anew
They gather outside the heavily protected white stucco villa every day now, the politicians waiting to bow before and speak to "Soniaji."
After weeks of seclusion that followed the assassination of her husband, Rajiv Gandhi, Sonia Gandhi has opened the doors to the family's relatively simple home at 10 Janpath, between Parliament and downtown, to meet Congress Party politicians.


ACCORD REACHED FOR GRIM BUDGET IN NEW YORK CITY
With Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council splitting much of their difference on tax increases and service cuts, New York City officials reached an agreement last night on the outlines of a grim, recession-dominated budget that will raise the cost of living and lower the quality of services in the city.
The agreement came after months of wrangling that culminated in tense negotiations that ended only as the deadline for adopting a budget loomed.
In the hours before the agreement, the Council, operating under new powers granted under the new City Charter, had renewed a threat to adopt its own version of the budget without input from the Mayor.


Layoffs in New Jersey
The $14.7 billion budget agreed to by the New Jersey Legislative calls for laying off more than 2,000 workers but no tax increase.
Page B4.
Other states around the country grappled with budget deadlines.
Page A10.


Unions Face Decision on Givebacks and Layoffs
The Dinkins administration and the City Council reached a budget agreement last night without concessions from municipal labor unions.
It will now be up to the union leaders to decide whether they are willing to make significant concessions -- by giving back salary increases and benefits -- to prevent 4,000 planned layoffs and perhaps even to bring back some of the 6,000 workers let go on Friday.


World Economies


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of July 1: MONDAY Carolina Frght Corp


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazines; Where to Draw the Line When Helping Advertisers
RECENTLY, some 7,500 randomly selected subscribers to Money magazine received a letter from the publisher, suggesting that they give serious consideration to investing in the Franklin U.S.
Government Securities Fund.
The fund -- as the letter mentioned -- is one of the magazine's advertisers.
Accompanying the letter was a Franklin advertisement with a coupon to send for a free prospectus.


How to Make OPEC Obsolete
A two-day conference between oil exporting and importing countries to find ways to stabilize the world's oil market, talked about for nearly two decades, is finally being convened in Paris today.
But with 24 countries and half a dozen international organizations invited to participate, it's likely that the meeting, dominated by conflicting individual agendas concerning oil prices, production levels and income distribution, will be a bust.


The Threat of Power Master
It could be the name of a cartoon superhero.
But there's nothing comic or heroic about the plan by the G. Heileman Brewing Company of Wisconsin to promote Power Master, a new high-alcohol malt liquor product, with an ad campaign that appears to target inner-city blacks.
Furious, Antonia Novello, the U.S.
Surgeon General, has condemned the product's name and marketing strategy as "socially irresponsible." Her anger is justified.


Bank of Japan Cuts Its Rate To 5.5 Percent
Japan today lowered its benchmark interest rate by a half percentage point, to 5.5 percent, ending its two-year-old policy of keeping interest rates high to wring inflation out of the economy.
The announcement by the Bank of Japan, which came at 12:15 P.M. here, appeared intended to spur Japan's economy from a recent slowdown in growth.
The country is headed toward its longest-running economic expansion in post-war history -- it is two months short of the record of 57 months, set more than 20 years ago -- and the bank has reccently come under increasing pressure to lower its rates to spur capital spending and revive the lagging stock market.
Tokyo Stocks Surge
The announcement came after widespread speculation that an increase was imminent.
The speculation sent the Nikkei index of 250 issues up 370.71 points, or 1.59 percent, to 23,661.67, in active morning trading, reversing a steady decline last week.
And the yen strengthened somewhat against the dollar.
At noon, the American currency was quoted at 137.80 yen, down from its close of 138.15 on Friday.





Dance in Review
New York City Ballet New York State Theater
George Balanchine's abstract ballets may lack specific characters.
Yet their solo roles are rich in nuances of interpretation.
Take "Valse-Fantaisie," the airy little piece to music by Glinka that the New York City Ballet performed Saturday night.


New York Woman Opens Its Gold-Card Mine
Here she comes, the New York Woman!
Street smart.
Ambitious.
Sexy.
A young urban survivor, who never, never leaves home without her American Express gold card.
Or so New York Woman magazine, which is published by the American Express Publishing Corporation, would have its advertisers believe.


Big Men on Campus


Washington Scientific Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 2


Jazz Festival; Ray Charles's Silences, Regina Belle's Wildness
The overstated and the understated met on the second show Saturday night at Avery Fisher Hall in the form of Regina Belle and Ray Charles.
Ms.
Belle, wild and extroverted, put on a performance that tried to shake the hall with her vocal improvisations, while Mr.
Charles put on his typically precise show.
The concert, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, closed with Mr.
Charles.
Using a voice that moved from a hiss to a moan, he made the most of slight melodies, imbuing almost everything he sang with loss and longing.
Though Mr.
Charles sings his songs the same way every night, he has the ability to turn the routine into something that signifies passion; as the band stared straight ahead, looking bored, the audience went wild.


Cellular Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seaway Food Town Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 25


Built on Big-Time Basketball, U.N.L.V. Tries to Scrub Its Image
Long before there was a 19,000-seat arena called the Shark Tank, in honor of its famous occupant, Jerry Tarkanian; long before there was even the Shark or a U.N.L.V.
Runnin' Rebel, there was a vision.
A handful of businessmen and investors who had migrated to Las Vegas in the 1950's and made their money in the casino-fueled boom of the 60's decided that the city needed to broaden its image beyond the neon-tinted night-life culture and the ever-present influence of organized crime.


Jazz Festival; With New Variations, Ornette Coleman
Count on Ornette Coleman to confound any expectations his listeners bring.
On Saturday night at Carnegie Hall, in his first New York performance in four years, Mr.
Coleman brought a new lineup of his Prime Time band and new variations on what he calls harmolodic music.
With Mr.
Coleman on alto saxophone, Prime Time includes two guitarists (Ken Wessel and Chris Rosenberg), constantly moving between rhythm and lead guitar roles, and now just one bassist, Al MacDowell.
Instead of two trap drummers, the new Prime Time includes Denardo Coleman, the leader's son, on drums, and the percussionist Badal Roy, usually playing tabla drums.


Bionaire Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Banking Gloom Clouds Outlook
Just as the recession is ending, doubts about the health of the financial system seem to have re-emerged in the credit markets, raising questions about the viability of a recovery.
Most bankers and economists contend that corporate balance sheets are in much better shape than they were a year or even six months ago.
But problems remain, particularly at big commercial banks.
Those difficulties are probably not serious enough to abort an upturn, they said, but they can act as a restraint on the recovery.


Morris Notches 8th Straight Victory As the Twins Break 4-Game Slide
Jack Morris won his eighth consecutive start, pitching a six-hitter today as the Minnesota Twins beat the Chicago White Sox, 3-0, and ended a four-game losing streak.
Morris (11-5) struck out three and walked one as he pitched his first shutout since last Sept. 23 against Oakland and the 25th of his career.
He improved his record in the Metrodome to 16-3, including 8-1 this season.


2 Rivals in Liberia Move Toward Peace
Liberia's two largest political factions moved today to set aside their differences and put an end to a bitter rivalry that has cost tens of thousands of lives.
An accord between the National Patriotic Front and rival Interim Government of Liberia, a breakthrough after months of stalemate, was reached after a 90-minute meeting here between Charles Taylor, the leader of the front, and Amos Sawyer, the interim President.
Five West African heads of government also attended the meeting.


Republican Senator Assails White House Plan on Rights Bill
Senator John C. Danforth today accused the Bush Administration of trying to enable employers to impose "extraneous" job qualifications that would discriminate against women, blacks and other members of minorities.
The Missouri Republican said efforts to work out a compromise on a bill dealing with discrimination in the workplace broke down last week because of White House insistence that any bill allow such standards.
For example, he said, a high school diploma requirement for janitors would exclude more blacks than whites and a ban on single parents would exclude more women than men.


Review/Rock; Speed-Metal Triple Bill at the Garden
In some ways, the Clash of the Titans tour that arrived on Friday night at Madison Square Garden could be the belated triumph of punk-rock.
As Anthrax, Slayer and Megadeth played, a full house, at least two-thirds of whom were wearing black T-shirts, shouted along with lines like Anthrax's "You're anti -- you're antisocial!" or "Ain't gonna live my life this way!" From a more cynical viewpoint, it was an example of rebellion as commodity, standardized in sound (a pummeling beat, minor chords, chantlike vocals), appearance (long hair, jeans and T-shirts, or bare chests) and action (flopping that long hair to the beat).
But for all its commercialism, the music, known as thrash or speed-metal, has genuine power.
The beat and guitars, simultaneously hyperactive and one-dimensional, are a perfect musical metaphor for enraged frustration, while speed-metal lyrics don't bother with any of pop's consolations, like love.
During the four-hour concert, fans stomped and shouted along with lyrics about fighting racism (Anthrax's "Keep It in the Family"), censorship (Megadeth's "Hook in Mouth") or dying on the battlefield (Slayer's "Mandatory Suicide").
Thrash recognizes, and tries to exorcise, the malevolent powers that greet adolescents on the verge of adulthood, often with lyrics that switch from the perspective of victim to victimizer.
In concert, words are often lost in the roar, but that hardly matters; fans have learned them from the albums' lyric sheets.


New in Entertainment: A Video of Your Last Surgery
As she put out the popcorn and potato chips in her living room, Karen Bennett said she believed this was going to be the first party ever held to watch a gallbladder operation.
That is a difficult claim to verify.
But at the very least it was the first party ever held to watch Karen Bennett's gallbladder operation.
"I can't exactly say I'm excited about it," said Meg Marshall, one of the first guests to arrive at Ms.
Bennett's home in the suburb of Wantagh, L.I., on Wednesday evening.
"But I am looking forward to it. Normally I hate looking at other people's home movies, but this will be different."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled dates for the release of major economic indicators this week.
Monday Construction Spending . . .
May Purchasing Managers' Report . . .
June


Times Is Planning to Sell Back Issues in CD Format
Joining a growing list of newspapers, The New York Times has announced plans to make its full text available on compact disk.
The primary market for compact disks is libraries, and The Times announced its plans yesterday at a meeting of the American Library Association in Atlanta.


AT THE BUDGET WALL: Mayor Still Holds Sway; Tenuous Compromise Shows Dinkins Power
By compromising on a budget for New York City, Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council each gave to get something for themselves and their city: a timely if tenuous agreement on how to begin facing its deepest problems in years.
Mr.
Dinkins, his fiscal stewardship under fire for months, won only half the increase in property taxes he sought, but a third more than the Council wanted.
That was enough to restore some of the worst of Mr.
Dinkins's threatened cuts.
He produced an agreement that proved that he was still the Mayor, a not inconsequential claim amid his misery.


International American Homes reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Question Box
Cy Young for M.V.P.
Q.
In the 1987 season, Kevin Mitchell was traded from San Diego to San Francisco in a seven-player deal that brought the Padres four players, one of whom was Mark Davis.
In 1989, Mitchell was voted the National League most valuable player and Davis was voted the Cy Young award.
Has there ever been any other trade that included the swapping of a future m.v.p. and future Cy Young winner?


Rebels Reported Killed on Kashmir Border
Indian soldiers patrolling the border in the state of Jammu and Kashmir on Saturday killed 15 Muslim rebels as they were trying to cross into Pakistan, the police say.
Police Chief Jai Narayan Saxena said on Saturday that the victims were among 80 young, unarmed Kashmiri men trying to cross the border for training in guerrilla warfare.


INSIDE
Tokyo Trims Interest Rate In a move to maintain the country's long economic expansion, Japan's central bank lowered a key interest rate to 5.5 percent.
Page D1.
Accord by Liberian Factions


Nichols Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Orchard Beach Offers Slice of Paradise
Ponce de Leon could have saved himself a trek to Florida if he had asked Matt Lipton where to find the fabled Fountain of Youth.
Florida's fine for time-shares and retirement villages, but Mr.
Lipton said the secret to his 80 years can be found in the waters of Orchard Beach in the Bronx.
"This is the health spa of the world," Mr.
Lipton decreed as he stretched his leathery, sand-flecked frame on the warm shore.
"I recommend it to everybody."


SIDELINES: No Tents at This Summer Camp; Mornings Are For Motivation
The Nike summer camp for high school basketball players, with its lofty ideals stressing education, has moved after eight years from Princeton, N.J., to Indianapolis.
It got a better deal.
CINDY HORR of the Center for Visitors and Conference Seminars at Princeton said: "We liked having them. But they got a fantastic deal in Indianapolis, with business people getting behind them and underwriting the cost."


Review/Theater; Wil Calhoun's 'Balcony Scene,' at Circle Rep
When a play's dramatic climax involves one man's brave efforts to defy the elements by renting a videotape during a virulent Chicago thunderstorm, you had better believe that it is nap time.
"The Balcony Scene," a new play by Wil Calhoun, is 80 minutes of nearly uninterrupted slumber that wastes the energies of two fine actors, Cynthia Nixon and Jonathan Hogan, and leaves an audience questioning the judgment of the Circle Repertory Company, a home for such distinguished writers as Craig Lucas and Lanford Wilson.
What was this theater thinking of?
It's one thing for a nonprofit company to aim high and fail, but "The Balcony Scene" aspires to be "Same Time, Next Year" and crash lands at roughly the esthetic altitude of "Three's Company."


Trunks Blamed in Drowning
A man drowned while trying to pull on a pair of swimming trunks, the authorities said.
Timothy John Hudson, 27 years old, of Broken Arrow, Okla., was swimming in Fort Gibson Lake on Friday when his trunks came off.


The Doc Can't Find The Cure
Dwight Gooden mumbled something to himself on the mound after the third Philadelphia home run zoomed into the far reaches of left field.
What he said was undetectable and probably unprintable, but he was not alone in mumbling about the alarming course of events.
Could Doc really be that bad?
That was the line most of the mumblers were mumbling after he was rocked once again while the Mets were bowing to the last-place Phillies, 10-9, yesterday at Shea Stadium.
The recent evidence offered by Gooden seems to indicate that, yes, the man with the $5 million arm has been pretty horrible.


French Inflation at 3.2%
Consumer prices in France rose by three-tenths of a percent in May from the previous month, the Government said last week.
The rise translated to an annual increase of 3.2 percent, the National Statistics Office said.


Barbara Lisi Is Married
Barbara Lynn Lisi, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony F. Lisi of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday at Waveny House in New Canaan, Conn., to Michael Craig Lengel 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lengel Jr. of Trumbull, Conn.
The Rev.
Theodore Hoskins, a Congregational minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Lisi-Lengel, 28 years old, graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
She heads her own public relations concern in Westport.
The bridegroom, 29, is an associate at Andersen Consulting, management consultants in New York.
He graduated from Stanford University and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.


Review/Opera; Bolshoi's 'Mlada,' a Russian Folk Spectacle
To its enormous credit, the Bolshoi Opera chose boldness over mere middlebrow prudence.
After Tchaikovsky's "Yevgeny Onegin" last week, the company could have continued along the same safe path with, say, "Boris Godunov" and "The Queen of Spades." Instead, on Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera House, it offered a real rarity, Rimsky-Korsakov's opera-ballet "Mlada," to be followed on Wednesday by Tchaikovsky's almost equally rare "Maid of Orleans."
Such repertory, along with younger singers less known in the West than some older Bolshoi standbys, represents a deliberate choice by the Moscow company's current leadership, in place since 1988: Aleksandr Lazarev, the artistic director and chief conductor; Boris Pokrovsky, stage director, and Valery Levental, designer.
They want to rediscover lost Russian masterpieces, enliven stodgy production styles and showcase young talent.


Austria Refuses to Withdraw Troops From Slovenia Border
Austria today rejected a demand by the Yugoslav Government that it withdraw about 5,000 soldiers whom it dispatched in recent days to border areas where Slovenian secessionist forces are holding some border posts against Yugoslav Army advances.
"There is no reason for this demand," the Austrian Interior Minister, Franz Loschnak, said to reporters.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Kentucky Development Finance Authority has had $90.9 million worth of hospital revenue bonds repriced by the underwriter, Dillon, Read, to yield 4.50 percent for bonds maturing in 1991, and 6.25 percent for 1997 maturities, raising yields about 5 to 10 basis points.
Term bonds maturing in 2010 were repriced to yield 7.05 percent, 5 basis points lower than the preliminary pricing.
Preferred *
Ohio Edison Co., Akron, Ohio, has filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission covering $50 million of preferred stock to be auctioned after a pricing for dividend purposes in mid-July.
It will offer 500 units at a price of $100,000 a unit, each of which will consist of 1,000 preferred shares with a par value of $100 each. *
First Fidelity Bancorporation, Newark, is offering $75 million in 10.64 percent preferred stock.
Ratings *
B.
F.
Goodrich Co.'s $250 million senior unsecured debt securities, filed as a shelf registration, has received a preliminary BBB rating from Standard &amp; Poor's.
The company is based in Akron, Ohio. *
Phoenix Sky Harbor Airport's $113 million revenue bonds issued in 1965, 1967, 1979, 1982, 1984 and 1985, which have an A+ rating, have been put on credit watch with negative implications by S.&amp; P. *
Clark County McCarran Airport, Las Vegas, Nev., has had its A-rated $487.3 million revenue bonds, series 1983 and 1988, and its $39.1 million subordinated debt, series 1982, rated A-, placed on credit watch by S.&amp; P.


Weicker Vetoes a Sales-Tax Plan, But Delays Budget Deadline a Day
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. vetoed a plan by the Legislature early this morning to solve Connecticut's budget crisis without an income tax, but he postponed for 24 hours his threat to shut down a large part of the state government.
Mr.
Weicker had threatened to furlough thousands of state employees and suspend all nonessential services beginning today if no budget was approved by 12:01 this morning, the start of the new fiscal year.
But shortly after the midnight deadline passed, he said that progress was being made and that one more day could bring forth a budget he would sign.


Kemp's Proposals on Poverty Given Sympathy, Not Action
A year ago, White House aides drafted a 10-page memorandum to provide President Bush with a vision for a war on poverty.
They ran it past Jack F. Kemp, the Administration's Housing Secretary and anti-poverty czar.
"That's not a vision," Mr.
Kemp complained in a letter to the White House.
He was particularly annoyed by the document's call for two technical studies of how anti-poverty programs are financed and managed.


Answers to Almost Any Question, for a Price
It is every Trivial Pursuit player's dream come true.
How do you make a horse walk downstairs?
What is the deepest point of the Mississippi River?
How many movies did Alfred Hitchcock make?
Call SVP for the answer.
It is also every research department's secret weapon.
What is the market share of a competitor?
How do debt-for-nature swaps work in Costa Rica?
Has wine consumption in Japan fallen?
Again, a quick call to SVP should bring the answer.


Abdel-Rahim Ahmed, A P.L.O. Leader, 47
Abdel-Rahim Ahmed, leader of the Iraqi-supported Arab Liberation Front and a member of the Palestine Liberation Organization's executive committee, died today.
He was 47 years old.
He died of cancer, an aide said.


Report on Underwriting
IDD Information Services reported that corporate underwritings totaled $249.68 billion in the first half of this year.
Investment-grade debt securities totaled $210.86 billion, an increase of $144.26 billion from the first half of 1990.
IDD also said that common stock sales rose sharply in the first half to $25.75 billion, from $12.88 billion in the first half of 1990.
April and May were record months for common stock issuance, accounting for $6.4 billion and $7.9 billion, respectively.
Because of rising stock prices, some companies were encouraged to reduce the high-yield debt they accumulated in the 1980's, IDD said.


Virginia Eskin, Pianist, Is Wed
Virginia Rubottom Eskin, a concert pianist, and Joseph David Steinfield, a lawyer, were married yesterday in Boston at the home of the bridegroom's mother, Irene Steinfield.
Daniel D. Levenson, a justice of the peace of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, officiated.
The bride is the daughter of Phyllis Rubottom of San Diego and the late Herbert Rubottom.
The bridegroom is also the son of the late Frank Steinfield.
The bride, 50 years old, specializes in performing music written by women.
She is a graduate of the Trinity College of Music in London.
Her father was the director of industrial relations for the Convair Corporation in San Diego.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


Road Repair At Its Peak, As Is Anger Of Motorists
Every 40 seconds, a contractor, utility company or plumber cuts a new hole in a New York City street.
And more often than that, motorists and pedestrians curse the delays and inconvenience caused by those holes.
A record amount of street work -- either to repair the road itself or something beneath it, like a sewer, water or power line -- is spread throughout all five boroughs this summer and is causing some of the worst traffic tie-ups in recent memory.


Changes Set At World Bank
The World Bank says its 22- member board has agreed to organizational changes sought by the United States to try to make the international lending agency more aware of private- sector needs in the third world.
The growing emphasis on helping the private sector is viewed as a means to further the bank's goal of alleviating poverty and promoting economic development, and not as an end in itself, Barber B. Conable Jr., the World Bank's president, said on Friday.


Lewis vs. Johnson Lacks a Dash of Hype
At one time it could have been the greatest grudge race since "Chariots of Fire." Don King might have shaved his head to get part of the action.
Reality, however, has toned down the hype and Monday night's showdown between Carl Lewis and Ben Johnson in the 100 meters at the BNP meet here is little more than just another stop on the Grand Prix track and field circuit.


8-Year-Old Drowns in River
An 8-year-old girl swimming in the Hudson River with a group of children drowned Saturday, the police said.
Holly Fitzgerald of Hadley drowned about 3 P.M. in Warrensburg, about 60 miles north of Albany, according to the Warren County Sheriff's department.
The girl had stayed in the river after the other children got out of the water.


Joyce West Is Married
Joyce Carol West and Mark Stephen Kadesh were married yesterday at the Rockville (Md.) Antebellum Mansion by Rabbi Jack Luxemburg.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from Cornell University and is an associate at Lewin-ICF, a health policy consulting concern in Washington.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul West of Seneca Falls, N.Y.
The bridegroom, 29, graduated from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.
He is a legislative assistant to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York.
Mr.
Kadesh is a son of Jack Kadesh of San Rafael, Calif., and Rebecca Ryan of Burlingame, Calif.


Big Board's Net Rises by 39.2%
The New York Stock Exchange said it had $7.8 million in net income for the first quarter, up 39.2 percent from $5.6 million a year earlier.
The exchange said pretax income was up 41 percent, to $13.5 million, from $9.6 million a year earlier.
Revenues fell slightly, to $89.3 million, from $89.4 million.


Clarcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


SK Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jazz Festival; Tribute to Dexter Gordon With Not Much Gordon
Legends don't take long to build in jazz.
"One for Dexter," a tribute to the late saxophonist Dexter Gordon at Avery Fisher Hall on Friday night, took 3 hours and 45 grinding minutes to pass into contention as one of the worst shows ever put on by the JVC Jazz Festival.
Critics and fans were heard muttering epithets, and the audience, small to begin with, voted with its feet.
Shows as catastrophic as this take an epic vision, and the vision, supplied by the producer Maxine Gordon, Mr.
Gordon's widow and former manager, and Shirley Scott, the organist and associate producer of the concert, managed to pack just about every form of pretension possible into the show.
There were copious moments of silence when the hall went dark: were the audience members supposed to meditate?
Ponderous statements were read about be-bop.
Writing by Langston Hughes showed up, as did several clips from the film " 'Round Midnight," which starred Mr.
Gordon, one of the greater improvisers in jazz; one clip didn't have him in it at all.


Ms. Garcia Wed To David Janis
Aracely Garcia and David Janis were married yesterday at the Burden Mansion in New York by Justice Michael J. Dontzin of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
The bride is a daughter of Pompilio Garcia of Bogota, Colombia, and the late Nohemi de Garcia Osorio.
The bridegroom is a son of Ruby Janis and Carroll Janis, both of New York.
The bride, 30, is the assistant vice president at Conservation Devices Inc., an equipment leasing company in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
She graduated from Mercy College in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Her father, who is retired, was a rancher.


Wall Financial reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Living by Yogi's Adage, Yanks Rescue Another One
In the dugout, there is a sense that the game is never really over.
The Yankees don't try to understand it as much as they simply enjoy it, but somehow they are winning games that appear lost.
Saturday night, they scored six runs in the last two innings to beat the Milwaukee Brewers, 9-8.
Today, they rallied from a 6-0 deficit after the third, exploded for seven runs in the seventh and then downed Milwaukee again, this time 8-6 at County Stadium, and returned home from a six-game trip with five victories.


Dance in Review
Ton Simons and Dancers Bessie Schonberg Theater
Ton Simons, a Dutch-born choreographer who lives in New York, has attracted attention in recent seasons for his exquisite miniatures.
That he can also create on a grand scale was eloquently demonstrated Friday night when the 14 members of Ton Simons and Dancers offered "Grace," to recordings of the adagio from Mozart's Divertimento in E flat (K. 563) and the Great Mass in C (K. 427).


Oppenheimer &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Behind Wal-Mart's Surge, a Web of Suppliers
The phenomenal success of Wal-Mart Stores can be traced in large part to the workrooms and factories of many of its suppliers, including the Liberty Trouser Company, a once-sleepy maker of work and hunting clothes.
Its marriage with Wal-Mart has given Liberty a hot new business in Liberty-brand children's wear for Wal-Mart, and that has led to the creation of a popular line of children's clothing called Circus Star for other retailers.
Four Liberty sewing plants have been opened in northern Alabama in the last four years and Liberty's main offices here expanded recently into a new headquarters, a refurbished Pontiac dealership.
If business continues to grow apace, Liberty may soon be bursting these walls, too.


Topics of The Times; Older, Wiser
A New York woman who should know better had procrastinated for years.
But when she turned 40 last month, she finally made an appointment to have a baseline mammogram, the low-dose breast X-ray recommended for women age 35 to 40.
The procedure was quick and painless.
But it revealed what every woman dreads -- a nodule.
It was a lump so tiny it couldn't be felt.
And the doctor said, "It looks benign." Indeed, three women out of four who undergo a biopsy get a clean bill of health.
But sensing the patient's anxiety, the physician arranged an appointment late that afternoon for a fine-needle aspiration -- a type of biopsy about as painful as a blood test, with no hospitalization required.


Gains at Large Law Firms Slowed Sharply Last Year
The nation's largest law firms suffered an unmistakable glancing blow from the economic recession last year, according to the annual financial survey by American Lawyer magazine.
The survey will be published today.
Revenues for the top 100 firms totaled $13.5 billion last year, up 9 percent from 1989.
That gain outstripped most segments of the economy but was a sharp decline from the 17 percent increase in 1989.
The slower growth stemmed from a decline in merger and acquisition activity, the real estate slump and client resistance to fee increases.


Ill and 'Broke,' Biaggi Restarts His Bronx Life
Out of prison and back in the Bronx, Mario Biaggi yesterday described himself as sick, broke and overjoyed to be reunited with his grandchildren.
"It's a far cry from 20 years ago," said Mr.
Biaggi, the former Congressman who was one of New York City's most powerful politicians before his conviction in the Wedtech case.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Advanced Telecommunications Corp., 4.5 million common shares, global offering.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.


Reports of Arms From Lebanon
Arms from Lebanon's 16-year civil war are now being used in ethnic violence in Yugoslavia after militias here sold part of their arsenals to separatists in Slovenia and Croatia, security officials and news reports here said today.
The security officials said $100 million worth of artillery, machine guns and ammunition have been sold on the Yugoslav market in the last four months.


Newnan Savings Bank reports earnings for Year to March 31


THE BUDGET BATTLES NEW YORK New York City: After months of squabbling, the Dinkins administration and the City Council reached an agreement to balance the $29 billion budget, but not without severe cuts in city services and increases in income and property taxes.    The agreement calls for a $335 million income-tax increase and a property-tax increase of $400 million. Most of Mayor David N. Dinkins's $1.5 billion in service cuts would be made under the agreement, along with the layoffs of 10,000 workers, including 6,000 who were dismissed on Friday.


Review/Television; On Debates, Risks and Romania
Despite its imposing title, "Crisis in the Arts: Politics, Censorship and Money" turns out to be a reprise of last year's commotion over whether Washington should subsidize works that many people find pornographic or sacrilegious.
Three of the six participants in the hourlong program at 10 tonight on Channel 13 say yes.
The playwright Edward Albee; Adolfo Nodal, the general manager of the Los Angeles Cultural Affairs Department, and Anne G. Murphy, director of the American Arts Alliance, a lobbying group that seeks money for cultural institutions, express their esteem for the arts and their opposition to censorship in phrases as original as Applaud Now signs; the audience in the studio of the San Diego public television station KPBS obliges.


San Andres Journal; On English-Speaking Isle, Tidal Wave of Spanish
Coursing over this island's coral cays and through its coconut groves runs an invisible cultural fault line that separates Caribbean reggae from Latin American salsa.
On one side are the natives -- English-speaking, Protestant and black.


U.S. and Japan Auto Talks Set
Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher said American and Japanese officials would resume talks in July on opening Japan's market for automobile parts to foreign companies.
An aide said the negotiations, to be held in Tokyo on July 23, would also address American complaints that Japan's new-car market was closed to foreign companies.
The United States trade deficit with Japan in auto parts last year accounted for a quarter of the $41 billion trade gap with Japan.


Ms. Wolfe Weds Matthew Tuchow
Nicola Wolfe, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Raymond Wolfe of New Providence, N.J., was married yesterday at the Stronghold Mansion in Bernardsville, N.J., to Matthew Noah Tuchow, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Tuchow of Birmingham, Mich.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman performed the ceremony.
The bride, 34 years old, graduated from Cornell University and received a doctorate in psychology from Harvard University.
She is to join the Northern California Alzheimer's Disease Center in Berkeley, Calif., as apsychologist in September.
Her father is a research physicist at the A.T.&amp;T.
Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J.
Her mother, Ursula Wolfe, is a sales associate with Burgdorff Realtors in Summit, N.J.


Bishop Smallwood Williams, 83, Head of Bible Way Churches, Dies
Bishop Smallwood E. Williams, a onetime sidewalk preacher who became an influential minister in Washington and the worldwide leader of the Bible Way Church, died Friday at the Washington Hospital Center.
He was 83 years old and lived in the capital.
He died of a heart ailment, his daughter, Yvonne, said.


Albany Truce Settles No-Win Battle
The armistice declared by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders on the state budget comes, in part, from a recognition that the dispute was not really over the $1 billion vetoed by the Governor, but a much smaller number.
But the newfound bonhomie here stems at least as much from a harsh political realization: that nobody stood to gain from a tumultuous showdown, one that appeared to be at hand just a few days ago when the Legislature vowed to pass new bills restoring the spending and Mr.
Cuomo threatened to veto those as well.


Hannah P. Pearce, Medical Student, Wed
Hannah Phillips Pearce, the daughter of Lorraine W. Pearce of Washington and John N. Pearce of Fredericksburg, Va., was married in Washington yesterday to Dr.
Bruce Jeffrey Cohen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur E. Cohen of Freehold, N.J.
Rabbi Dennis Ross performed the ceremony at the Washington Hebrew Congregation.
Mrs.
Cohen, 27 years old, is a senior medical student at the University of Maryland.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University.
Her father is a professor of historic preservation at Mary Washington College.
Her mother owns an antiques shop in Washington.


Mallon Steals the Show on Final Hole
After 18 holes of some of the highest theater in the recent history of women's golf, Meg Mallon holed a delicate 15-foot birdie putt on the 72d hole this afternoon to defeat Ayako Okamoto and Pat Bradley and win the 37th L.P.G.A.
Championship.
The 28-year-old Mallon, who won the first tournament of her five-year career in February, retained remarkable poise and an affable nature while outplaying two of the Ladies Professional Golf Association's most vaunted veterans to close with a seven-birdie, two-bogey 67 over the par-71 Bethesda Country Club course for a 72-hole total of 10-under-par 274.


Deluge of Press Releases Splits the P.R. Industry
Touching off a debate more typical among sports fans, a small public relations newsletter has accused the industry of doing too much pitching and not enough hitting.
The result is the sort of donnybrook that businesses often hire public relations experts to quell.
The newsletter, The Bulldog Reporter, asserts in its current issue that mass mailings of press releases and story proposals by public relations people are damaging the industry's reputation and alienating journalists.
The criticism has brought both indignant denials and sad agreement in the industry.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-7
The Prime Minister of Yugoslavia and the leader of the breakaway republic of Slovenia announced that the army had been ordered to withdraw in an effort to ease the country away from the edge of civil war.
Page A1
News analysis: A crucial question in the Yugoslav crisis is whether its army is exerting undue control over events, or being buffeted by them.
Partly, the crisis bared some of the army's inherent weaknesses.
A6


Veronex Resources reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Review/Ballet; A Diaghilevian Staging
Rimsky-Korsakov did not call "Mlada" an opera-ballet for nothing, and it was not surprising that the strongest ovation on Friday night went to Nina Ananiashvili, the popular ballerina from the Bolshoi Ballet, who appeared in two of the opera company's performances at the Metropolitan Opera House.
This triumph owes much to Miss Ananiashvili's exquisite style.
Her Cleopatra in a vision scene had a dynamic contrast with her beautiful lyricism as Mlada, the ghost who haunts her betrothed, the Slav pagan prince Yaromir.


Super Valu Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


Books of The Times; Collected Odds and Ends From Graham Greene
Reflections By Graham Greene Selected and Introduced by Judith Adamson 325 pages.
Reinhardt Books in association with Viking. $19.95.
It isn't easy to find a thread of continuity among these six dozen brief pieces by Graham Greene, written over the span of half a century for various newspapers and journals.
The volume's editor, Judith Adamson, who teaches English at Dawson College in Montreal, cites in her introduction the many travel pieces she has included, and suggests that we look to them for the reality that later was transformed fictionally into the "unique vision" of Greene, who died in April.


Pettibone Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


King's Dream Lives Again at Site of His Death
For years, the motel where the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in 1968 stood amid dilapidated warehouses, a crumbling memorial to the civil rights leader.
But this week, the Lorraine Motel celebrates its rebirth as the National Civil Rights Museum.


Essay; The Raid on R.F.E.
"If it ain't broke," Bert Lance used to say, "don't fix it."  America's most effective broadcasting tools for promoting freedom and democracy abroad -- Radio Free Europe and its adjunct, Radio Liberty -- have never been more needed to set the pace of a free press in self-liberating nations.
But a bureaucratic cabal wants to fix all that by placing the quasi-independent stations under the dead hand of the State Department and the U.S.
Information Agency.


Military Institute Should Stay All Male
To the Editor:
From the perspective of parents with one son at the Virginia Military Institute and our other son at West Point, "Wrong Gray Line" (editorial, June 19) saddens us.


New York Area Military Sites Spared
On Staten Island, where jobs for 4,200 civilians and about as many military personnel were at stake, sailors voiced relief.
So did officials in New Jersey, who had worried that Fort Dix would be closed.
Both military installations were recommended for reprieves yesterday by a seven-member commission that had been considering closing them along with other forts, shipyards and naval bases the Pentagon had said it no longer needed.


A Timetable For Decisions
Here are the dates by which the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission, the President and Congress are expected to act on base closings: July 1: The commission sends its recommendations to the President.


Arizona's Tough on Campaign Finance
To the Editor:
You report that Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida has signed "legislation that imposes the nation's toughest limits on contributions to statewide political races" (news article, May 26).
You also state that such states as South Dakota, Montana and Connecticut have tighter limits for legislative candidates.


Feed Iraqis, Starve Saddam
The suffering of the Iraqi people cries out for compassion.
Shortages of food, medicine, clean water and electricity now threaten to cause more death and disease than the Persian Gulf war.
Indeed, the worsening plight of Iraq's vulnerable children and powerless adults virtually demands some easing of the economic sanctions.
Why make the Iraqi people suffer for the crimes of Saddam Hussein?
But the sanctions remain one of the few levers by which the allied coalition hopes to disarm Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological capabilities.
As Iraq disdainfully evades international inspectors, the allies know they need every bit of pressure they can muster.
There may be a way out of this dilemma: Permit Iraq to resume oil exports, but impound the earnings and apply some of them to humanitarian assistance.
Satellite photos and defectors' reports make clear that Iraq continues to violate the terms of the United Nations cease-fire.
Iraq supplied misleading accounts of its nuclear arms program and still tries to conceal arms-making equipment and facilities from international inspectors.
As if to underscore reports that Washington is weighing military options, President Bush says "all means necessary" may be used to enforce the cease-fire resolution.
But bombing during the war did not succeed in eliminating Saddam Hussein's nuclear capacity.
Lifting sanctions without qualification would leave the Iraqi dictator with no reason to obey the U.N. cease-fire resolution.
Worse yet, he'd give priority to rebuilding the military machine that keeps him in power.
And he would speciously blame his foreign foes for whatever pain his people continued to endure.
A wiser course would be to let Iraq export oil but turn the proceeds over to the United Nations.
The Security Council can empower a special committee to disburse the money, allocating 30 percent to a reparations fund for Kuwait.
Part of the balance could be earmarked for genuine humanitarian aid, to be distributed under U.N. auspices by relief agencies.
The Iraqi people should be left in no doubt about who is providing the emergency aid.
Another portion could be used to defray expenses of the international effort to assure safe havens for Iraqi Kurds.
And finally, as some suggest, the remainder could be kept in a special fund to be given Iraq once it is rid of Saddam Hussein.
What makes this feasible is Iraq's dependence on readily monitored petroleum sales.
Allied bombing did not destroy Iraq's refineries or its pipelines to Turkey and Saudi Arabia.
There are no major obstacles to a swift resumption of exports that can earn Iraq $17 billion a year.
And Saddam Hussein has little choice but to accept any terms that the world dictates.


Players International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.N. Officials Confront Iraqi In Baghdad Over Inspections
The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency and United Nations officials met today with Iraq's Foreign Minister to protest an incident in which nuclear inspectors arriving at an installation encountered gunfire.
Members of the delegation appeared grim when they left the meeting with Foreign Minister Ahmed Hussain Khudayer, but did not describe the session.
They are to meet on Monday with Prime Minister Saadun Hamadi.


New York Can't Ask if It's Art Before Letting a Film Crew Shoot
To the Editor:
We understand the concern of Brent Staples in "New York, the Movie" (Editorial Notebook, June 15) that New York City might be wasting its precious resources on fool's errands and unprofitable ventures.
But then Mr.
Staples reminds us that "Hudson Hawk," the clunker whose shooting tied up Brooklyn several nights last summer, cost $51 million to make.


Current Law Protects Postwar Environment; Tale of Two Cities
To the Editor:
Your coverage of the Persian Gulf war welcome-home celebrations in New York City and Washington highlights the incongruent priorities in Federal and local policies.


Crownamerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Bills and Fannie Mae Issues in Week's Sales
In a week shortened by the Fourth of July holiday, the Treasury plans little activity aside from the usual weekly bill offerings today.
It will offer a total of $20.8 billion in three-month bills, maturing Oct. 3, and six-month bills, maturing Jan. 2.


Opposition Leaders Arrested in Algeria; Tanks Are Called In
Security forces in Algeria rolled tanks into the capital on Sunday and arrested the two leaders of the powerful Islamic fundmentalist party that is challenging the long rule of President Chadli Benjedid.
The two party leaders, Abassi Madani and his deputy, Ali Belhadj, were taken into custody in Algiers after both issued challenges to martial law, which was imposed throughout the country on June 5 in response to a campaign of strikes and demonstrations led by the fundamentalist party, the Islamic Salvation Front.


UNITED YUGOSLAVIA IS U.S. POLICY'S AIM
American policy toward Yugoslavia, as repeatedly articulated by top-ranking Administration officials over the last month, is primarily aimed at preventing a full-scale civil war in the Balkan country.
The Bush Administration is known to be concerned not only with the casualties and destruction that such a conflict could bring about in the multinational society of Yugoslavia but also with the effect it could have in other ethnically mixed countries, particularly those in Eastern Europe that are just emerging from four decades of Communist rule.


CHRONICLE
A potentially nasty dispute is shaping up between MARY MOORE, the only child of the late sculptor Henry Moore, and trustees of the Henry Moore Foundation.
Miss Moore, an executor of the estate, has claimed ownership of a large number of works in possession of the foundation.
Established in 1977 by the sculptor, the foundation administers his property at Perry Green, the hamlet in Hertfordshire where he lived and worked.
The foundation's assets are valued at $75 million.
Miss Moore filed suit last month in England's High Court over ownership of 150 to 200 works.
Originally, she was a foundation trustee but resigned in 1980.
She also charges that the foundation's intent to build galleries and storage at Perry Green violates its spirit.
"It's being institutionalized," she said.
Early proposals were withdrawn when local residents objected.


Maax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


FINAL CUT IS MADE ON MILITARY BASES THAT SHOULD CLOSE
The Federal commission charged with closing military bases, working until the last hours before its deadline, voted today to recommend closing the huge naval shipyard at Philadelphia and the naval station in Long Beach, Calif., the Army base at Fort Ord in California and a number of smaller installations around the country.
But the seven-member panel rejected several recommendations by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, who had proposed closing dozens of bases to accommodate a 25 percent reduction in personnel expected by 1997.


SIDELINES: Yachting Goes Hollywood; Lights! Camera! Lifejackets!
The glitz of America's Cup yacht racing has lured the film makers of Hollywood.
What better place to stage a feature-length movie depicting the wealth and power that supports cup racing than in Newport, R.I., the city that staged America's Cup sailing matches from 1930 until 1983?
On May 28, filming began on the water using two veteran 12-Meters, Intrepid and Stars &amp; Stripes '83.
But instead of DENNIS CONNER as skipper, the actor CLIFF ROBERTSON is at the helm of the American boat.
He is the fictitious Morgan Weld, heir to a fortune reminiscent of 1930's America's Cup racing and the Vanderbilt era.
PETER GILMOUR , the Australian helmsman who competed in the 1987 cup match, is coordinating sailing for the film.


Quotation of the Day
"We needed a minor miracle at the beginning of this process. We need a major miracle now." -- Representative Robert A. Borski, Democrat of Pennsylvania, after the commission vote to close the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard.  [ A10:4. ]


Topics of The Times; Unhealthy Confusion
Last year's food labeling reform would confine the use of terms like "low-fat" and "light" to products that really deserve them.
Congress also required the Food and Drug Administration to prohibit all health claims on food packages except those supported by "significant" scientific agreement.
Unfortunately, Congress failed to extend these same standards to food advertising -- an omission that cries out for correction.
The Federal Trade Commission regulates advertising, the F.D.A. labeling.
The two are now at cross purposes.
A case in point is the F.T.C.'s proposed settlement of deceptive advertising charges against the Campbell Soup Company .
The F.T.C. will let the company claim that its soups can reduce the risk of some heart diseases -- even though the soups' high sodium content could increase the risk.
The deal merely requires the company to disclose the amount of sodium per serving.


SIDELINES: They're Easy to Pronounce; What's in an Initial? Maybe Nothing
The recent National Basketball Association championship featured A. C. GREEN of the Los Angeles Lakers and B. J. ARMSTRONG of the Chicago Bulls.
Although A. C. Green is in reality A. C. Green Jr., his initials do not stand for anything.
They are his name.
Armstrong, however, is actually Benjamin Roy, the B. J. apparently short for Benjamin.
Sports, more than Wall Street, say, seems to have more of these quirky initials that may or may not stand for something.
Perhaps the most famous team of initials had Y. A. (YELBERTON ABRAHAM) TITTLE throwing the alley-oop pass to R. C. OWENS on the 49ers in a simpler era.


Tokyo Issue of China Bonds
The Bank of China has issued nearly $145 million in bonds in Tokyo in its first such financing outside China since the 1989 military crackdown on the pro-democracy movement, a Japanese underwriter said Friday.
"All of the funds to be raised by the bond issue will be used for projects in developing China's petrochemical industry," said Shen Yue, an official with the Yamaichi Securities Company, the leading underwriter on the financing.


Metro Matters; Gadflies of Today Parcel the Blame Among Old Allies
A decade ago, a Harlem community organizer was instrumental in mobilizing an emotional protest against New York City's plan to close Sydenham Hospital.
The protesters ultimately lost.
But the city's decision to shut the hospital generated enduring distrust of the Koch administration by many black New Yorkers.
Years later, that animus helped elect Mayor David N. Dinkins.
Now, with poor people again bearing the brunt of many city economies, the organizer from Harlem is back -- this time as Mr.
Dinkins's deputy mayor.


Sara Lee's Bryan Foods Moves to Ogilvy Atlanta
Bryan Foods, a meat and cold-cuts division of the Sara Lee Corporation, is moving its estimated $12 million advertising account to Ogilvy &amp; Mather, Atlanta, from Lintas New York.
Lintas said Bryan, based in West Point, Miss., made the change because it wanted a Southern agency for its products, which are marketed in the South.
Lintas said it would continue to handle other Sara Lee lines, like baked goods.
But a newsletter, The Delaney Report, which had reported that Bryan might shift agencies, suggested other Sara Lee business could follow.


Results Plus
HORSE RACING Irish Derby to Generous  English Derby winner, Generous, added the Irish Derby to his list of triumphs yesterday when he breezed to a three-length victory over French challenger Suave Dancer in Dublin.
Ridden by Alan Munro, Generous took the lead with about 400 yards left in the mile-and-a-half race and pulled away for the victory.
Suave Dancer, a 9-4 shot ridden by Walter Swinburn, was second.
Irish-trained Star of Gdansk, a 12-1 shot with Christy Roche aboard, finished third in the field of six horses, eight lengths behind the winner. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Sweep by Soviet Teams The Soviet Union won the men's and women's titles at the European Cup meet yesterday in Frankfurt.
Soviet women won four events yesterday: Irina Sergejeva won the 200-meter dash in 22.48 seconds, Ludmilla Naroschilenko took the 100-meter hurdles in 12.55 seconds and Elena Rodina captured the high jump at 6 feet 6 inches.
The Soviet women's team also won the 1,600-meter relay in 3:21.77 to clinch the overall title.
The Soviet men edged Britain by 4 points. (AP) HORSE SHOW Lenehan Captures 29th Leslie Lenehan of Westport, Conn., won the Miller's Harness Company Lake Placid (N.Y.) Grand Prix yesterday, topping a field of 29 entries.
Lenehan gained her 29th career victory aboard Pressurized, a 12-year- old American thoroughbred, by completing the 15-jump, one-round course faultlessly in 65.645 seconds.
The 1984 Olympic veteran also placed second with a fault-free ride in 68.650 seconds on Fortus, an 8-year old, Belgian-bred gelding.
AUTO RACING Argentine a Winner Juan Manuel Fangio 2d of Argentina gave Toyota its first victory of 1991 yesterday, beating Geoff Brabham in the Camel Continental sports-car race in Watkins Glen, N.Y.
Toyota led a lap for the first time this year.
Fangio had won four times in 1990 for Dan Gurney's team.
Fangio completed 122 laps around the 2.428-mile course during the two-and-a-half-hour race.
He averaged 117.706 miles per hour and earned $50,000, including a $20,000 Camel bonus.
Tom Kendall of LaCanada, Calif., suffered multiple fractures of his right leg and a possible fracture of his left leg when his Chevy Intrepid slammed into a tire wall on lap 61.
He was airlifted to a hospital in Sayre, Pa., for X-rays where he was listed in serious condition. (AP) GOLF Couples Pulls Away Fred Couples got the break he needed when Peter Persons hit into the water on consecutive holes and he went on to a three-stroke victory yesterday in the $1 million St.
Jude Classic.
Couples followed Persons's adversity with birdies at Nos. 12 and 14 to pull away from the field and tie the Tournament Players Club at Southwind 72-hole course record set last year by Tom Kite with a 15-under-par 269 total.
Rick Fehr, the first-round leader, closed with a 67 to take second, while Jay Haas and David Canipe both shot 65 for 11-under 273 totals in a tie for third. (AP) Colbert Wins a Duel in Seniors: Jim Colbert shot a two-under-par 68 yesterday, outdueled co-leader Al Geiberger and captured his first PGA Seniors Tour victory by three strokes in the Southwestern Bell Classic Seniors Tournament in Kansas City, Mo.
As Colbert finished with a 54-hole total of nine-under-par 201, Geiberger's final-round 71 dropped him to a tied for second with Larry Laoretti, also looking for his first seniors victory, who shot a 68. (AP) SOCCER Victory for the U.S.
Marcelo Balboa's tie-breaking goal with two minutes remaining lifted the United States team to a 2-1 victory over Trinidad and Tobago in the Gold Cup on Saturday night in Pasadena, Calif.
After Bruce Murray scored with four minutes left to tie it, Hugo Perez centered the ball, but Chris Henderson's shot rebounded off Trinidad and Tobago goalie Michel Maurice.
With his back to the goal, Balboa shot into the center of the net and past Maurice, who was out of the net, for the winning goal. (AP)


Waterhouse Investors Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


BUSH AIDES SAY 4 ARE ON COURT LIST
Senior Bush Administration officials said tonight that President Bush had narrowed to four jurists his list of choices to replace Justice Thurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court, and that he could announce his selection as early as Monday.
That word came as two television networks reported that Mr.
Bush is leaning toward nominating Emilio M. Garza, a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit who sits in Texas.
Judge Garza, 43 years old, would be the first Hispanic-American to ascend to the nation's highest court.


Ms. Reiling Wed To R. L. Neiman
Mary Lynn Reiling, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald T. Reiling of Sudbury, Mass., and Raymond Laurence Neiman, a son of Muriel Neiman of Ardsley, N.Y., and the late Walter Neiman, were married yesterday at Stillington Hall in Gloucester, Mass.
The Rev.
Burns Stanfield, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the nondenominational ceremony.
The bride, 29 years old, is a marketing manager at the Lotus Development Corporation, a computer company in Cambridge, Mass.
She is keeping her name.
She graduated from Bowdoin College.
Her father is a patent lawyer for the Digital Equipment Corporation in Maynard, Mass.
Her mother, Marlene P. Reiling, is the president of Mill Brook Travel Agency in Sudbury.


Witness to Recorded Beating Is Killed as Auto Hits a Pole
A man who was a witness to the videotaped police beating of Rodney G. King was killed early Saturday when a car the man was riding in hit a telephone pole, the police said.
The man, Freddie George Helms, 20 years old, was also a passenger in the car being driven by Mr.
King on the night of March 3 when he was beaten.


Iowa Journal; Choice for Youths: Tobacco or a Fine
Young smokers beware: on Monday it be comes illegal in Iowa for anyone under 18 years old to smoke a cigarette.
If caught smoking, chewing or even possessing tobacco by the police, an underaged offender could be fined up to $100 and yanked off the street or out of the mall and taken home in the back seat of a squad car.


Lawrence Gordon Weds Jane Keller
Jane Elizabeth Keller, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donal E. Keller of Manhasset, L.I., was married yesterday to Lawrence Alan Gordon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Haskell R. Gordon of Worchester, Mass.
Rabbi Stanley Davids performed the ceremony at the summer home of the bride's parents in Westhampton Beach, L.I.
The bride, 35 years old, was until recently the vice president of marketing at the Solgar Vitamin Company in Lynbrook, L.I.
A graduate of Smith College, she received a master's degree in public health from the University of Michigan and an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the chief of dentistry at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
Her mother, Barbara Keller, is the director of the Herricks Community Center in New Hyde Park, L.I.


Bridge
The European Team Championships ended on Saturday at Killarney in Ireland with victories for Britain in the Open Series and for Austria in the Women's Series.
The Open Series standings were: first, Britain, 546.5 victory points; second, Sweden, 527; third, Poland, 504; fourth, Iceland, 503.


Legal Travel? Then It's a Rotten Law
The White House maintains that John Sununu's frequent travel on corporate jets is perfectly legal, and that the chief of staff's conduct only appears to be irregular.
The claim that it's within the law is open to challenge on several points, but in any case there's a larger point: It's a bad law.
Congress was embarrassed into stiffening Federal ethics law in 1989 as the price of voting itself a pay raise.
But the tightening also included a loosening -- which lets Government officials travel on official business aboard corporate jets without paying the full cost.
This was written into the legislation at the Bush Administration's insistence, on the flimsy argument that executive branch officials are entitled to the same generous latitude as Congress accords its members.


Pinnacle Environmental Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


With Some Somber Notes, a Gay Day


Current Law Protects Postwar Environment
To the Editor:
"Saddam Hussein's Inferno" (editorial, June 9) and "Our Planet Can't Afford More Such Wars" by John Balbach (letter, June 19) argue that it would help protect the environment from destruction in time of war if the United States ratified a 1977 protocol to the 1949 Geneva Conventions protecting the victims of armed conflict.
I disagree.


Racing Against New Budget Year, States Work to Forge Pacts on Spending
Lawmakers from California to Pennsylvania struggled through the day yesterday to write budgets before the start of the new fiscal year today, and the Governor of Maine warned that all nonessential government services would cease immediately if a budget was not passed.
In Pennsylvania, the Legislature went home tonight without a budget, although the Senate did pass a $283.6 million spending bill that would provide money for welfare and other essential services for two weeks.
Gov.
Robert P. Casey promised to veto the bill if it passed the House.


Domestic Stock Markets Retreated Slightly in the 2d Quarter
After a strong performance in the first quarter, the stock market caught its breath in the second.
"It was a boring quarter," said Laslzo Birinyi Jr., president of the Wall Street research firm Birinyi Associates.
"Given what happened in the first quarter, some sort of setback was not unexpected."


Military Institute Should Stay All Male
To the Editor:
"The Wrong Gray Line" (editorial, June 19) goes off half-cocked.


In Gay Parade, Pause to Recall AIDS Deaths
Amid the pageantry of the 22d annual New York City Lesbian and Gay Pride Parade yesterday, amid the exotically tatooed men and women, the dapper elderly men in straw boaters, the sequins-and-lame contingent carrying a "Transsexuals for Change" banner, there was a somber message.
Two hours into the parade, the line of march halted.
All along the five-mile route from Columbus Circle to Greenwich Village, the cheering, shouting, applauding and singing and dancing stopped.


Abroad at Home; Mr. Justice Marshall
The year Thurgood Marshall was born, 1908, 89 black men were lynched in the United States.
When he went to law school, in 1930, he could not go to the University of Maryland, in his home state, because it did not admit blacks.
In the 1940's, when he traveled through the South trying cases against segregation, his life was at risk.
All that is history.
Young Americans must find it hard to imagine a time when lynchings were commonplace in this country, when even border-state universities were segregated, when it was physically dangerous to challenge segregation.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 1


CHRONICLE
In an unusual public and network television co-production, HARVEY FIERSTEIN, the Tony Award-winning actor and playwright, will play an AIDS counselor in a story directed toward teen-agers because, Mr.
Fierstein said, "I just had to be part of getting the message to kids that it's so easy to protect yourself."
WGBH in Boston is producing the movie, which will be broadcast first on PBS and the next day on ABC.
The program, financed by both networks, is aimed at educating teen-agers about the disease.


Techmire reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Reviews/Television; Helen Hayes and Career: She's Her Own Best Critic
Whatever distinction public television has these days is being propped up largely by a handful of established series: "Masterpiece Theater," "Great Performances," "American Playhouse," "Frontline," "P.O.V." and the Bill Moyers essays.
Another is "American Masters," opening its sixth season tonight -- on Channel 13 at 9 -- with "Helen Hayes: First Lady of the American Theater."
Narrated by Jason Robards, this is the kind of profile that, in shorter form, might accompany the bestowal of a Lifetime Achievement Award at the annual Kennedy Center Honors.
Potentially unsettling facts are not ignored but they are never allowed to interfere with an accentuation of the positive.
Miss Hayes, born in 1900 and having made her stage debut in 1905, has had a truly remarkable career and, as she reviews the years, there can be no doubt that she has come through splendidly because she is a very tough and intelligent woman.
She knows herself well, better than some of those offering tribute here.


A Crisis of Confidence for Japan's Nuclear Power Strategy
When Japan's industrial planners outlined their vision of the next two decades, they concluded last year that the country was more committed than ever to nuclear power.
Only by building two nuclear plants a year for the next 20 years could Japan keep its auto factories humming, its electronics industry buzzing and its neon cities brightly lighted, they said.
Now, despite a multimillion-dollar effort by the Government to win public acceptance, that strategy appears on the brink of collapse.
An anti-nuclear movement that Japanese officials once dismissed as a radical fringe is gradually winning over the middle class, helped by disclosures about a nuclear accident four months ago here in the industrial heartland.


In Walkout at a G.M. Plant, Pay and Benefits Are Beside the Point
Randy Yates walked the picket line outside the General Motors minivan plant under a punishing sun, his shirt dark with sweat, and talked about why his co-workers were striking for reasons that have nothing to do with wages or benefits.
Since 400 workers were laid off in February at the plant on the Baltimore waterfront, Mr.
Yates and his colleagues said, the remaining workers have had to work faster to keep up with the assembly line.
They said the pace had led to numerous injuries.


Telemedia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Historic Sunday for Wimbledon
There was talk of tennis courts that swallow seeded players like graveyards.
There was the sort of noise that usually emanates from high-school pep rallies, rattling the dark green rafters of Centre Court.
There was a giddy mood undercutting the overcast sky.
The only show of normalcy at Wimbledon on this historic Sunday was provided by the heavens, which served up rain, and the players, who put in a routine day of work on what has traditionally been their mid-tournament holiday.


Afrikaner Says Army Subverted Namibia Vote
In the year that preceded Namibia's independence in March 1990, Nico Basson was known around Windhoek, the Namibian capital, as an unobtrusive public relations man who helped the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance, a multi-racial coalition of centrist political parties.
As Mr.
Basson now tells it, he was actually an army reserve major employed in an elaborate plot by the South African military to manipulate Namibia's transition to independence.
Mr.
Basson said his role in the conspiracy, which he contended had Cabinet authorization, was to devise a press campaign that camouflaged a murkier intelligence operation aimed at subverting the South-West Africa People's Organization, the black liberation movement popularly called Swapo.
Reducing Victory Margin
The strategy, he said, reduced Swapo's margin of victory to 57 percent of the vote in the United Nations-supervised elections in Namibia in November 1989.
This fell well short of the two-thirds majority that Swapo needed to impose the socialist-oriented constitution it preferred.
The Democratic Turnhalle Alliance, which Mr.
Basson served as a spokesman, emerged with 28 percent and sits as the official opposition in Parliament.


Years of Backlogs Snarl New Jersey Civil Courts
In September 1987 a man in Monmouth County, N.J., filed a malpractice suit against a surgeon who had operated on his knee, contending that the operation had caused nerve damage that affected the use of his foot.
Nearly four years later he has yet to learn when he will get his day in court.


Jessica C. Adler and Daniel Fass Marry
Jessica Carol Adler and Dr.
Daniel Fass were married yesterday at the home of Margo and Delbert Tenney in Greenwich, Conn., by Rabbi Aaron Pranken.
The bride, 31 years old and a graduate of Parsons School of Design, is a fashion photo stylist.
She is the daughter of Walter Adler of New York, the secretary of the Town Club Foundation, and the late Justine Adler.


Swim, Cycle, Run and Fulfill Sacred Oath
At the starting line, before any of the 725 female triathletes dived arms-first into inviting Lake Isle this morning, one of 10 professional competitors fainted from nervousness and knocked her head on a concrete step.
A call was made over the loudspeaker for a physician, and Dorian Gravenese, a resident at New York Hospital in Manhattan, responded in her wet suit.
Gravenese ministered to the victim, then returned quickly to her spot among the second wave of starters.
Within a 73-minute span, Gravenese would have swum 900 yards, biked 12.4 miles, run 3.1 miles and fulfilled the Hippocratic oath.


FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; The Alzado Alarms on Steroids
TO anyone who watched that Raiders-Jets game during the Super Bowl XVII playoffs, the moment is unforgettable.
In a rage, Lyle Alzado snapped the helmet off Chris Ward and flung it at the Jets offensive tackle.
"Ward kept holding me," the Raiders' defensive end later explained.
During the next off season, the National Football League created what is known as the Alzado Rule: the removal of another player's helmet shall result in ejection and a possible fine.


TENNIS: Sports of The Times; Surviving the Sunday Company
THEY opened the gates and let the people into Wimbledon yesterday.
The All England Club is still standing, quite nicely, thank you.
The fans did not loot, nor did they pillage, nor did they burn down the grounds, nor did they claw at the hallowed grass of Centre Court like New Yorkers did at Shea Stadium when the Mets used to win championships.


T.W.A. Extends Bond Buyback
Trans World Airlines says it has extended by three weeks its offer to buy back debt at a fraction of the face value.
The airline is trying to repurchase $1.2 billion in bonds, using the $445 million it obtained by selling three London routes to American Airlines.
The airline said the tender offer to buy back the bonds was now good through July 26.
T.W.A.'s chairman, Carl C. Icahn, has said that he must fend off creditors and gain significant concessions from labor unions to keep the troubled carrier out of Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings.


Mexican Plan by Asarco
Asarco Inc. said yesterday that it was considering the sale of some or all of its holdings in Mexico Desarrollo Industrial Minero S.A., known as Medimsa, Mexico's largest producer of nonferrous metals.
Asarco holds a 31.2 percent stake in Medimsa, which is based in Mexico City.
The rest is controlled by Grupo Industrial Minera Mexico S.A.
Medimsa owns and operates 13 mines and 7 metallurgical plants in Mexico and had a net income of $171 million in 1990 on sales of $870 million, including the 1990 fourth-quarter results of Mexicana de Cananea, which Medimsa acquired in September 1990.


Adele Fink and Gerald Alters Have Wedding
Dr.
Adele Fink and Gerald Alters were married yesterday at the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue in New York by Rabbi Helene Ferris.
The bride is a daughter of Esther G. Fink of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Sol Fink.
The bridegroom is a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Eli Alters.
The bride, a psychologist, is a counselor trainer for the New York City Board of Education.
She is keeping her name.
She graduated from Queens College and received a master's degree in counseling from New York University and a doctorate in psychology from Fordham University.


CONFLICT IN YUGOSLAVIA: An Army Besieged; Yugoslav Troops Fight for Status Qua As All Sides Question Their Conduct
As Yugoslavia has tumbled through crisis over the last few days, one of the crucial questions being asked is whether its army is exerting undue control over events, or being buffeted by them.
Federal soldiers and tanks seized frontier posts and occupied airports last week to keep secessionist Slovenia in Yugoslavia.


Laura Newman and Charles Hagen Are Married
Laura Newman, an abstract painter, and Charles Hagen, the editor of Aperture magazine in New York, were married yesterday at the Brooklyn Ethical Culture Society.
The Rev.
John Bauman, a Mennonite minister, officiated.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Newman of West Orange, N.J.
The bridegroom is a son of Jeanne P. Hagen of Alexandria, Va., and the late Col.
Robert P. Hagen of the Army.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly PARTIES TO THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION AGAINST APARTHEID IN SPORTS -- 3 P.M.


The 900th Suicide: Not Just a Number
Last Sunday, at 11 o'clock in the morning, a man in blue jeans and a white shirt leaped to his death from the Golden Gate Bridge, the 900th person to commit suicide from the beautiful span that is San Francisco's signature.
Suicides off the soaring deck are ho-hum events here, dutifully recorded in the local newspapers in a few unemotional paragraphs that as a rule do not identify the people or explain their sorrows.
But this time, the dead man, Ron R. Berst, has been given voice by his sister, who said she was compelled to tell the story of the 38-year-old systems engineer who decided to end his life before AIDS stripped him of control and dignity.


Neal Moszkowski Wed to Amanda Edelbaum
Amanda Ross Edelbaum, a daughter of Candy Edelbaum and Jon F. Edelbaum, both of New York, was married yesterday at her mother's summer home in Chatham, N.Y., to Neal Moszkowski, a son of Dr.
Enrique Moszkowski of Buenos Aires and the late Dr.
Erica Moszkowski.
Rabbi Harold Salzman performed the ceremony.
The bride, 24 years old, is the director of development at Lawyers for Children, an advocacy group in New York for children in foster care.
She is a graduate of Cornell University.
Her father is an architect.
Her mother is a psychotherapist.


Scent Maker Plans Sequel To 'What Is Sexy?' TV Ad
THE advertiser that mined a motherlode of controversy when it asked "What is sexy?" in the 1980's plans a sequel for the 1990's.
Quintessence Inc. of Chicago, the fragrance marketer that benefited from the enormous publicity given the provocative television commercial for its Jovan Musk line in 1987, intends to run an updated version in October, timed for the crucial holiday selling season.


9 People Struck by Lightning
Lightning injured nine people, two of them critically, yesterday afternoon as they stood beneath a tree during a heavy rainstorm in Eisenhower Park in Nassau County, the police said.
Elsa Oliviera, 17 years old, of Elmont, L.I., and Anamarie Lopes, of Mineola, L.I., were admitted to the Nassau County Medical Center in critical condition, suffering from multiple burns and shock, said Joseph Lupinacci, a Nassau County police spokesman.
The others were treated at nearby hospitals and released.


Milan and the Mafia: Who Has a Line on Whom?
A shoe vendor called a new special telephone line to say he was being intimidated by false rumors that he was a drug pusher.
Another shopkeeper called to say he could no longer afford to pay the protection money and put up a sign saying, "Closed down due to Mafia."
Stories about extortion schemes and nasty punishments from gangsters are familiar to Italians.
But the difference this time is that the special line is not in Sicily, the Mafia stronghold, or even in Naples, where the Camorra gang is active, but in Milan, the cosmopolitan heart of Italy's industrial north, a place that had always been beyond the gangs' reach.


Storm And Winds Disrupt Regatta
For the second year in a row, high winds disrupted final racing in the Liberty Cup Match Racing Regatta in New York Harbor yesterday.
By shortening the race course, regatta officials managed to get in the two final races needed to determine a winner, who was Peter Isler of San Diego.
The victory for Isler made 29-year-old Bertrand Pace of France a runner-up for the third straight year.


Salk Will Try Vaccine For AIDS on Himself
Dr.
Jonas Salk, who pioneered development of a polio vaccine, says he will be the first uninfected person to be injected with his experimental AIDS vaccine.
He said he planned to inject himself before the end of the year.
In an interview with The San Diego Union, Dr.
Salk said the vaccine would then be tested on uninfected volunteers and celibate nuns and priests.


A Setback For Keating
A judge has refused to dismiss fraud charges against Charles H. Keating Jr., the former chairman of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, saying that enough evidence exists to support a reasonable suspicion of guilt.
In taking the action on Friday, Judge Lance Ito of the Los Angeles Superior Court paved the way for Mr.
Keating's trial to begin on Aug. 2.


Current Law Protects Postwar Environment; Censored Casualties
To the Editor:
Further on the subject of managed news in the Persian Gulf war:


AT THE BUDGET WALL: Reporter's Notebook; City Hall Budget Peace: It's Rapidly Infectious
The pundits at City Hall knew it was time to pop the champagne yesterday when a quiet but significant event took place sometime after 6 P.M. near the busy front entrance.
Peg Breen, the tall, elegant and sometimes brisk spokeswoman for Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, and Leland T. Jones, the bantam and often frenetic acting press secretary for Mayor David N. Dinkins, shook hands.
The rumor was that their relationship in the last few days had come down to traded accusations in the press and clipped personal exchanges.
Now, all was forgiven.
The deal was done.


SIDELINES: Godfather's Hall of Fame; In the Harness For $100 Million
Sometime this summer, JOHN CAMPBELL will become the first harness racing driver to capture $100 million in purses.
WILLIE SHOEMAKER was 53 years old when he became the first $100 million jockey.
Celebrating early, Campbell will be inducted into the Harness Racing Hall of Fame next Sunday in Goshen, N.Y.
Fittingly, he goes in with BILL O'DONNELL .
Campbell is the godfather of O'Donnell's son, CHRISTOPHER O'DONNELL .


People
*
Brian Johnson has been promoted to executive vice president and director of business development at J. Walter Thompson, New York, for its North American operations.
He had previously been the agency's new-business director for Europe.


Demonstrators Support Separatists in Yugoslavia


Budget Package For New Jersey Signed Into Law
The state adopted a new budget tonight for the fiscal year that begins on Monday, and the plan's Democratic sponsors said it would result in the layoffs of 2,000 to 3,000 state employees.
The $14.7 billion budget, which was signed by Gov.
Jim Florio at 11:54 P.M., also includes the $400 million sale of a section of highway in Bergen County to the New Jersey Turnpike Authority.


National Media Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Current Law Protects Postwar Environment; End Iraq Sanctions
To the Editor:
Your June 24 front-page article about disease spreading in Iraq is further testament to how ill-founded and barbaric is the decision to continue sanctions against Iraq, given the dire conditions and suffering there.


Meadow Star to Face A Lite Light Rematch
The return match between the glamour fillies of the racing season took shape yesterday when Lite Light passed her final test in San Francisco with no physical problems and was booked for a flight to New York tomorrow and another shot at Meadow Star on Saturday at Belmont Park.
The fillies met three weeks ago in the Mother Goose Stakes, and they were barely a nose apart after racing a mile and an eighth and ending with a furious duel down the homestretch.
It took the placing judges six minutes to unravel the photo finish and declare the winner: Meadow Star, by an eyelash.


Ethiopians to Discuss a New Regime
The new rulers of Ethiopia are convening a conference in Addis Ababa on Monday to form a more broadly based provisional government -- a step viewed as vital to healing the ethnically divided, financially strapped country after years of civil war and famine.
But the meeting of Ethiopian factions, including the three rebel fronts that worked together to overthrow the Soviet-backed regime of the past 14 years, is expected to put off for the time being an issue critical to the country's long-term unity.
That is the question of whether the province of Eritrea in the north of the country should become independent, an outcome favored by the rebel organization now in control there.


Cemetery Journal; Pet Burials Rivaling Some for People
"I don't want to be buried/In a pet cemetery," sang the Ramones, understandably, though Benita Lebow, president of the board of directors of the Bide-A-Wee Home Association, would surely disagree.
Ms.
Lebow's group runs the Bide-A-Wee Pet Memorial Park, a cemetery for, among other animals, thousands of dogs and cats, a raccoon that lived to be 15, an African bush baby, and a mouse called Worries, buried in a matchbox.


Patterns So Lively They Jump
Say farewell to the gentle dewdrop and the fragile rose.
Fashion prints are entering a more vigorous phase.
Here come the bold abstractions, the vivid plaids, the mixed-up patchworks and the arresting graphics.
Since clothes are mostly made in simple, defined shapes, patterns can fly.
The movement to dynamic prints that has been under way for some time is gathering momentum.
Four years ago Christian Lacroix startled the fashion world with his wild mixtures incorporating colors your mother said should never be put together.
It was one of his great successes.
Last year's Pucci print revival was followed by Gianni Versace's stirring cauldron including photos of Madonna and a melange of covers of Vogue magazine.


Bryant Park, Partly Renovated, Is Reopened to the Public


Ex-Officer Shoots 2 Robbery Suspects
A retired police officer shot and wounded two of three youths who tried to rob him on Sunday in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, the police said.
One of the suspects, Marcus Harrison, 17 years old, of Montclair, N.J., was in critical condition yesterday in Woodhull Hospital, a hospital spokesman said.
Another suspect, Timothy Whiteside, of 625 Park Avenue in Brooklyn, was in fair condition at the hospital, the police said.
The third youth fled after the shooting.


Review/Television; Rape and the Damage That Can Last a Lifetime
You might want to keep the children away from "Rape: Cries From the Heartland," tonight's hourlong documentary at 10 on HBO.
This unflinching look at seven cases handled by the Memphis Rape Crisis Center leaves few details to the imagination: the victims' descriptions of what was done to them are as explicit as the examinations for evidence.
But the producer, Maryann DeLeo, is out for more than physical evidence; as the strained title suggests, she is trying to capture the feelings that remain after the bruises disappear.
The program seems to focus disproportionately on the very young and the elderly.
A 7-year-old says she was raped by her mother's former husband; an 8-year-old says she was raped by an adult cousin ("I still don't understand why he did it"); a handicapped woman says a neighbor raped her; a pregnant woman was attacked in an abandoned building, and a 72-year-old woman was attacked near her nursing home.
The cases, evidently chosen for impact, are punctuated by striking statistics on how few rapes are reported, how many rape cases go unprosecuted, the high percentage of convicted rapists who rape again.
The program does not explain how some of the more speculative estimates have been reached.


Charles Jurrist, Dance Critic, 46
Charles Jurrist, a dance critic for The Daily News, died on June 23 at his home in Greenwich Village.
He was 46 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Main Line Journal; Modern Crusade: Plight of the Rich
Whether the rich get richer was the topic that drew 40 wealthy people into the town library here in one of the old Main Line suburbs that sprang up west of Philadelphia after the rail line to Pittsburgh was laid in 1846.
The consensus among these Main Line millionaires, heirs to fortunes in root beer and department stores, was that no, the rich are not getting richer -- particularly the rich whose ancestors' fortunes are tied up in older trust accounts that give banks nearly complete control over how the money is invested and spent.


A Paris Museum Reopens in a New Guise
When it housed the world's finest collection of Impressionist art, the Jeu de Paume was the best-loved museum in Paris.
Nowhere else in this city could so many favorite paintings be seen in such intimacy and numbers.
Now, after a $10 million renovation, it has reopened in a new guise, as an exhibition hall for contemporary art.
This is the latest step in the Mitterrand Government's prodigious, long-term cultural campaign, which includes the building of the Bastille Opera and the renovation of the Louvre and the Tuileries.
The remodeled Galerie Nationale du Jeu de Paume is also the most prominent sign yet of this city's renewed commitment to new art.
The building closed its doors in 1986, when its Impressionist collection was moved across the Seine to the Musee d'Orsay to join other 19th-century works from the Louvre.
It has begun its new life with an exhibition devoted to Jean Dubuffet, an eminent French artist if a curious choice for an institution committed to contemporary art.
Paintings and drawings from the last decade of his life, which ended in 1985, fill the white, modernistic spaces that Antoine Stinco, a French architect, designed to replace the rooms in which thousands of tourists jostled for space in front of Monets, Manets and Renoirs.


A Partner Is Retiring At Goldman, Sachs
Leon G. Cooperman, a 25-year partner at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and one of the best-known money managers on Wall Street, will retire as a general partner on Nov. 29, the end of the firm's fiscal year.
Mr.
Cooperman, who is 48 years old, has been the chairman and chief executive of Goldman Sachs Asset Management, the brokerage firm's investment management unit, since its formation in early 1989.
Before that, he ran the firm's research department for 10 years and was chairman of the investment policy committee from 1974 to 1986.


CHRONICLE
PHIL DONAHUE and GERALDO RIVERA often appear on television at the same time, albeit on different stations.
But tomorrow they will appear together on a "Geraldo" show dealing with AIDS.
Mr.
Donahue will be a guest along with LARRY KRAMER , the playwright and founder of Act-Up; JEANNE WHITE , the mother of Ryan White, a teen-ager who died of AIDS, and DAVID LEMOS , executive director of the Names Project, which sponsors the AIDS memorial quilt.


New York Taxes Batter Middle Class
The middle class is likely to feel the greatest impact from the $735 million increase in income and property taxes that the Dinkins administration and the City Council has agreed to impose to balance the budget, tax experts say.
Businesses will also be hit hard, the smallest ones the worst.


Simon's Sentence Is Cut In Wedtech Bribe Case
Stanley Simon, the former Bronx Borough President convicted in 1988 on racketeering charges in the Wedtech scandal, will be released from prison ahead of schedule, possibly as early as today, according to court papers filed yesterday.
Mr.
Simon would join Mario Biaggi, the former Congressman from the Bronx, who was freed on Friday because of deteriorating health.
Mr.
Biaggi, who was also convicted on Federal charges stemming from his dealings with Wedtech, the defunct Bronx military contractor, was ordered released by a Federal judge after serving less than two years of an eight-year sentence.


Panel Says Medicaid Should Increase Doctor Payments to Medicare Level
A Federal advisory commission said today that payments to doctors under Medicaid, the health care program for poor people, should be gradually increased to the amounts paid under Medicare, the Federal health insurance program for the elderly.
The panel, which in April found that reimbursements under Medicaid were about two-thirds of those under Medicare, estimated that bringing the two programs to parity would cost $2.4 billion a year.
Under the normal division of responsibility for Medicaid, which is administered by the states under Federal guidelines, Washington would pay slightly more than half the cost, and the states would pay the remainder.


Heileman Told It Can't Use The Power Master Name
The G. Heileman Brewing Company may not use Power Master as the name of its new malt liquor because it sounds too much like an advertisement for its high-alcohol content, the Government said today.
The decision by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms is a reversal of the agency's earlier approval of the name.


Pregnant Woman Hit and Killed By Car on a Brooklyn Sidewalk
A pregnant woman was killed and nine other women were injured yesterday when a drunken driver drove onto a sidewalk in the Flatlands section of Brooklyn during the morning rush hour, the police said.
In just seconds in front of South Shore High School on Ralph Avenue, the driver's car hit two people on the sidewalk, then careered through a bus stop, hitting a city bus, knocking off its doors and striking several people either boarding or leaving the vehicle.


Ogilvy Loses Executive's Soul Search
GORDON BOWEN, the creative executive whose will-he-or- won't-he tug-of-war between jobs at two top New York agencies has fascinated the advertising community for the last two weeks, made up his mind yesterday.
Mr.
Bowen, 40 years old, will leave Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York to join McCann-Erickson New York, where he will become executive vice president and chief creative officer.


Caterpillar Inc. Expects Losses
Caterpillar Inc. said today that it would likely post a loss this fiscal year, its first since 1984, as a weak economy continues to cut into demand for earth- moving machines.
Caterpillar, based in Peoria, said that a loss for the year was probable and that a second- quarter loss was a virtual certainty.
The company said it would release second-quarter results on July 18.


Police Slaying of a Black Man Brings Protest
A 25-year-old New Brunswick man was fatally shot on Sunday by a police sergeant after an early-morning chase through city alleys, the Middlesex County prosecutor said today.
The authorities said the man, Shaun Potts, was killed when Sgt.
Zane Grey's gun apparently discharged accidentally.


New York Will Hold Grammys Again
The 34th annual Grammy Awards will be presented in February at Radio City Music Hall.
This will be the first time that the Grammys will have been presented two years in succession in Manhattan.
For most of its existence, the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences has presented the awards in Los Angeles, where the academy has its largest chapter.


Old-Fashioned Seat Belts Were Safer
To the Editor:
"When a driver," you report (front page, June 13), "closes a car door and turns the ignition, the motorized belt diagonally crosses the chest. But the lap belt must be buckled manually." You then cite a study that concludes "70 percent of drivers and riders are lulled by the automatic shoulder strap into a false sense of security and do not fasten their lap belts."


Capriati Comes Up Big Against a Sizable Foe
The Women's Tennis Association guidebook says Brenda Schultz stands 6 feet 2 inches and weighs 170 pounds, which could be an understatement.
The guidebook also says Schultz's serve has been clocked at 120 miles per hour, which sounds about right.
Schultz was firing them high and hard today, but Jennifer Capriati showed uncommon wisdom for a 15-year-old, and hung in until the smoke subsided.


New Oshkosh President
Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc., the maker of casual clothing, said yesterday that Douglas W. Hyde, whose family controls the company, had been elected president and chief executive.
Mr.
Hyde, who is 40 years old, replaces Harry M. Krogh, 61, who joined the company last year to see it through a transition to Mr.
Hyde's leadership.
Mr.
Krogh will remain as a consultant to the company, which is based in Oshkosh, Wis.
Michael D. Wachtel, 37, Mr.
Hyde's brother-in-law, was promoted to executive vice president, as called for in the company's succession plan.


Union Leaders Are Willing To Make More Concessions
Two major leaders of municipal unions in New York City said for the first time yesterday that they were willing to give back as much as $100 million in wages and other concessions to avert some of the thousands of layoffs called for in the budget.
City officials are hoping that the concessions will eventually help restore cuts in services and the jobs of many of the 10,000 workers slated to be laid off -- including 6,000 laid off last week -- as part of the budget agreement reached Sunday night after tough bargaining between the City Council and the Dinkins administration.


The Twisting Road to a Budget Deal
At about 3 P.M.
Sunday, under the curious gaze of a pair of police officers and lulled, perhaps, by the pungent aroma of boxed red geraniums, two deputy mayors and two City Council tacticians adjourned to a park bench outside City Hall and, in less than half an hour, resolved the budget impasse that had threatened New York City with fiscal chaos.
The two Council representatives, Joseph Strasburg and Marc V. Shaw, then left Deputy Mayors Bill Lynch and Sally Hernandez-Pinero and rushed to join Peter F. Vallone, the Council Speaker, at Angelo of Mulberry Street, a restaurant in Little Italy.
There, as they consumed half-orders of the house specialty, spaghetti with light tomato sauce, they briefed Mr.
Vallone and Councilman Jerry L. Crispino on the tentative accord.


Budget Cuts Eased For City Film Office And Some Others
On the day after the so-called doomsday budget compromise, only two things seemed clear for the future of the arts in New York City: the Mayor's Office for Film, Theater and Broadcast had escaped drastic cuts, and at least some funds had been restored to cultural agencies that had been facing budget reductions of 47 percent.
For the directors and staffs of hundreds of arts institutions and cultural agencies throughout New York City, yesterday was a time of anxious telephone calling, tense speculation and dread.
They tried, in conversations with mayoral aides and through contacts on the City Council, to learn their fate unofficially before formal budget levels could be released today.
One Cut Spared
For at least one group, the advance news was good.
The film office appears to have been spared a cut that would have reduced its $450,000 operating budget by as much as $200,000.
Also canceled was a proposal that would have transferred responsibility for the issuance of film permits to the New York Police Department.


On the Superior Social Skills of Women
To the Editor:
Why are single, adult men more likely to live with their parents than single women (front page, June 16)?
Being pampered and allowed more freedom than a daughter certainly contribute to the trend.
But judging from my own experience as a bachelor and that of single friends of both sexes, I think there is another, more powerful explanation.


Bravo, Brazil
The reckless destruction of the Amazon rain forest is surely among the saddest of the world's environmental disasters.
Encouraged by past Brazilian governments, cattle ranchers and landless settlers have set fire to huge sections of Rondonia, in western Brazil, fouling the air and laying waste to a precious natural resource.
To the delight of conservationists everywhere, President Fernando Collor de Mello has now agreed to allow foreigners to help save the forest through so-called "debt for nature" swaps.
In simplest terms, Brazil would engage in extensive reclamation projects in exchange for forgiveness of part of its massive overseas debt.


Merrill Adds Lasker, Stone
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said yesterday that a subsidiary had acquired Lasker, Stone &amp; Stern, a New York Stock Exchange brokerage.
Merrill, which did not disclose the price of the acquisition, also named Donald Stone, the senior partner of the specialist firm, as chairman and chief executive of Merrill Lynch Specialists Inc. in charge of the firm's floor operations.


Suspects Arraigned In Beating of Black
Four of five suspects in the attack on Jermaine Ewell pleaded not guilty yesterday to a Nassau County indictment charging them with attempted murder, assault and civil rights violations.
Shannon Siegel, 20 years old, of Atlantic Beach; Ian Pearl, 20, and Gregory Kussof, 19, both of Bayside, were released on $100,000 bail by Judge Donald Belfi.


Fireworks, Courtesy of Barfield And Maas
The fifth inning was full of explosions at Yankee Stadium last night.
They stopped the game with the Indians at bat because a long firecracker was shot from the stands into shallow right field.
But they did not stop the game when the Yankees came to bat and two rockets were fired into the upper deck.
That is because those blasts were long and loud homers off the bats of Jesse Barfield and Kevin Maas and the only damage was to the earned run average of Cleveland starter Greg Swindell.


Margaret Suckley, 99, Archivist And Aide to Franklin Roosevelt
Margaret L. Suckley, an aide and confidante of Franklin D. Roosevelt during World War II and an archivist at the nation's first Presidential Library at Hyde Park, N.Y., died on Saturday at Wilderstein, her home in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
She was 99 years old.
She died of congestive heart failure, her family said.


Much Too Soon to End South Africa Sanctions; Reinvestment
To the Editor:
Even if the United States lifts South Africa sanctions, the economic gloom in South Africa will not correspondingly be lifted (news article, June 18).


Smoking Hastens Facial Wrinkling, Study Finds
A NEW study has confirmed that people who smoke are more susceptible to facial wrinkles than nonsmokers.
The study, by Dr.
Donald P. Kadunce, a dermatologist, and five colleagues at the University of Utah Health Sciences Center, involved 109 smokers and 23 people who had never smoked, all between the ages of 35 and 59.


Sprint Limits Some Billing On '900' Calls
The U S Sprint Corporation, the nation's third-largest carrier of long-distance telephone calls, said yesterday that it would no longer handle billing for certain new "900"-number services.
The company said that under its new guidelines, "900" pay-per-call services that sell personal ads, job listings or offer credit cards to those with credit troubles would have to send bills directly to Sprint customers who use the services.
Sprint also said that under most circumstances, it would refuse to handle billing for new "900" services that charge consumers more than $15 a call.


What Intel's New Chip Foretells
THE Intel Corporation, confirming what some of its customers have already announced, last week formally introduced a 50-megahertz version of the i486 DX microprocessor.
The new chip becomes the fastest and most powerful microprocessor available for personal computers, and it moves us one step closer to the day when the average PC user will have access to the computing power of a mainframe computer.
Of course, not everyone needs a mainframe on a chip, especially since computers built around it are expected to cost $10,000 or more when they become widely available later this year.
The first customers will be software designers, scientists, engineers, graphic designers and businesses that need fast machines to serve as hubs for computer networks.


American Express Rating
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation downgraded its rating of the debt of the American Express Corporation yesterday, citing troubles at the brokerage subsidiary, Shearson Lehmann Brothers.
The ratings agency took American Express's debt rating down a notch to AA-, from AA.
The top grade is AAA.
Even at AA-, the agency still regards American Express as having a strong ability to repay its debts.


Dumond Peck Hill, 68, International Lawyer
Dumond Peck Hill, a specialist in international law, died Saturday at his home in Washington.
He was 68 years old.
He died of a heart ailment, a family spokeswoman said.


Oil Drilling Weighed In Peru Nature Area
AN American oil company's plan to drill for oil in Peru's largest Amazon nature reserve is presenting this impoverished country with a cruel choice.
On one hand, oil revenues are desperately needed to revive an economy that shrank 30 percent in the last three years.
With proven oil reserves down to about one-third the level of a decade ago, Peru this year became a net oil importer.


People
*
Tim Pollak has been appointed to a newly created position, vice chairman and worldwide director of client services, at Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising Worldwide, New York.
He had previously been president of Young &amp; Rubicam's New York office, a position that will not be filled.
John McGarry, who last month became the president of Young &amp; Rubicam U.S.A., has already assumed most of Mr.
Pollak's former responsibilities as president.


Cubans Said to Arrest An Opposition Leader
In what diplomats said was a crackdown on dissent before a major international gathering, the Cuban Government on Sunday arrested the leader of a fledgling opposition group and rounded up several other political and human rights advocates.
State security agents, who reportedly had a warrant, searched the home of Yndamiro Restano, the 43-year-old leader of the year-old Harmony Movement, before leading him off to jail early Sunday, said officials of the human rights group Americas Watch.


Argentina Writes I.M.F.
Argentina has submitted a letter to the International Monetary Fund outlining the country's economic goals, an Argentine official says.
The I.M.F. must agree to Argentina's economic targets before it approves a $1 billion standby loan to the country.
The spokesman gave no other details of the letter, sent last week, but officials of the Argentine Economy Ministry said the country had offered to make substantial cuts in public spending and to continue paying $60 million a month to its foreign bank creditors.


New Campaigns
*
Young &amp; Rubicam, New York, is comparing three Xerox television commercials to the Japanese film classic "Rashomon." But a comparison with a Calvin Klein campaign might be closer to the mark.
The Xerox spots use multiple points of view to tell a story of a troubled business.
Though the technique does recall Akira Kurosawa's 1951 movie, which was based on a story by Ryunosuke Akutagawa, a much more recent television campaign for Calvin Klein's Obsession fragrance told of a young woman's passion as seen by various people in her life.


Outboard Marine Loss
The Outboard Marine Corporation said today that even though it expected its third-quarter operating results, before restructuring charges and other adjustments, to be better than in the corresponding period last year, its restructuring charges would increase its overall loss.
The company, which is based here, expects a net loss greater than the $15 million reported in the 1990 period.
It said it also expected its sales to be lower than the $311 million in the corresponding quarter last year.
Outboard Marine said its pretax restructuring charges would total $45 million in the third quarter, primarily from consolidating some of its boat-building activities, closing several boat-manufacturing plants and writing down good will.


Judge Rejects Request by Doctors To Remove a Patient's Respirator
A judge today rejected doctors' advice that a severely brain-damaged woman be taken off a respirator.
The judge, Patricia Belois of Hennepin County Court, instead gave the woman's husband the power to make medical decisions for his 87-year-old wife, Helga Wanglie, who has been in a persistent vegetative state since May 1990.


THE SUPREME COURT: Man in the News; From Poverty to the Bench; Clarence Thomas
Judge Clarence Thomas, President Bush's choice to succeed Thurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court, has always been quick to tell his friends and colleagues about the grinding poverty into which he was born in coastal Georgia.
His father abandoned the family to go north when Judge Thomas was 7 years old, and his harried mother sent him to live with his grandparents in Savannah, the first time he lived in a house with a toilet.
His success, he has told friends, was due to his grandfather's insistence that he go to school and work hard.


Michael Landon, 54, Little Joe On 'Bonanza' for 14 Years, Dies
Michael Landon, who won fame as Little Joe Cartwright in the television series "Bonanza" and who enhanced his celebrity as a creator, writer and director of other television hits, died yesterday at his ranch in Malibu, Calif.
He was 54 years old.
He died of cancer of the liver and pancreas, said a spokeswoman for Jay Eller, his lawyer.


Excerpts From News Conference Announcing Court Nominee
Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference here today naming Clarence Thomas, a Federal appeals court judge, as his choice to succeed Justice Thurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court: OPENING STATEMENTS President Bush
Well, I am very pleased to announce that I will nominate Judge Clarence Thomas to serve as Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court.


Bush Voices His Support and Respect for Sununu
President Bush today expressed support and respect for his chief of staff, John H. Sununu, and said that months of questions over Mr.
Sununu's use of Government and corporate aircraft for private and political travel should now be put to rest.
In a news conference at his retreat in Kennebunkport, Me,, Mr.
Bush said Mr.
Sununu had apologized to him "right from his heart" for the embarrassment that the issue caused.


Defending Social Record, Bush Lauds Kemp
President Bush cited Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp as being in the forefront of concern for the poor in his Administration and defended his own record on social welfare issues.
Mr.
Bush's comments came at a news conference in Kennebunkport, Me., when he was asked about an article that appeared today in The New York Times describing Mr.
Kemp's frustrated attempts to rally the Administration to a war on poverty.


Juice Label Rule Asked By F.D.A.
After years of debate and countless delays, the Food and Drug Administration has proposed labeling rules that would tell consumers a lot more than many beverage makers usually reveal about what is in their juice drinks, juice cocktails and even wine coolers.
As framed, the new regulations would force beverage makers to list on the side of their containers not only the total amount of juice in their products but specific percentages of each juice used in a blended drink.


Shaping a Role in South Korea
When President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea arrives at the White House on Tuesday for a three-day state visit, he and President Bush are expected to turn to the most delicate military question in Asia: Does it still make sense to keep 43,000 American troops and hundreds of nuclear weapons on the Korean Peninsula?
The former general is visiting after a remarkable year in which, through diplomatic maneuvers that caught even his own people by surprise, the Soviet Union has established diplomatic relations with South Korea, and China appears ready to do the same.


No Uniform for Rose In Babe Ruth Movie
PETE ROSE 's ban from baseball caused producers of a television movie about BABE RUTH to alter the film, in which Rose portrays TY COBB .
The producers of the film, which is to appear on NBC on Oct. 6, sought permission from major league baseball to use team logos and uniforms.
"Usually, when we grant rights, we demand to review the script so as not to portray baseball in a negative light," RICK WHITE , president of Major League Baseball Properties, said yesterday.
When the producers decided to use the career hits leader to play Cobb, the man whose record he broke, they were given some stern advice.
"We told them, 'We don't want you not to employ Pete Rose, but if you do, he can't appear in a uniform because he is on the disqualified list,'(TM)" White said.(AP)


9 States Miss Deadlines for Budgets
California entered its new fiscal year today without a balanced budget.
So did eight other states where politicians were also unable to make the painful decision of raising taxes and cutting spending in a time of deep recession.
For now, missing the deadline in California meant only another tense day of nail-biting and head-banging at the Capitol in Sacramento, but in Maine, Gov.
John R. McKernan Jr. declared a state emergency and furloughed 10,000 state employees considered nonessential.


On My Mind; Is This Still News?
There's no real news in this column except maybe that before tomorrow morning about 40,000 people will die who should have lived quite longer.
These people are all less than 5 years old.
The day after, about the same number of small people will die -- give or take a thousand or two.
And the day after that, and so on and so on, all through the year.
If you put it all together, and multiply 40,000 by 365, would that be news, maybe worth writing, or reading, a column?


Close of Canada Paper Mill By End of Year Is Planned
Most of a Canadian paper mill owned by a joint venture of the Kimberly-Clark Corporation and The New York Times Company will be shut down by the end of the year.
The decision follows the failure last week of the companies, the province of Ontario and an employee-led group to agree on a way to keep the enterprise going with more modest cuts.
The joint venture, the Spruce Falls Power and Paper Company, was formed more than 60 years ago by the two American companies and is the major employer in the remote Kapuskasing region, some 500 miles north of Toronto.
It employs 1,450 people, of whom all but 250 will be laid off.


Kohl Threatens to End German Aid to Yugoslavia
Chancellor Helmut Kohl toughened his position toward Yugoslavia today, threatening to cut off all German aid if the Belgrade Government again sent troops against the independence-minded republics of Slovenia and Croatia.
He also raised the possibility for the first time that Yugoslavia might not survive the current crisis intact.


Labor: Key to New York's Crisis
All the celebrating at City Hall because New York met its budget deadline is understandable but premature.
Of course it is better to have a budget than not to have one.
But the new budget that emerged over the weekend is more a draft than a finished document.
It relies on optimistic hopes for tax collections, and it is still missing one big piece of the budgetary puzzle: a contribution from the municipal unions.
Yesterday, labor leaders indicated that they would be willing to make concessions.
But what a paltry beginning it was.
Labor was talking of concessions worth about $100 million in the new fiscal year while the city was seeking about $600 million.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.64
5.74
8.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.59
5.55
7.73
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.71
5.69
7.60
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.13
8.10
8.43
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.43
8.40
8.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.45
9.45
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.19
7.21
7.47
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bush Says He Will Rely on Cheney In Decision on the Base-Closing List
President Bush said today that he would rely on Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney's advice in deciding whether to accept or reject the recommendations of a Federal commission to close 25 military bases and 10 research laboratories by 1997.
In a news conference at his vacation home in Kennebunkport, Me., Mr.
Bush said it was "unlikely" he would disagree with the recommendations made by the seven-member commission he appointed earlier this year.
But he left open the possibility that he might reject the commission's report if the Pentagon strongly objects to its contents.


Toronto Victory Has Footnote; Catcher Didn't Step on Plate
Roberto Alomar doubled home two runs to tie the score, then scored the winning run in the ninth inning when catcher Dave Valle took his foot off home plate, giving the Toronto Blue Jays a 4-3 victory over the Seattle Mariners today.
Seattle starter Randy Johnson, who struck out 11 and didn't walk a batter, had a two-hitter going into the ninth, along with a 3-1 lead.
But then things turned sour for him.
Mookie Wilson led off with a double.
The next batter, Devon White, hit a checked-swing bouncer back to the mound, but Johnson threw wildly to first.
Wilson ended up at third, and White at second.


A New Partner for Lehman
Lehman Brothers announced yesterday that T. Christopher Pettit, who had been the head of the fixed-income division, would run the investment banking firm on a daily basis as part of a series of administrative changes.
Mr.
Pettit will hold the new position of managing partner, reporting to the co-chief executive officers, Richard S. Fuld Jr. and J. Tomilson Hill 3d.


Two Concertos to Open Mostly Mozart Festival
A concert by the flutist James Galway and the pianist Andre Watts will open the 25th Mostly Mozart Festival on July 9 at 8:30 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The concert is to feature Mr.
Galway, who made his New York City debut at the 1978 Mostly Mozart Festival, in Mozart's Flute Concerto No. 1 in G. Mr.
Watts is to be the soloist in Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 9 in E flat.


Jews Couldn't Leave Nazi Germany Easily
To the Editor:
"Volcanoes, Nazis and Crime" (editorial, June 14) cleverly compares Nazi Germany to an active volcano.
Yet the question "why so many Jews couldn't bring themselves to leave Germany in the 30's" is not an enduring point, but myth at best.


As Glitz Wore Out, the Coach Wore Thin
One widely held belief about Jerry Tarkanian is that the beginning of the end came in 1987 with the incident that university officials now simply call "the Daniels thing," a reference to Lloyd Daniels, the former schoolyard basketball prodigy who attended three high schools in New York City, two prep schools outside the state and never graduated from any of them.
To many people "the Daniels thing" typified the brazenness of a program that simply had gone too far.
Daniels was steered to the University of Nevada-Las Vegas by Richard (Sam) Perry, a man who has since been identified as a convicted sports fixer who was involved in the 1978 point-shaving scandal involving the Boston College basketball team.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League TEXAS RANGERS -- Activated Brian Bohannon, pitcher, from the 60-day disabled list and optioned him to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
National League PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Placed Roger McDowell, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Amalio Carreno, pitcher, from Scranton-Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association ATLANTA HAWKS -- Traded Spud Webb, guard, and a 1994 second-round draft pick to the Sacramento Kings for Travis Mays, guard.
Did not tender a qualifying contract to Moses Malone, center.
BOSTON CELTICS -- Tendered a qualifying contract to Kevin Gamble, forward.
Did not tender qualifying contracts to Dave Popson, forward, and A.J.
Wynder, guard.
CHICAGO BULLS -- Announced they will exercise their option on the contract of Cliff Levingston, forward.
Tendered qualifying contracts to Bill Cartwright, center; John Paxson, guard; and Scott Williams, forward.
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Tendered qualifying contracts to John Morton, guard, and Henry James, forward.
Did not tender qualifying contracts to Gerald Paddio, guard, Milos Babic, center, and Derrick Chievous, guard.
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Tendered qualifying contracts to John Shasky, center; Kelvin Upshaw, guard; and Jim Grandholm, forward.
Did not tender a qualifying contract to Steve Alford, guard.
DENVER NUGGETS -- Traded Blair Rasmussen, center, to the Atlanta Hawks for the rights to Anthony Avent, forward.
Traded to the rights to Avent to the Milwaukee Bucks for the rights to Kevin Brooks, forward; a second-round draft choice in 1994; and other considerations.
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Tendered qualifying contracts to Kenny Smith and Kennard Winchester, guards, and David Wood and Matt Bullard, forwards.
Did not tender a qualifying contract to Dave Feitl, center.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Tendered a qualifying contract to Tony Smith, guard.
Did not tender a qualifying contract to Irving Thomas, forward.
MIAMI HEAT -- Tendered qualifying contracts to Sherman Douglas and Kevin Edwards, guards.
Did not tender qualifying contract to Terry Davis, forward.
NEW YORK KNICKS -- Tendered a qualifying contract to John Starks, guard.
Did not tender qualifying contracts to Kenny Walker, forward, and Greg Grant, guard.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Announced they will not exercise their option on the contract of Rick Mahorn, forward.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Named Jeff Munn public address announcer and Robin Pound strength and conditioning coach and assistant trainer.
Continental Basketball Association TULSA FAST BREAKERS -- Named Steve Bontrager coach and Bill Shuck general manager.
United States Basketball League MIAMI TROPICS -- Announced the resignation of Eric Dennis, coach.
Named Dave Vinturella general manager and Kevin Mackey coach and director of player personnel.
Promoted Jim Price to associate coach and assistant director of player personnel and Jordan Bressler to assistant general manager.
Signed Mouse McFadden, guard.
Placed Shelton Jones, forward, and Karlton Johnson, guard, on the taxi squad.
World Basketball League DAYTON WINGS -- Activated Darryl Johnson, guard, from the taxi squad.
YOUNGSTOWN PRIDE -- Signed Kenneth Ray Brooks, guard.
Announced that Ken Redfield, forward, has left the team for personal reasons.
FOOTBALL National Football League NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Mike Riley, cornerback.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Signed Al Del Greco, placekicker.


Much Too Soon to End South Africa Sanctions
To the Editor:
Among Margaret Thatcher's many aggressive comments in her speeches in the United States June 17 and 18 was her demand that sanctions must immediately be removed from South Africa, a claim that has always interested me because I was the head of the team of writers in South Africa some years ago who produced Pretoria's first propaganda campaign against sanctions -- and later unmasked such biased material in two books and in United Nations reports.


Sports of The Times; The Science Of Finding A Sleeper
ONE of the most talented players eligible for the National Basketball Association draft, possibly, is on the loose -- after having gone unclaimed, unsigned, and largely unnoticed.
His name is Jerome Harmon, a 6-foot-3 1/2-inch guard from Louisville, and one man in particular, Rich Steinlauf, finds it remarkable that Harmon's still fancy-free.
Steinlauf, who runs the Complete Box Score Inc., a one-man college draft consulting service in Manhattan, finds it odd based on Harmon's ability, but understandable in light of his history.


Army Veteran in Texas Dies After Setting Himself on Fire
An Army veteran who splashed himself with gasoline and set himself on fire to protest a reduction in medical benefits died today.
The veteran, William Benefield, 40 years old, of Amarillo, died at Brooke Army Medical Center here, doctors said.
He set himself on fire on Friday outside the veterans hospital in Amarillo, officials said.
He ran into the lobby, where two workers put out the flames.


With Stalemate, Connecticut Enters Budget Abyss
Connecticut's government stood today on the threshold of an undefined, but sharply worsened budget crisis.
For the first time in this century, there was no state budget in place through the first full day of business of a new fiscal year.
Senior state officers warned that the void could lead to huge legal claims and constitutional questions about who pays the bills when the budget process breaks down.


Work Wear Defers Interest Payment
The Work Wear Corporation has decided to defer today's interest payment on the company's 13 percent senior subordinated notes that are due Jan. 1, 1997.
The board of the Cleveland maker of industrial work clothing will decide whether the company will make the $6.5 million interest payment before the end of the 30-day grace period, according to a filing today with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Nominee's Youth a Rarity
At 43 years old, Clarence Thomas would be one of the youngest Justices to join the Supreme Court in this century.
Judge Thomas, a United States appeals court judge for the District of Columbia Circuit, was nominated today by President Bush to succeed Justice Thurgood Marshall, who is retiring.


Board Calls Dryfoos Fund Records Overdue
New York City's Campaign Finance Board said yesterday that Councilman Robert J. Dryfoos of Manhattan had missed a deadline to supply records of an unusual $170,000 fund, which is under Federal investigation along with the Councilman.
Mara Neville, a spokeswoman for the board, which monitors campaign contributions and spending, said that it appeared that the fund -- organized last year as the 7th District Council Government Committee -- fell within the filing requirements and that the board had asked the Councilman to supply income and spending records on it.


Realignment At Time Inc. Magazines
The Time Inc.
Magazine Company reorganized its upper ranks yesterday, naming new publishers for Time and People magazines and dispatching for the first time a top manager to the West Coast, where four of its magazines have headquarters.
Advertising agency executives said the changes seemed intended to make it easier to package advertising in groups of magazines or in magazines in conjunction with other media owned by Time Warner Inc., the magazine group's corporate parent.


Income of Mormon Church Is Put at $4.7 Billion a Year
A Phoenix newspaper reported Sunday that the Mormon Church, which does not disclose its finances, collects at least $4.3 billion a year from its members and $400 million more from its many enterprises.
Nearly all that $4.7 billion is spent furthering religious goals, The Arizona Republic said, but it added that the church also invested several hundred million dollars a year in real estate and securities and in expanding its businesses and investments.
The newspaper said the figures were conservative estimates based on an eight-month investigation.


Florio to Allow Smokers Rights To Become Law
Gov.
Jim Florio said yesterday that he would allow a smokers rights bill to become law in New Jersey but that he would not endorse smoking by putting his name on it.
At a news conference at the governor's mansion in Princeton, where he signed a comprehensive health care bill, the Governor said that for the first time since he took office 18 months ago, he would allow a piece of legislation to leave his desk without either a veto or a signature.


Albany Accord To Restore Cuts Is Called Shaky
In a development that seemed characteristic of five months of state budget negotiations, an agreement reached by the Governor and legislative leaders on Friday night and trumpeted on Saturday began to unravel here tonight.
In back-to-back news conferences, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the legislative leaders -- Assembly Speaker Mel Miller and the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino -- said they left Friday night's meeting at the Executive Mansion with distinctly different understandings of their agreement.


Ethiopian Factions Seek Broad Coalition
Ethiopian political factions gathered here today to try to form a provisional government that would represent the country's first step toward democracy after 30 years of civil war and a century of imperial-style rule.
Meles Zenawi, the rebel leader whose group took control in the capital after the fall of the Marxist-Leninist Government of Lieut.
Col.
Mengistu Haile Mariam inMay, said efforts had been made to include "most sectors of society" at the meeting.
But he conceded that not everyone would be happy with the representation.


Coca-Cola Backed In Pricing Suit
The Coca-Cola Company said a Federal court in Wilmington, Del., had ruled in its favor in a nearly decade-long suit over pricing brought by a group of bottlers.
The company said the plaintiffs are expected to receive less than $15 million plus interest under the court's ruling.
The company said the legal action affected roughly 30 bottlers who operate under a 1921 contract, and two small bottlers who signed an amendment to the contract in the late 1970's.


Books of The Times; Dating the Start of the Modern World
American Nervousness, 1903 An Anecdotal History By Tom Lutz Illustrated. 329 pages.
Cornell University Press. $29.95.
When did the modern age begin?
Virginia Woolf declared that "in or about December 1910, human character changed." The date she picked had to do with the famous Post-Impressionist exhibition in London.
Some scholars have said the turning point was 1907, the year Picasso painted "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon"; 1914, the year World War I began, or 1922, the year that witnessed the publication of "The Waste Land," "Ulysses" and the "Tractatus."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front- page article yesterday about a proposal to close military bases incorrectly listed Alexander B. Trowbridge as a member of the commission that voted on the plan.
Mr.
Trowbridge resigned from the commission on May 17.
Because of another editing error, an article on Saturday about actions by the commission mislocated Fort Totten, a base the panel voted not to recommend for shutdown.
It is in Queens, not Staten Island.


Ann Billings Wed To Glenn Suokko
Ann Billings, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Franklin S. Billings Jr. of Woodstock, Vt., was married in Woodstock yesterday to Glenn Arnold Suokko, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Suokko of New Ipswich, N.H.
Frederick Doubleday, the clerk of the Town of Woodstock, performed the ceremony at the Lakota Club.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from the University of California at Santa Cruz and received a master's degree in natural resources from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the Chief Judge of the Federal District Court for Vermont.


By Design; Gingham's Back, but Svelte
Brigitte Bardot would love it.
This summer, gingham, the fabric Miss Bardot made famous in the 1950's, is back in style again -- with 1991 additions.
In Miss Bardot's heyday photographs of the actress cavorting about in St.
Tropez looking adorable in gingham dresses and kerchiefs made this lowly checked cotton, usually reserved for kitchens, a hot fashion.
Now several designers have revived the pattern, for day and night, often printing it on denim and adding stretch fibers.


Telephones Disrupted In the Pittsburgh Area
Telephone service was disrupted for more than one million customers in Pennsylvania today, and utility officials said the failure may be related to those that affected 10 million customers in the Washington and Los Angeles areas last week.
Bell of Pennsylvania lost service in the 412 area code, which covers Pittsburgh and the southwestern corner of the state, for about six hours, Bob Valentini, the company's president, said at a news conference.
The failure affected 1.3 million customers.


INSIDE
Rules on Labeling Juices After years of debate and delays, the Government has proposed labeling that would reveal much more about what is in juice drinks.
Page D1.


Review/Dance; Fireheart's 'Indivisible,' A Multi-Media Work
Despite its title, "Indivisible" could too easily be divided into small scenes of varying degrees of impact and coherence.
The multi-media dance work that Howard Fireheart presented on Sunday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio began in semidarkness.
Deliberately dim slides of human bodies were projected on hanging panels, and live nude dancers emerged from the shadows of the stage.
The opening moments of "Indivisible" possessed a mysterious beauty.


Court Upholds Reprimanding Of Holtzman
In a ruling likely to be used as political ammunition against the New York City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, the state's highest court ruled today that she deserved to be reprimanded for making an unsubstantiated claim of misconduct against a judge.
In 1987, when she was the Brooklyn District Attorney, Ms.
Holtzman released to reporters a letter accusing Judge Irving W. Levine of forcing a rape victim in a Criminal Court case to re-enact her assault on the floor of his robing room.


In New Jersey, a Bitter Budget Game: Job Bumping
After working for five years in the press office of the Department of Human Services, Rose Ananthanayagam is playing a perplexing and painful game of musical chairs set off by the state's decision to lay off hundreds of state workers.
Another worker with more seniority or a higher job classification will take her job producing a newsletter here in Trenton.
Ms.
Ananthanayagam, in turn, is bumping somebody else in South Orange.


CHRONICLE
A familiar figure in New York politics, LARRY DOUGLAS has worked in elections from JOHN V. LINDSAY 's mayoral campaign to DAVID N. DINKINS 's , for which he helped to coordinate get-out-the-vote operations.
But sometimes he told clients that he had worked for candidates, including LAWTON CHILES , when he had not.
He also maintained that he had graduated from Georgetown University when, in fact, he is a Long Island University dropout.
Mr.
Douglas said that when The New York Observer, a weekly paper, inquired about his credentials in March, he flew into a panic and then to Tel Aviv.
"I had this need, basically, to embellish a side of my life," he said as he met with a reporter at a restaurant in Queens a couple of days ago.


Ashland Completes Permian Takeover
Ashland Oil Inc. completed the acquisition of the Permian Corporation, an independent oil marketer based in Houston, from National Intergroup Inc. for about $75 million in cash and about 2.2 million Ashland shares.
National Intergroup valued the stock at $66.8 million, based on Friday's closing price of $30.375 a share on the New York Stock Exchange.
Ashland's shares rose 25 cents today, closing at $30.625.


A.T.&amp; T. Move On Accounting
After talks with the Securities and Exchange Commission, A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that it might be permitted to use a favorable accounting method relating to its merger with the NCR Corporation.
Although the S.E.C. has not issued a ruling, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company said it might be allowed to list the merger as a pooling of interests, permitting an all- stock tranasction that would be tax-free to NCR shareholders.


Mandela's Group Meets Today to Define Future
The African National Congress, which has struggled since 1912 to free South Africa from white domination, is poised for one of the most potentially significant events in its turbulent 79-year history.
On Tuesday, 17 months after President F. W. de Klerk restored its legal status, the congress will convene its first national conference inside South Africa in more than three decades.


Regulators Ask To Bar Keating
Regulators today moved to bar the former operator of Lincoln Savings, Charles H. Keating Jr., and six others from the savings and loan industry after a judge rejected pleas that a hearing would harm Mr.
Keating's defense on separate criminal charges.
In its biggest-ever enforcement action, the Office of Thrift Supervision also seeks $130.5 million in money that Mr.
Keating and the others are accused of looting in four Lincoln Savings and Loan deals.


Norman Ready to Play
GREG NORMAN says he's well enough to play at this week's Western Open in Lamont, Ill., despite a hip injury that forced him to withdraw from the United States Open.
Last year's leading money-winner on the PGA Tour wasn't expected to play again until the British Open later this month.
Norman hadn't committed to the Western Open, but until he got hurt, he had been expected to play there, said tournament director PETER DE YOUNG .
Norman has played in just 10 events this season, winning $135,081. (AP)


Soviets Approve a Law On Private Ownership
The Soviet Parliament overwhelmingly approved a law today breaking the Government's monopoly on owning industrial enterprises and allowing individuals, including foreigners, to buy such properties for the first time in seven decades.
But the new law on denationalization, which many people here and in the West had hoped would liberate Soviet industry to market forces, was weakened by amendments that exempt some important industries and slow the pace and scale of privatization.


Bush Picks a Wild Card
Clarence Thomas, who at age 43 is barely half the age of the man whose Supreme Court seat he was named today to fill, came of age in the world that Thurgood Marshall helped create.
Now the question is to what extent, if he is confirmed, Judge Thomas would add weight to the Court's new majority that appears willing, even eager, to dismantle important parts of the legacy that Justice Marshall helped to build.


Abraham R. Klitzman, A Lawyer, Dies at 83
Abraham R. Klitzman, a lawyer who was active in Jewish affairs, died on Saturday at the Monmouth Medical Center in Long Branch, N.J.
He was 83 years old and lived in Long Branch.
He died of a heart attack, a spokesman for the family said.


Grocery Employee Is Killed by Gunman
A 45-year-old employee of a small grocery store on the Lower East Side was shot to death last night by a gunman after an argument, the police said.
The victim, Julio Antonio Rodriguez of 170 West Fourth Street, was pronounced dead on arrival at Beth Israel Hospital.


New President Named At Bell Laboratories
John S. Mayo, a veteran designer of advanced communications and computer systems, was chosen yesterday as the seventh president of A.T.&amp; T. Bell Laboratories since the research center was founded in 1925 as part of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
Dr.
Mayo, who is currently senior vice president for Network Systems and Network Services at Bell Laboratories, will replace Ian M. Ross, who has been president since 1979.


Cuomo and Dinkins Strive to Find Long-Term Solutions to Fiscal Ills
With their immediate budget crises not fully resolved, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins turned yesterday to finding ways to solve New York City's and the state's deep long-term fiscal problems by shifting and streamlining their complex burdens of taxing, spending and providing services.
Just what form such a joint review would take or what force its recommendations might have remained in some dispute, and both sides jockeyed yesterday to be seen as leading the effort.
City Hall proposed the creation of a new city-state commission, while the Governor said he favored increasing coordination through existing staff-level efforts.


Corrections
An article on June 18 about the MacArthur Foundation's fellowship awards incompletely described a recipient, Alice Fulton.
In addition to being a literary critic and a professor of English, she is a poet.


NBC Cuts in Burbank
NBC said yesterday that it would end program transmissions from Burbank, Calif., on Jan. 1 in a move that would cut 75 engineers.
NBC's New York operations will take over sending programs to West Coast affiliates, said Pat Schultz, a spokeswoman in Burbank.
The cuts affect engineers, managers and clerical help, she said.
It was unclear how many Burbank staff memebers would be furloughed, Ms.
Schultz said.
Some will be hired by KNBC-TV, the NBC-owned local television station in Burbank, she said.


Doctors Trying Coral for Skeletal Repairs
"FULL fathom five thy father lies; Of his bones are coral made . . ."
Shakespeare's whimsical notion of a skeleton replaced by reef is turning to reality as doctors are discovering that treated coral seems a near-perfect substitute for bone in reconstructive surgery.


Accounts
*
Massachusetts Office of Travel and Tourism, Boston, to Houston Effler &amp; Partners, Boston.
The agency estimated billings at $4.5 million.
Four other agencies were finalists in a review: Arnold Fortuna Lane; Cosmopulos, Crowley &amp; Daly; Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners, and Rossin Greenberg Seronick, all situated in Boston.
The account had previously been handled by Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Barr Laboratories Inc., Pomona, N.Y., has privately placed $30 million in debt securities with the Cigna Corp., Philadelphia. *
Castle &amp; Cooke Inc., Los Angeles, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $300 million in debt securities through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.


Bridge
One of the last links with the earliest days of contract bridge, which began to supersede the auction game in 1925, was severed on Friday when Sam Fry Jr. died at the age of 82.
He was just young enough to avoid the transition from auction to contract that many of his seniors found difficult, and by the time he was 25 he had won the first of his nine national titles.
They included three Spingold Knockout Teams and one Vanderbilt Knockout Teams.
In 1959 he represented the United States in the world team championship, finishing second to Italy and ahead of Argentina.


Cost Said to Rule Out Birth Control for Many
In about three-fourths of the world's developing countries, birth control methods are so expensive that the average family cannot afford them, according to a study made public today.
The issue of cost is important now because some nations are seeking to turn over to charities and commercial suppliers the distribution of birth control methods to poor people, now done chiefly by governments.


Treasury Prices Fall After Report
A survey indicating that the nation's manufacturing sector expanded during June, the first such rise in a year, helped to push down prices of Treasury notes and bonds yesterday.
The report came as a surprise to most credit market participants and analysts, who had expected that the survey of the nation's purchasing managers would show that activity remained weak to sluggish, at best.


Chess
Tournament sponsors usually schedule their events for the monsoon season.
After all, they say, chess is an indoor game, so nobody cares what goes on outdoors.
It just isn't so.
The grandmasters do care about the ambience, as witness their reports on the fourth annual St.
Martin Open Tournament, May 4 to 12.
The six-time United States champion Walter Browne raved about the clear blue water of the Caribbean island and its 36 beaches.
As he put it in Inside Chess, Vol. 4, Issue 11, with "80-degree temperatures, it was easy to relax between rounds."


DEATH KNELL RINGS FOR WARSAW PACT
In a move that pushed the cold war further into history, the Soviet Union and the five other countries in the Warsaw Pact formally agreed today to dissolve the political and military alliance that long enabled Moscow to dominate Eastern Europe.
"As of noon today, the Warsaw Pact no longer exists," President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia said after leading the organization's final summit conference.
"We are saying goodbye to the era when Europe was divided by ideological intolerance."


Much Too Soon to End South Africa Sanctions; Elections First
To the Editor:
Some discussions of South Africa and sanctions state that nothing in the United States sanctions law requires elections.
The anti-apartheid community and many members of Congress disagree with that interpretation of the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act of 1986.


Seismologists Downgrade Magnitude of Latest Quake
The earthquake that rocked the Los Angeles area on Friday measured 5.8 on the Richter scale, instead of 6.0 as originally calculated, seismologists said today.
The new magnitude of the earthquake was calculated by Kate Hutton, a seismologist at the California Institute of Technology, and endorsed by scientists with the United States Geological Survey.


Fed Feels Left Out; 2 Vacancies and Chief's Term Is Up, But Washington Pays Little Attention
Federal Reserve policy makers will hold one of their most important meetings of the year here Tuesday with two seats on its board vacant and Alan Greenspan's future as chairman at least officially in limbo.
Fed officials say that the vacancies and the uncertainty over whether Mr.
Greenspan will be given another four-year term are no more than inconveniences and that they will have no problem on Tuesday agreeing on a target range for the growth of money supply over the next six months.


EXECUTIVES
*
Acme United Corp., Fairfield, Conn., a maker of medical products, named Ian W. Sloan senior vice president. *
Connecticut Natural Gas Corp., Hartford, named Victor H. Frauenhofer president and chief executive.
He remains chairman.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 2


A Timetable For Decisions
Here are the dates by which the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission, the President and Congress are expected to act on base closings:  July 15
Deadline for the President to either accept the list, reject it or return it to the commission for revision.
If he rejects it, the process stops.
If he returns it, the commission has four more weeks to revise the list to satisfy the White House.
Once the President approves the list, he sends it to Congress, which has 45 legislative days to reject it, or it takes effect.
Congress cannot modify the list.
If Congress rejects the plan, no bases will be closed.


Microsoft's Big Push Into Electronic 'Books'
The Microsoft Corporation, whose software for personal computers dominates the market, has aggressively entered the business of putting books and encyclopedias on compact disks, causing concerns in the fledgling industry.
One fear is that the company will shrewdly use its dual role as a developer of the technical tools used in producing electronic books and as a publisher of electronic materials in its own right.
Others worry that Microsoft, with more than a billion dollars in sales last year, will out-muscle its rivals, eventually dominating the industry.


Florida State in A.C.C.
Florida State officially joined the Atlantic Coast Conference yesterday, a move that will lift the Seminoles' basketball prestige and give the league a new football power. (AP)


Observer; No Sox, Birds, Beasts?
The Associated Press reports Denver's new major-league baseball team will be called "the Colorado Rockies." The Rockies of this unfortunate name are the mountains, not all those movies about the swell prizefighter from Philadelphia.
The Rockies will be the first big-league ball team named for a piece of geology, but probably not the first to be named after a geographical location, since I assume "Mets" is shorthand for "the New York Metropolitan Areas." Come to think of it, though, in that case, they'd be "the New York Areas," wouldn't they?


Bush Presses Syria and Israel on Peace
President Bush hinted today that if Syria and Israel were not more receptive to his proposals, he would give a speech, or issue invitations for a peace conference, to make clear who is standing in the way of Middle East peace.
At a news conference outside his family's summer home in Maine, Mr.
Bush also confirmed that he and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had scheduled a two-hour meeting for July 17 in London, where the Soviet leader is to present his plans for economic reform to the leaders of the seven leading industrialized democracies.


Man Held in Scheme For Fake AIDS Fund
The man who the police say collected money in Chelsea for years with false laims of helping infants with AIDS was arrested over the weekend with the help of a volunteer for the Gay Men's Health Crisis, the nation's largest AIDS services group.
The volunteer, David Lynch, 50 years old, said he immediately knew something was wrong on Sunday morning when a shabbily dressed man approached him on 23d Street near Seventh Avenue and asked for a donation for children with AIDS.


Retirees' Plight in Bankruptcies
Connie Patterson, who worked 35 years for Eastern Airlines as a flight attendant, has Parkinson's disease and spends $95 a month on medicine, in addition to the costs of visits to the doctor.
Miss Patterson can handle those costs for now because of the group health insurance provided through Eastern.
But with the bankrupt airline undergoing liquidation, those benefits may not last much longer.
And the disease will become more debilitating.
"This condition can only get worse," she said.


Ortho Wins Damages In Dispute Over Drug
A private arbitrator in a contract dispute between Amgen Inc. and its leading marketing partner for the drug erythropoietin, the Ortho Pharmaceutical Corporation, has ordered Amgen to pay $164 million in damages.
As a result, Amgen said yesterday that it would record a charge of approximately $88.5 million after taxes against earnings for the quarter ended June 30.
The award to Ortho's parent, Johnson &amp; Johnson, was higher than analysts' estimates.
Amgen shares fell 87.5 cents, to $117, in over-the-counter trading.
Johnson &amp; Johnson's rose $1, to $84.50, on the Big Board.


Base Closings, Without Politics
A Federal commission's recommendations for shutting 25 more military bases have caused understandable anguish in the communities that will lose thousands of jobs and millions in income.
But closing bases is as necessary as it is painful.
The commission did its unpleasant work with intelligence, compassion and admirable independence.
The commission was created by Congress to handle a hot potato that the members of Congress were afraid to handle themselves.
The seven commissioners didn't look too comfortable doing it, either.
They sat in open session all day Sunday and into the night -- gavel-to-gavel on C-SPAN television -- discussing, debating and finally casting their fateful votes.
It was high drama, and a rare display of decision-making in the open.


Denver's 40th Mayor Takes Office


Curtis B. DAll, Wed To F.D.R. Daughter In 20's, Is Dead at 95
Curtis B. Dall, a retired stockbroker and a former son-in-law of President Franklin D. Roosevelt who later became chairman of the Liberty Lobby, died Friday at the Hospice of Northern Virginia in Arlington.
He was 95 years old and lived in Alexandria.
He died of natural causes, his family said.


Top Prize at Cannes Goes to Perrier Spot
A French commercial for Perrier sparkling water, now showing on American television, took the Grand Prix at the 38th annual International Advertising Film Festival in Cannes.
The spot for Source Perrier S.A., which features a lion and a woman, was created by Ogilvy &amp; Mather Paris.
The award was announced Friday at the festival, sponsored by Screenvision Cinema Network.


William F. Mann Jr., Chemical Engineer, 73
William F. Mann Jr., a chemical engineer and retired chemical company executive, died on Sunday at his home in Westfield, N.J.
He was 73 years old.
He died of cancer, his son, William, said.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing in Business Day on Saturday misstated the name of the Macmillan Inc. unit that James Diamond had been named to head.
It is G. K. Hall.


Algeria Says 2 Opposition Chiefs Face Trial on Conspiracy Charge
The Algerian military charged two leading Islamic fundamentalists with "armed conspiracy against the security of the state" today and said they would be tried.
The two men, Abassi Madani, the leader of the Islamic Salvation Front, and his deputy, Ali Belhadj, were arrested on Sunday by security forces, a military communique said.
The military is running the country under martial law imposed June 5 in response to a campaign of strikes and demonstrations led by the Islamic Salvation Front.


Cencor Inc. in Loan Inquiry
Cencor Inc., an office equipment leasing and financing company, said today that it was investigating millions of dollars in loans that were arranged by the company's late chairman and put into a separate company.
The executive, Robert Brozman, died earlier this month, and the company subsequently learned of the loans by 16 banks, totaling $22.8 million.


P.&amp; G. Makes Moves on Fat
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company has asked Congress to extend the patents on olestra, its no-calorie fat substitute, beyond the usual 17 years.
The consumer products giant also is seeking Food and Drug Administration approval for another product, caprenin, a fat that can be used in soft candy, such as candy bars, and in confectionery coatings.


Clues to the Climate in a Coral Reef
STUDYING a coral reef among the islands of Indonesia, scientists have found further evidence that the sea level was five or six feet higher in the period before the last ice age than it is now.
European and Indonesian scientists examined the reef, which is just off the coast of Sumba Island.
The reef formed in a series of terraces, resembling a staircase, with each step representing the growth of the reef between ice ages.
By measuring the decay of uranium in samples taken from the reef, the scientists approximated its geological history.


Our Towns
When Rick DePollo touches a sizzling flare to the first fuse out in the dark end of Veterans Park here at dusk Thursday, he will have one second to duck.
Then will come that familiar "THUNK" as a four-pound packet of powder vaults into the holiday sky.
Two seconds later, 600 feet overhead, the sudden explosion will ignite the crowd's excitement.
In good times and bad times, blowing up colorful gunpowder in the Fourth of July sky and "oohing" and "aahing" together in a chorus of strangers united for a few thrilling minutes have become a familiar, comforting ritual across the land.
Economically, this is not one of the good times in older blue-collar communities like Ridgefield Park.
So the Town Council voted to chop the $23,000 fireworks expense from the municipal budget.


Q&amp;A
Earth's Mass
Q.
Is the Earth gaining mass from meteorites, etc., or losing it when things are launched into space?
A.
"Easily it's gaining," said Dr.
Alan Friedman, director of the New York Hall of Science in Queens.
A large number of small meteorites strike the Earth every year, he said, while the amount of material thrown out into space is comparatively negligible.


Swiss Jail 3 as Insiders
A Swiss court has found three bank employees guilty of insider trading and jailed them for up to five months, a court spokesman said today.
The Zurich court convicted two stock traders who worked at Credit Suisse and Bank Zurich, and a banker temporarily working for Privatbank Zurich of using inside information to deal in Credit Suisse shares at a profit of about $555,000.
The decision marked the first time a Swiss court had successfully applied an insider trading law that took effect three years ago.
Shares in Credit Suisse, Switzerland's third-largest bank, rose on March 2, 1989, the day before it announced a big restructuring that made it a unit of CS Holding.


Key Signal of Cells Found to Be A Common Gas
A SIMPLE and familiar chemical best known as a precursor of acid rain and smog is emerging in a surprising new role, as one of the most powerful known substances in controlling bodily functions.
It has escaped physiologists' attention until now because it survives in the body for a mere five seconds or so, and because it bears no resemblance to any known biological regulator.
The chemical is nitric oxide, and new findings show it is a messenger molecule involved in a wide range of activities.
It mediates the control blood pressure.
It helps the immune system kill invading parasites that sneak into cells.
It stops cancer cells from dividing.
It transmits signals between brain cells.
And it contributes to the large-scale death of brain cells that can debilitate people with strokes or Huntington's disease.


Chalmers B. Wood, 74, Foreign Service Officer
Chalmers Benedict Wood, a retired Foreign Service officer who served as an adviser to the South Vietnamese Government, died on Thursday at the Medical Center of Princeton, N.J.
He was 73 years old and lived in Princeton.
He died of a brain hemorrhage, the funeral home said.


SOVIET REFORMISTS DECIDE TO CREATE OPPOSITION GROUP
A group of prominent Soviet citizens led by former Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze announced the formation of a new political opposition movement today intended to mount a nationwide challenge to the Communist Party.
"There is no time to wait any longer," the group, the Movement of Democratic Reforms, declared in issuing an impassioned plea to potential members to put aside their differences and unite against Communist hard-liners.
"Passivity and divisiveness, endless argument and antagonism are working toward catastrophe."


'Ask Dr. Science' Passes a Landmark: Puncturing 'Experts' 2,000 Times
It's hardly in the same league with Orson Welles's "War of the Worlds" or Edward R. Murrow live from London, but yesterday there was another milestone in radio history: the 2,000th episode of "Ask Dr. Science."
"Ask Dr. Science" is a daily 90-second radio parody of deep-voiced, all-knowing experts with white lab coats, Bunsen burners and test tubes.
It opens with a ditsy, 1950-ish theme song, and then Dr.
Science's trusty sidekick declares: "Remember, he knows more than you do. He has a master's degree . . .
in science!
"


Crack Epidemic Deserves as Much of Our Attention as AIDS
To the Editor:
You mark the 10th anniversary of the beginning of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome epidemic with two Op-Ed articles June 5.
The crack cocaine epidemic began in this country just five years later, but with no notice in the Centers for Disease Control publication Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, which spotted the onset of AIDS.


Corrections
A list of free summer events in Weekend on Friday misstated the telephone number for information on Shakespeare in the Park.
The number is (212) 861-7277.


What Price Yugoslavia?
How is it that whenever some small European nation seeks to establish freedom, democracy and independence for itself, the U.S. invariably backs away from these principles and turns a blind eye to its suppression by force?
So Poland in 1953, Hungary in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968 and Poland again in 1980.
The Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia have hardly fared any better, and now it seems to be the turn of Croatia and Slovenia.
U.S. opposition to their aspirations is said to be motivated by a need to preserve Yugoslavia's "unity and territorial integrity." Secretary of State James Baker says he is convinced that "separation will lead to violence," and that we "will not reward unilateral actions."


Romanians Are Told of Nation's Role in Mass Killing of Jews
For the first time, half a century after the event, the enormity of the killing of more than half of Romania's 750,000 Jews by Germans, Hungarians and Romanians was told today for all Romanians to hear -- their memory mourned by the Government and a monument unveiled to their martyrdom.
Many of the speakers, particularly Elie Wiesel, the Nobel Peace Prize winner, who was born in Romania and is the sole survivor in his family, used the occasion to warn against the current rebirth of anti-Semitism.


Aaaah, Work! Suddenly, Guetterman Is Feeling Better
During a normal game in Lee Guetterman's frustrating season, the left-handed Yankee relief pitcher would begin his mental preparation in the fourth or fifth inning.
But too often, that preparation has been wasted and Guetterman has been left to watch from beyond the distant left-centerfield fence.
But last night was not normal, not with Scott Sanderson struggling on the mound as the latest flu victim in the Yankee clubhouse.
Not with Steve Howe sick, and John Habyan in need of a day off, and Greg Cadaret having pitched four and two-third innings Sunday, and Eric Plunk working three and one-third innings Saturday, and Steve Farr earning two saves in the past two days.


Eric R. Bachmann, Importer, 83
Eric R. Bachmann, founder and retired president of the Eric R. Bachmann Company, a machine-tool importer, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.
He died of cancer, his son, Peter, said.


Now You See It . . .
They fought and argued for five months over a budget, so why not fight some more -- even three nights after finally reaching an agreement?
In dueling news conferences, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the legislative leadership blasted each other for misunderstanding the understanding.
Article, page B4.


BRIEFS
*
American General Corp., Houston, an insurer, completed the sale of its Hawaiian Life Insurance Co. to the Meiji Mutual Life Insurance Co., Tokyo.
Terms were not disclosed. *
American Telephone and Telegraph Company, New York, said it would offer discount calling on July 4 and July 5 for calls within the United States, including Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.


Occidental Sells China Mine Stake
The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said it had sold its 25 percent stake in a coal mine in China.
The sale to the Bank of China Trust and Consultancy Company relieved Occidental of about $145 million in loan guarantees.
The mine had a $31 million loss last year.


Bank of New York Merger Lawsuit
A Federal judge denied a motion by the Bank of New York Company to dismiss breach-of-contract claims by Northeast Bancorp.
Northeast, based in New Haven, is seeking $350 million in damages from Bank of New York in connection with an unsuccessful merger bid.


New Warning by the Army Imperils Yugoslav Standoff
Yugoslavia's fragile cease-fire appeared increasingly shaky tonight after the army high command warned Slovenia, the secessionist republic at the center of the nation's crisis, to stop harassing army units.
The tensions arose a day after the nation's Prime Minister said the Yugoslav Army had been ordered back to its barracks to ease the confrontation.


Dollar Soars on Expectation U.S. Rates Will Hold Firm
The dollar rose sharply yesterday as the outlook for firm United States interest rates brightened and the Bank of Japan lowered that country's discount rate.
Analysts said the dollar was also helped by a report from the National Association of Purchasing Management that the June survey of its members showed the United States manufacturing sector had ended a yearlong decline.


Explaining Extra Legs
A parasitic flatworm is responsible for causing frogs in a California pond to sprout as many as eight legs, a scientist says.
Dr.
Stanley K. Sessions, a biologist at Hartwick College in Oneonta, N.Y., has been trying to solve the puzzle of this quirk of nature since 1986 when the frogs were discovered by Stephen B. Ruth, a teacher at Monterey Peninsula College.
Nearly three-quarters of the tadpoles found in a pond in Santa Cruz County had hind-limb abnormalities, but no pollutant was to blame.


Man Found Hanged in Prison
An inmate in the Putnam County Correctional Facility here hanged himself today, the Putnam County Sheriff said.
The man, James Churchill, 28 years old, of Hopewell Junction, was found hanging in a shower stall at 10:50 A.M., Sheriff Robert Thoubboron said.
Correction officers who had gone to Mr.
Churchill's cell block to tell him that his lawyer had come to see him found him hanging in the shower from a section of his bed sheet, Mr.
Thoubboron said.
Mr.
Churchill was being held on charges of attempted murder and burglary in the first degree, Mr.
Thoubboron said.


Walesa Paves Way for Voting For New Parliament Oct. 27
President Lech Walesa paved the way today for Poland's first free parliamentary elections since World War II to be held in October.
Mr.
Walesa reluctantly signed an election bill that he said would lead to the creation of a fragmented and weak Parliament, after the lower house, dominated by former Communists, on Friday overruled his veto of its draft.


As Wheaton Advances, Lendl's Wimbledon Nightmare Continues
Curses, foiled again.
Until his dream of winning Wimbledon is matched by a daredevil's delight in the impromptu art of crackling volley winners across a battered lawn, Ivan Lendl won't win Wimbledon.


Patterns
Something in the Air
There's no escaping it: Calvin Klein's new fragrance Escape is everywhere, with 40 million scent strips inserted in July and August issues of magazines.


Paring the Rolls and the Payrolls
Kenny Walker came out of the University of Kentucky in 1985 as one of the nation's most heralded players.
He had size, strength, quickness, scoring and jumping ability, all the traits necessary to play small forward in the National Basketball Association.
The Knicks made him their first-round draft choice, the fifth player selected over all.
Yesterday, the Knicks allowed the 26-year-old, 6-foot-8-inch Walker to become an unrestricted free agent, and he was job-hunting.


June Surge In Economy Is Reported
The nation's purchasing managers reported yesterday that their monthly survey of economic activity indicated that the economy surged in June to its highest level in more than two years.
The National Association of Purchasing Management's main economic index rose to 50.9 percent in June, up sharply from May's level of 45.4 percent.
It was the highest reading since April 1989, when the index stood at 52.1 percent.


Fed Clears Deal for Bank of New England
The Federal Reserve Board today dismissed objections by the Justice Department, Maine and community organizers, and approved without any conditions the proposed acquisition of the Bank of New England and two affiliated banks by the Fleet/Norstar Financial Group Inc.
By a 3-to-2 vote, the governors found that the merger would not create antitrust problems in several markets in Maine and Connecticut.
The board also unanimously rejected arguments by community-improvement groups that had sought a hearing to determine whether Fleet/Norstar had complied with Federal laws requiring banks to make loans to low-income communities.


What's Up With Doc?
There was no couch in the office, no notepad or tape recorder, no inquiry into childhood wounds or worries.
Still, the effort behind the closed door of the visiting manager's office today was to get into Dwight Gooden's head.


United Plans More Flights To Orlando
United Airlines said yesterday that it would more than double its daily flights from Orlando, Fla., a move that puts it in direct competition with Delta Air Lines and USAir there.
United, the nation's No. 2 airline after American Airlines, said it would increase the number of daily flights to 47 from 18, effective Oct. 31.
But analysts expressed doubt that Orlando, a fast-growing city and the home of Disney World, the Epcot Center and the Disney MGM Studios, could support three major airlines.


British Steel Profit Off 66%
British Steel P.L.C. said today that its profit sank 66 percent in the year ended March 30 because of the British recession and intense competition in Europe.
British Steel reported net profit of $:193 million, or about $311 million, for the year, compared with $:564 million, or $907 million, in the previous year.
Sales fell 1.4 percent, to $8.1 billion.


ABC Picks a Leader To Fit Leaner Times
By achievement and temperament, Jack O'Hara is not someone you would expect to occupy the executive producer's chair at ABC Sports.
His predecessors -- Roone Arledge, the founding father of network sports, and Geoffrey Mason -- were flamboyant, hands-on producers with Emmys lining their trophy cases.
O'Hara's network rivals, Terry O'Neil at NBC and Ted Shaker at CBS, fit the same profile: they are supervisors, but they remain Type A producers, more comfortable in a production truck or studio than in a boardroom.


W. B. Doner Changes Leadership in Michigan
W.
B.
Doner &amp; Company has reorganized its Southfield, Mich., office, placing control in the hands of three senior executives based there.
Until the restructuring, the office was run by an executive committee whose members were based there and in Baltimore, Doner's other headquarters office.


Who's Doing What, With What?
IN most offices, hardly anyone wants to learn a lot about personal computers.
People just want to get the job done.
Ideally, if they use just one application -- a word-processing program, for example -- it should start up without further ado after they flip the power switch.
That situation is easy enough for anyone who speaks elementary DOS to set up, and most offices have some kind of computer guru, if not a person or department devoted to keeping things humming.


Business Scene; Interest Rates, The Real Ones
SINCE the spring of 1989, the American economy has grown either weakly or not at all.
And all through this period, what economists call real interest rates -- the difference between interest rates on borrowed money and the inflation rate -- have remained high.
High real rates are usually seen as a threat to economic activity and an obstacle to a strong recovery after recession.
Such concerns are justified, most economists say.
The real test of the impact of interest rates is their level in relation to the inflation rate.
The closer the two rates are to each other, the greater the likelihood that salaries and prices will rise sufficiently to offset the cost of a loan.
Sometimes interest rates on loans can be falling, but if the inflation rate is falling even faster, the real cost of the loan rises.


Engineers Teach 'Smart' Buildings To Foil Quakes
LAST week's earthquake in southern California may jolt even the building industry, notoriously slow to innovate, into experimenting with new kinds of earthquake resistant buildings.
Among the most interesting are so-called smart buildings in which a system of computers, sensors and moving weights detects and moves to counteract the alarming motions generated by earthquakes and strong winds.
Traditionally, building engineers have taken a brute strength approach to structural safety.
They use massive, heavy materials and build stiffness into a building's infrastructure to resist winds and earthquakes.
To filter out shaking, some newer buildings have been constructed on huge rubber pads or materials that act as springs that help dissipate energy.
It has taken 30 years to get such passive control systems into the building codes, because American construction companies are extremely slow to innovate, said Dr.
Tsu T. Soong, a professor of civil engineering at the National Center for Earthquake Engineering Research at the State University of New York in Buffalo.


Cali's Mayor Escapes Ambush
The mayor of Cali, German Villegas, escaped an ambush by leftist rebels, but at least three of his bodyguards were killed and his brother was wounded, the police said today.
The attack late Sunday apparently was carried out by the Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces, the nation's largest rebel group, the police said.


Rig Count Up in Week
The number of working oil and gas rigs in the United States rose by 15 in the last week, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
The company said 881 rigs were in operation, up from 866 the week before but down from 1,020 a year ago.
The count represents the number of rigs exploring for petroleum and natural gas.
At the height of the oil boom in December 1981, the count reached a peak of 4,500.


Nurses Reject AIDS Tests
The American Nurses Association, the nation's largest organization of nurses, has come out against compulsory AIDS testing for its members and patients.
Instead, in a 577-13 vote Sunday at their annual convention, delegates representing 2 million registered nurses endorsed voluntary testing as well as voluntary disclosure by nurses who are infected with the AIDS virus.


New York at Work; Puppeteer Creates Shows for Grown-Ups
There were a couple of hands lying on the couch.
Unfortunately, they weren't attached to arms.
A smudgy woman trotted by with a loose head cradled in the crook of her elbow.
She said she was spent from hauling heads around, but all she got from her allies were sour looks.
Julie Taymor wanted to get on with things and introduce four other heads.
She pointed out the frightful head of a king and those of three of his ministers.
They were propped on rods, fanning out in all directions.
Now she wanted to go downstairs and inspect some feet.
She feared they might be too fat.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about revenues at the nation's largest law firms last year misstated the number of lawyers and partners at Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz and at Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
Wachtell has a total of 99 lawyers, 54 of them partners; Cravath has 284 lawyers, 66 of them partners.


Otto Marx, 81, Dies; Led Investment Firm
Otto Marx Jr., an investment banker and president of Marx &amp; Company, a Manhattan investment banking firm, died on Friday at a hospital in Nice, France.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He became ill aboard his yacht and died after emergency surgery, his lawyer, Roger Harris, said.


New Bankruptcy-Fee Rules Harsh on Investment Banks
Investment bankers working on bankruptcy cases will have to disclose hourly billing rates and account for their time down to every six minutes under strict new guidelines that became effective yesterday in the Southern District of New York.
The guidelines reflect a growing effort to rein in advisory fees run up during bankruptcy cases.





Rush of Soviet Immigrants to Israel
A sudden rush of new immigrants, eager to leave the Soviet Union before its new passport law took effect today, pushed Soviet immigration for June to its highest total since October.
Just over 20,000 Soviet Jews moved here in June, and about half that number arrived in a big airlift over the last six days.


Lebanese Clash with P.L.O. in South
Fighting broke out today as Palestinian guerrillas resisted efforts by the Lebanese Army to reassert the Government's authority over Palestinian strongholds in southern Lebanon.
The police said two gunmen were killed and three wounded in fighting with mortars and machine guns east of Sidon.
A Defense Ministry communique said troops came under shellfire from Palestinian positions as the soldiers advanced near the villages of Kraye and Jensanaya on the outskirts of Sidon, a port city 25 miles south of Beirut.
The army returned the fire, and both sides brought large numbers of reinforcements to the scene.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The nation's manufacturing economy surged in June to its highest level in more than two years, the nation's purchasing managers said.
The group's main economic index rose to 50.9 percent in June, up sharply from May's level of 45.4 percent.  [ Page D1. ]  Construction spending dropped nine-tenths of 1 percent in May.  [ D5. ]
Investment bankers working on bankruptcy cases must disclose hourly billing rates and account for their time down to every six minutes under strict new guidelines that became effective in the Southern District of New York.  [ D1. ]


Market Place; On Dividends, Some Fresh Hope
FOR the first time in two years, the number of companies providing good dividend news to holders is rising, as corporate boards apparently begin to believe the optimistic forecasts of an early rebound in business activity.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation reported yesterday that 82 companies either raised dividends, resumed paying them, or made an extra payment to holders in June, up from 76 in the same month of 1990.


CONSERVATIVE BLACK JUDGE, CLARENCE THOMAS, IS NAMED TO MARSHALL'S COURT SEAT
President Bush today nominated Clarence Thomas, a conservative Republican with a scanty judicial record on civil rights and abortion, to replace the retiring Justice Thurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court.
If confirmed, the 43-year-old United States appeals court judge for the District of Columbia Circuit would follow Justice Marshall as the second black judge to ascend to the Court.


A Justice Until 2030?
"Only in America could this have been possible." Clarence Thomas thanked President Bush with feeling yesterday for nominating him to the Supreme Court.
As a black child born in poverty, he said, "I could not dare to dream that I would ever see the Supreme Court, not to mention be nominated to it."
He might have added: Only after others had labored to realize America's promise of racial justice.
And only by walking in the shoes of Thurgood Marshall, whose mighty strivings as a lawyer and a judge have done so much to clear the ladder for other disadvantaged Americans.


CHRONICLE
MADONNA, who has been searching for new digs since a neighbor complained about her trees blocking his view from the Hollywood Hills, is moving to RONALD REAGAN'S part of town.
She bought a 21-room villa in Bel Air, the gated Los Angeles enclave favored more by establishment types than by pop stars.
She is paying about $8 million, The Los Angeles Times reported on Sunday, for a 20-year-old house with three bedrooms and 10,000 square feet.


Crystal Brands
Crystal Brands Inc. said it would take a $30.7 million reserve after taxes in its second quarter because it is restructuring its manufacturing and sales operations.
The company, which makes Evan-Piccone clothing, also said it expected to lose $4 to $4.50 a share in the quarter ended June 30, because of the reserve.
Crystal Brands will also cut its work force of 11,000 by about 1,000 people.
Its stock was unchanged on the Big Board today at $21.50.


Clarence Thomas In His Own Words
On Civil Rights
Much of the current thinking on civil rights has been crippled by the confusion between a "colorblind society" and a "colorblind Constitution." The Constitution, by protecting the rights of individuals, is colorblind.
But a society cannot be colorblind, any more than men and women can escape their bodies.
It would destroy limited government and liberal democracy to confuse the private, societal realm (including the body and skin color) and the public, political realm (including rights and laws).
Obscuring the difference between public and private would allow private passions (including racial ones) to be given full vent in public life and overwhelm reason. . . .
Thus the "quest for racial justice," as opposed to justice per se, is doomed, because American justices by definition cannot be race- or group-oriented. . . .
The tragedy of the civil rights movement is that as blacks achieved the full exercise of their rights as citizens, government expanded, and blacks became an interest group in a coalition supporting expanded government.
From a book review of "And We Are Not Saved: The Elusive Quest for Racial Justice" by Derrick Bell, The Wall Street Journal, Oct. 12, 1987.


Pet Cemetery Owners Indicted
The owners of the Long Island Pet Cemetery were charged with mail fraud yesterday in a 20-count Federal indictment.
A grand jury charged Samuel Strauss, 70 years old, of Boca Raton, Fla., and his son, Alan, 35, of Dix Hills, L.I., with scheming to defraud pet owners, veterinarians and animal hospitals by using the mail to solicit business by falsely promising services at the Middle Island cemetery.
The indictment said many pets that were supposed to get a private cremation were shoved, dozens at a time, into large ovens, while others were dumped into trenches.


Lewis Finishes Second but Prevails Over Johnson
Carl Lewis extended his hand to Ben Johnson minutes before their long-awaited 100-meter race tonight, but Johnson declined the gesture.
"As long as we are competing, that can't happen," Johnson said.
Based on what followed, that may not be much longer.
In a steady rain here at the BNP Grand Prix meet, Lewis, who recently proved he is still among the world's top sprinters, finished second with a time of 10.20 seconds to Dennis Mitchell in the 100-meter dash.
Johnson labored down the stretch and wound up next to last in a field of eight, in 10.46.


Japan's Central Bank Lowers Discount Rate to 5.5 Percent
Japan lowered its benchmark interest rate today by a half percentage point, to 5.5 percent, ending its two-year-old policy of keeping interest rates high to wring inflation out of the economy.
The announcement by the Bank of Japan, which came at 12:15 P.M. here, appeared to be intended to spur Japan's economy after a recent slowdown in growth.
The country is headed toward its longest-running economic expansion in postwar history -- it is two months short of the record of 57 months set more than 20 years ago -- and the central bank had recently come under increasing pressure to lower its rates to encourage capital spending and revive the lagging stock market.


Construction Spending Off 0.9% in May
Construction spending dropped nine-tenths of 1 percent in May, the Government said today.
The decline followed a revised 1.2 percent rise in April, the largest increase in more than a year.


Dykstra Picks Up Bat
LENNY DYKSTRA took batting practice with the Philadelphia Phillies yesterday for the first time since breaking his collarbone in an auto accident on May 6.
Dykstra swung the bat in the indoor batting facility beneath Veterans Stadium, with hitting coach DENIS MENKE looking on.


Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Tilles Center C. W. Post Campus Long Island University
Virgil Thomson told everyone years ago how to compose music that was truly American: simply be an American and write what you want.
Tonight's New York Philharmonic program, the first in a summer series called Tillesfest '91, was a maze of such wants and needs, written by citizens of all shapes and descriptions.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9
A Soviet opposition group was formed to mount a nationwide challenge to the Communist Party.
The group is being led by former Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze and other prominent Soviet citizens.
Page A1


Some Opera Tableaux Appear Outside the Opera


Don't Bet on Unbridled Retiring, Owners Say
The owners of the 1990 champion Unbridled denied the rumors yesterday: Despite a series of injuries and ailments that have hammered his 1991 season, Unbridled is not being retired and, in fact, may go back to the races within the month.
"He's training again, and he seems to be doing fine," Bentley Smith reported by telephone from his stable office in Minneapolis.
"He's had a rough year. But I'd say we're 10 days to two weeks away now, and we have no immediate plans to retire him. Maybe when the season's over, because a lot of people are expressing interest in him for breeding. But for now, we're getting him ready to go back to the races."


Pork Prices Drop Sharply On Report of High Supplies
Pork futures prices dropped sharply yesterday after a Government report signaled record high meat supplies through the end of the year.
Livestock futures were mixed.
Live cattle settled 0.25 cent lower to 0.48 cent higher on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, with the contract for delivery in August at 72.70 cents a pound.
Feeder cattle settled 0.15 cent lower to 0.15 cent higher, with August at 88.62 cents a pound.
Live hogs were 1.50 cents to 1.37 cents lower, with July at 53.20 cents a pound, and frozen pork bellies were 2 cents lower across the board, with July at 49.70 cents a pound.


Tracking Tsetse Flies
Satellites may help the authorities in Africa battle the tsetse fly, which transmits sleeping sickness in people and disease in cattle, a study suggests.
Researchers found that the abundance and mortality rates of the flies in several areas of Africa correlated with information from meteorological satellites.


Demise and Pall Of the Indians
If Columbus had sailed east, if the Wright brother had preferred trains, if George Steinbrenner had bought the Cleveland Indians . . .
In fact, 20 years ago, Steinbrenner and his partners tried to buy the Cleveland Indians.
In fact, they thought they had bought the team from Vernon Stouffer, the latest of the Indians' transient owners.


The Dow Advances 51.66 Points, to 2,958.41
An exceptionally strong stock market in Tokyo and a favorable purchasing managers' report did wonders for Wall Street yesterday as stocks bounced back sharply and recovered almost everything they lost last week.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which sank nearly 59 points last week, soared 51.66, or about 1.8 percent, to 2,958.41.


Plan to Update Turnstiles Hits a Snag
When people drop tokens into turnstiles or fare boxes to take subway or bus rides in New York City, they are using 50-year-old technology that almost every major city in the world has abandoned as outmoded and too expensive.
In Boston, San Francisco, Washington, London, Hong Kong and Singapore, for example, riders use paper magnetic fare cards that operate on the same principle as plastic cash-machine cards issued by banks.
In those cities riders pass their pre-paid cards across an electronic reader on the turnstile before proceeding through.


Monica Seles, I Presume
MONICA SELES , who has not been available for comment since she pulled out of Wimbledon with an unspecified injury, is reportedly staying at the Florida estate of DONALD TRUMP .
The 17-year-old Yugoslav was spotted on the grounds of the palatial ocean-front Mar-A-Lago estate in Palm Beach over the weekend, The New York Post reported yesterday.
The paper reported that a source close to Trump said Seles and her parents took refuge at the estate about a week ago after her residence in Sarasota, Fla., was besieged by reporters.
The source said Seles, who gave up a chance at the tennis Grand Slam by withdrawing from Wimbledon after winning the Australian and French opens, had injured her leg slightly in a minor car accident.
Speculation has swirled around the nature of Seles's injury.(Reuters)


European Military Group Calls for a Truce in Yugoslavia
Echoing steps by the European Community, a European military information exchange group called for a cease-fire in Yugoslavia and the return of Yugoslav federal troops and Slovenian territorial defense forces to their barracks.
The statement was approved by the Conflict Prevention Center of the 35-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.


Next, 'Bo Knows' About Rehabilitation
Add rehabilitation to the long list of skills that Nike Inc. boasts Bo knows.
In new television commercials that begin next Tuesday, during CBS's telecast of the baseball All-Star Game, the nation's leading athletic shoe marketer will present the third annual installment in its "Bo knows" advertising series that has become as popular with ad-award committees as it is with sneaker-buying consumers.


5 Airliner Passengers Injured In Storm on Way to Newark
Five people aboard an American Airlines flight from Puerto Rico to Newark International Airport were injured yesterday when the aircraft encountered severe turbulence, airport officials said.
Emergency units met Flight 674 as it landed safely at 10:15 P.M., said a Port Authority officer, Daniel Bergen.
The five who were injured were taken to hospitals in the area and treated for minor injuries, he said.


Corrections
A listing in the Guide column of the Long Island Weekly on Sunday misstated the date and telephone number for a party to benefit the Rogers Memorial Library in Southampton.
The party will take place Friday, not Saturday, from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Southampton Bath and Tennis Club on Gin Lane.
The number for reservations is (516) 287-1233.


Campeau's Units Change Creditor Plan
Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation amended their Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization plan today, but said they still had not satisfied the objections of some creditors.
The amended plan filed in Federal Bankruptcy Court changes the mix of cash and securities that would go to some of the creditors.
Company officials said the new plan satisfied some, but not all, objections to the initial reorganization plan filed April 29.


2 Haulers Charged In Dumping Case
The New York State Attorney General's Office has charged two Long Island hauling concerns with criminal contempt for dumping construction debris on state property.
According to court papers filed in district court here yesterday, the companies, Garofalo Carting Inc. of Brentwood and R. &amp; M. Sanitation Leasing Company of Dix Hills, have continued to use an illegal dump on the grounds of the Pilgrim Psychiatric Center in Brentwood, despite a court order directing them to stop.


Ivy League Joins Crowd
The Ivy League said yesterday it would allow freshmen to begin playing varsity football in 1993, a move aimed at saving money by eliminating freshman programs and reducing the number of recruited players.
The changes were agreed to in principle at the Council of Ivy Group Presidents meeting on June 25.
The move must still be ratified at the council's December meeting.
Ivy freshmen already are eligible for varsity teams in all other sports except men's crew.
Yale athletic director ED WOODSUM said the university was opposed to dropping the freshman football program.
Woodsum said he is worried that freshmen will not be able to adjust to both the rigors of athletics and Yale academics. (AP)


Careers; Creating Jobs By Building Export Trade
THE Xport Port Authority Trading Company has a job-related mission.
Operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, it helps small- and medium-sized companies to export products, with the aim not only of improving United States trade figures, but also of creating more jobs.
For example, the jobs created may be export manager and assistant at a company that never had such a department, nor could afford it, until the Xport staff helped the company get started in export markets and bolstered its sales.


Parting Shots of a Safety Board Official
Jim Burnett stepped down as a member of the National Transportation Safety Board last week in characteristic fashion.
He took a blunt parting shot at the agency, which investigates major plane, train, bus and ship accidents.
The 43-year-old lawyer said he thought the board had "lost some of its grit" in protecting the public from transportation hazards.
"There has been a trend on the part of the board to be less aggressive in facing up to industry interest groups," he said, in one of a series of telephone interviews from his office and home in Washington.


Quotation of the Day
"As a child, I could not dare dream that I would ever see the Supreme Court, not to mention be nominated to it. Indeed, my most vivid childhood memory of a Supreme Court was the 'Impeach Earl Warren' signs which lined Highway 17 near Savannah. I didn't quite understand who this Earl Warren fellow was, but I knew he was in some kind of trouble." -- Judge Clarence Thomas.  [ A15:1. ]


Samsung Exports
The Samsung Electron Devices Company, a subsidiary of the Samsung Group of South Korea, has agreed to export $125 million worth of color monitors to the Hewlett-Packard Company of Palo Alto, Calif.
About 500,000 Samsung Electron color monitors will be shipped over two years, with the first shipment scheduled for the end of the month.


Music in Review
'The Witchboy'
Reimann Opera Theater New York University
"The Witchboy," a new opera by two brothers about magic in backwoods America, makes good use of ordinary materials.
Its music moves plausibly from revival-meeting hymns to angular accompanied recitative to syncopated bluesiness to the kind of modal melody that Aaron Copland turned into a manufactured American folk music. (Grieg did the same thing for the Norwegians.) The score is by Timothy C. Lloyd.
After his death, it was adapted for synthesized sound by John Clifton.


The Tonic? Johnson and More Johnson
He has been the constant for the Mets through the controversies and the collapses.
Manager Bud Harrelson writes Howard Johnson's name in the lineup day after day and the third baseman pastes it all over the official score sheet inning after inning.
"He's my All-Star," Harrelson says of Johnson.
Johnson, who drove in two more runs in today's 4-2 triumph over the Expos at Olympic Stadium, is on the official All-Star ballot as a shortstop, and so is nowhere close to being elected by fans across the country.
He is, though, a virtual certainty to be named to the National League squad by Cincinnati Manager Lou Piniella, and so has gone ahead and made some arrangements for next Tuesday's game in Toronto.


Westchester and L.I. Face Sales Tax Rises
Residents of Westchester, Suffolk and Nassau Counties would pay higher sales taxes under legislation being drawn up today in the State Legislature.
Another measure would authorize New York City to raise its income tax.


Grandparents' Right to Sue Is Broadened
In its second recent venture into one of the most emotional aspects of the law, New York State's highest court today broadly expanded the circumstances under which grandparents can sue to visit their grandchildren, even over objections from the children's parents.
The Court of Appeals, in a 6-to-0 decision that overturned an appellate court's ruling last year, found that such suits could be brought even if the children were being raised by both parents.


PBS Drops 1992 Campaign Project
The Public Broadcasting Service has abandoned an ambitious plan for television coverage of the 1992 Presidential campaign.
The plan included free time for the candidates to address the public and opportunities for voters to voice their concerns to the candidates.
The project, called "The Voters Channel," was canceled because of disagreements over financing between PBS and the project's major sponsor, the John and Mary R. Markle Foundation, executives on both sides said yesterday.
The foundation had agreed to commit $5 million to the effort, which it estimated would cost $12 million to $15 million to produce.
Differences between the foundation and PBS over what the programming would include also hindered the foundation in its effort to raise more money, said Lloyd N. Morrisett, its president.


Music in Review
Yevgeny Onegin
Bolshoi Opera The Metropolitan Opera House
The Bolshoi's new production of "Yevgeny Onegin," for all its highly publicized problems, had settled into well-ordered routine by Saturday afternoon, and offered modest rewards to a listener fearing the worst.
The Tatyana, Nina Rautio, was especially fine in quiet passages, and her interplay with Marina Shutova, as Olga, was engaging.


Dynamics Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


New Training Site For the Angels
The California Angels confirmed today that they plan to make the city of Tempe their spring-training headquarters for at least 15 years starting in 1993.
At a news conference near city-owned Diablo Stadium, officials of the team and the city credited a new state ball park-renovation law with the Angels' decision to leave Palm Springs, Calif.


Bridge
The annual series of world championship books produced by the American Contract Bridge League ended last year, after a span of 36 years.
But this challenging assignment has been tackled effectively by an English publisher, Tony Sowter, under the auspices of the World Bridge Federation.
He has changed the page size and the internal format, while the analyses, mainly by Eric Kokish of Canada, continue to be of high quality.
In two respects there has been an improvement: the number of photographs has been greatly increased, and the time needed for preparation and publication reduced.
In North America the latest book, covering the 1990 tournament in Geneva, is available for $27.95 including mailing, from Baron-Barclay ( (800) 274-2221).


Economic Scene; AIDS Testing Doesn't Pay
THIRTY-THREE state legislatures have decided it is bad social policy to permit discrimination against workers with the AIDS virus.
Now, two economists at Columbia University have found that AIDS testing, the keystone to discrimination, is also bad business policy.
The costs of screening prospective employees, say David Bloom and Sherry Glied, far exceed the likely savings on insurance.
Their research results, published last week in Science magazine, should be welcome news to people with a healthy respect for the power of the profit motive: If testing did indeed pay, it would put the interests of corporate America in direct conflict with those of society.


Scheib (Earl) Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Weicker Loses Again in His Bid For Income Tax for Connecticut
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s attempt to impose the first income tax ever in Connecticut went down to defeat today -- again -- whn the Senate killed an exhaustively negotiated tax plan.
The rejection meant that the Governor, an independent, had come up short for now in his effort to force a restructuring of Connecticut's tax system through a legislature in which he has no natural political allies.
He was thwarted even though, at dawn today, he had carried out his greatest threat: to begin shutting down state offices.


Corrections
A profile on June 24 of Larry Gagosian, an art dealer, incorrectly described the criminal conviction of Peter M. Brant, a friend of his.
Mr.
Brant, a polo player and race-horse owner in Greenwich, Conn., was convicted of willful failure to maintain tax records, a misdemeanor, not tax evasion, a felony.
Two corporations of which he was president, the BATO Company and Riviere du Loup Newsprint Ltd., pleaded guilty to willfully filing false tax returns, a felony.


Campeau Units Get Store Bids
Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation said they had received offers totaling $78 million for 11 department stores in Florida and South Carolina.
The nine Jordan Marsh and two Burdines stores are among 20 for sale as part of a strategy approved in April to merge the two retail chains.


Community Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Review/Television; The Wheels of Justice, Live on Cable
On most of its 24-hour programming days, the Courtroom Television Network, the new cable channel that started operating this week, will present live trials from around the country, unedited and enhanced with analysis, interviews and relevant reports.
Monday, the opening day, brought viewers the trial of a Florida man charged with killing his mother-in-law 25 years ago, a case that was reopened by the accused man's son; the trial of an Ohio basketball star charged with rape, and the first live telecast of proceedings from a Federal court: a suit brought in Philadelphia accusing a company of discrimination against an employee because of her age and illness.
Courtrooms being closed on July 4, tomorrow will largely be given to two recent trials that touched on issues concerning freedom of speech and the tapes of which were made available for preview.
Since the taped trials are handled much like the live ones, they can serve as evidence for a preliminary judgment of the so-called Court TV, which promises "to teach you about our legal system," is up to.


William E. Dugan; Executive, 84
William Edward Dugan, a Wall Street executive and former chairman of Laidlaw &amp; Company, died on Friday at his home in Manchester Center, Vt.
He was 84 years old.
He died of cancer, said his daughter, Isabell.


Isuzu Draws Up a List For an Account Review
American Isuzu Motors Inc. and the consultants assisting in the review of the creative portion of its $75 million advertising account have settled on a list of finalist agencies for the review, industry executives said yesterday.
On the list, the executives said, are: Altschiller Reitzfeld Davis/Tracy-Locke, New York; Carmichael Lynch, Minneapolis; Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco; McCabe &amp; Company, New York, and McElligott Wright Morrison White, Minneapolis.
American Isuzu has already named SFM Media Corporation to handle the media-buying portion of the account.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Orders to U.S. factories surged 2.9 percent in May, the biggest rise in more than a year, the Commerce Department said.
The report seemed to extinguish any hopes that the Fed would cut interest rates again to spur the economy.  [ Page D1. ]  Consumers' faith in the present and future health of the economy jumped sharply in June, a survey on consumer sentiment showed.  [ D2. ]


60-Minute Gourmet
THE goal of successful entertaining over a summer holiday like the Fourth of July is to please guests without taxing yourself to the point where the weekend becomes one long, hot stretch in the galley.
It is amazing how the most rudimentary and quick meal can impress guests if a little thought is given to presentation.
Take, for example, broiled chicken breast.
Couldn't be easier, right?
You simply season them with salt, pepper, rosemary, coriander and olive oil, or any herbs you choose.
Then broil the breasts for three to four minutes on each side and set them aside in a warm place.


School Board Rebukes, but Elects, a Chief
H.
Carl McCall was elected president of the New York City Board of Eduation yesterday in an atmosphere of disharmony and some bitterness that may cloud his efforts to shape the board into an effective policy-making body.
The public show of resentment in a ceremony that usually has the ordered dignity of a coronation came as something of a surprise.


Lung Patients: In Hospital Too Long?
Doctors often keep patients with emphysema and other chronic lung diseases in the hospital longer than necessary, according to a study of two hospitals.
Data on 83 patients 45 years old and older with asthma, emphysema and other lung problems admitted to the two Rochester, N.Y., hospitals from November 1986 through late 1987 is analyzed in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical Association.
The study concluded that the necessary stay was 6.9 days, while the actual average stay was 8.7 days.


Notes and Bonds Little Changed
More optimistic news about the economy had only marginal impact on the credit markets yesterday, where prices of Treasury notes and bonds were little changed in thin trading.
A sharp increase in factory orders in May, the largest monthly rise in more than a year, and an improvement in the consumer confidence survey conducted by the University of Michigan were both seen as signs that the economy is continuing to improve.


CHRONICLE
More than 2,000 people packed Westminster Abbey yesterday for the memorial to Dame Margot Fonteyn, who died in February.
They included PRINCESS MARGARET ; LORD RUNCIE , the former Archbishop of Canterbury, and Dame NINETTE DE VALOIS .
Dame Ninette, 93 years old, discovered the dancer in the 1930's, when she ran the ballet school of Sadler's Wells, which later became the Royal Ballet.
"She loved life, sought life, danced life," she recalled of Dame Margot.
"She would not want to be mourned, only understood."


For the Opera, Sang Fe Goes Formal


Atlantic City Official Found Guilty of Official Misconduct
An Atlantic City Councilman was found guilty of official misconduct and other charges today while another Councilman and two other men were acquitted in a city corruption case that originally had eight defendants.
A Superior Court jury found Gene Dorn guilty of official misconduct, conspiracy to commit official misconduct and campaign contribution violations.


Judge Portrayed as a Product Of Ideals Clashing With Life
The old St.
Benedict the Moor School on East Gordon Street here, which Clarence Thomas attended for eight years in the 1950's and 60's, has long been closed, a footnote to the history of segregated Savannah.
Its windows are boarded up, its swings broken, its plywood doors padlocked; the Irish nuns who taught there, whom some white townspeople called the "nigger sisters," have all retired to convents elsewhere.
But their influence, and St.
Benedict's, lives on in Judge Thomas, as he acknowledged Monday when President Bush nominated him to the United States Supreme Court.
Their teachings are present in the defiant conviction they instilled in Clarence Thomas that with enough hard work and determination he could overcome quadruple handicaps: being black, fatherless, poor and Catholic in the Eisenhower-era South.


With Clock Ticking, Cuomo and Top Legislators Try to Restore Money He Had Vetoed
Carrying their budget feud to the 11th hour of the legislative session, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and top state lawmakers struggled today to forge a compromise on restoring much of the money that the Governor vetoed out of the spending plan earlier this month.
All sides said they were prepared to restore about $650 million of the $940 million that was vetoed.
Much of it would be used for school aid and other local assistance.
But the Governor reiterated his insistence that about $200 million of the restored money be paid for with either new revenues or spending cuts in other programs.


Unifirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


BRIEFS
*
Armco Inc., Parsippany, N.J., a steel company, bought Douglas Dynamics Inc., a snowplow maker, for about $60 million. *
Colgate-Palmolive Co., New York, agreed to acquire Murphy-Phoenix Co., Cleveland, the maker of Murphy Oil Soap, a household cleaner.
Terms were not disclosed.


It's Not Enough to Admit Golf Club Bigotry
To the Editor:
I understand Tom Watson's sentiment in "The American Way to Golf" (Op-Ed, June 17), but unfortunately, he has taken the idea that admitting the problem is half the solution a step too far.
As far as Mr.
Watson is concerned, admitting that America's country clubs have an exclusivity problem is an end in itself.


Coleman Mends, but What's the Rush?
Vince Coleman, his hamstring on the mend, ran in the outfield here today.
He loped, he cut, he sprinted.
There wasn't a stride missing.
The question that arose, though, as Coleman got closer to returning from the disabled list, was whether the Mets had missed a stride without him.


Rally in Grain Prices Stalls As Parched Areas Get Rain
A rally in grain and soybean futures prices stalled yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after rain fell in some parched areas.
Wheat futures settled 4 cents to 1/2 cent lower, with the contract for delivery in July at $2.64 a bushel.
Corn was 2 cents lower to 1 1/2 cents higher, with July at $2.32 3/4 a bushel.
Oats were 2 1/2 cents to 3/4 cent lower, with July at $1.13 3/4 a bushel, and soybeans were 8 1/4 cents to 1 1/4 cents lower, with July at $5.31 3/4 a bushel.


Idealism With Gloves Off
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. did not create the budget problems in Connecticut; they arose from problems of falling tax revenues caused by the recession.
But at every turn in the six months since he took office as the state's first independent third-party governor in a century, he has gone out of his way to make those problems indelibly his own -- in proposing and defending the kind of income-tax plan that residents and lawmakers have resisted for decades.
Through two budget vetoes -- and his order, issued early today, to begin shutting down nonessential state services until lawmakers pass a budget that he will sign -- Mr.
Weicker has argued in ringing and righteous terms that he is defending residents from budget chicanery and long-term fiscal ruin.


Stocks Mixed, With Dow Rising by 14.31
After Monday's big run-up, stock prices turned mixed yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average rising 14.31, to 2,972.72. and the rest of the market giving ground.
Walt Disney and Alcoa accounted for almost 90 percent of the Dow's gain.





K-V Pharmaceutical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Godfather and the Kurds
Having gassed Kurdish villages and dishonored a 1970 agreement for Kurdish autonomy, Saddam Hussein now makes another offer that he believes his Kurdish subjects cannot refuse.
He promises them free elections to a Kurdish parliament, pluralism and a free press.
But the fine print exposes these concessions as a sham.
He demands that Iraqi Kurds support his own Baath Party "until martyrdom," denounce the international intervention that saved their lives and oppose all of Baghdad's enemies, including "the Zionist-American imperialist threat."


Hipotronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


BOXING: Notebook; Sanctioning Bothers Sulaiman
At a hearing in Las Vegas, Nev., last week, Jose Sulaiman , president of the World Boxing Council, declared that he was not a puppet of promoter Don King.
What prompted that statement?


Arkansas Bans Miller
OLIVER MILLER became the fifth University of Arkansas basketball player to begin next season on suspension.
Miller, the Razorbacks' 6-foot-9-inch center, will miss at least two games for his involvement in an incident outside a Fayetteville nightclub on June 25, Arkansas coach NOLAN RICHARDSON said yesterday..
TODD DAY, DARRELL HAWKINS, ELMER MARTIN and ROOSEVELT WALLACE are all suspended from the team for November for their involvement in a sexual incident in the athletic dormitory in February.
Day is also suspended for December for allegations of cheating on a biology lab quiz during summer school. (AP)


CHRONICLE
Better known as an acid-penned observer of louche lives and loose lips, TAKI has written a prison memoir, describing his three months as "the guest of the Queen of England."
"Nothing to Declare," published by Atlantic Monthly Press , is spiced with Names, as the author, a.k.a.
Taki Theodoracopulos, reflects unrepentingly on his past as a playboy.
He spent nearly three months, from December 1984 to February 1985, in a British jail after pleading guilty to a charge of transporting cocaine.


Quality Food Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


It's Not Enough to Admit Golf Club Bigotry; Scottish Style
To the Editor:
"The American Way of Golf" (Op-Ed, June 17) by Tom Watson is incisive and commendable.
His principled decision to resign from a golf club where he had played since he was 6 years old is an inspiration to all people of good will who would reject the discriminatory policies of such clubs.


Barter Finance for Era of Credit Crunch
To the Editor:
The practice of bartering, discussed in "Opportune Times for Big Barterers" (Business Day, June 20), is more than swapping goods and services.
Today, bartering is an ideal corporate financing technique for large to midsize companies.


Two Pesos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Simple Chip May Allow Air Bags for Passengers
Engineers at Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, N.M., have developed a simple silicon chip that could allow more auto makers to install air bags for passengers as well as the driver.
Most automobiles equipped with air bags have only one, for the driver, in part because designers must plan for the worst case, a nearly dead car battery.
The hot-wire device currently used to trigger an air bag could require all of a battery's remaining voltage, so these devices might fail in a car with multiple air bags.


Reporter Off Trump Beat
The Wall Street Journal has reassigned the reporter who had been covering Donald J. Trump, acting to remove what a Journal spokesman described as "a perception problem" involving a possible conflict of interest for the reporter.
The reporter, Neil Barsky, accepted three $1,000 tickets from representatives of Mr.
Trump to the boxing match between Evander Holyfield, the heavyweight champion, and George Foreman in Atlantic City in April, which was sponsored by Mr.
Trump.
Mr.
Barsky had received permission from his superior at the paper to take a ticket, but accepted two others for family members who accompanied him.


Public &amp; Private; Weighing the Victim
Of all the questions we get asked in the newspaper business, perhaps the most slippery is the definition of news.
The wise-guy answer -- "I know it when I see it" -- does not suffice.
But in fact it is the closest thing to truth.
Readers know it when they see it, too.
They may ask why it is of particular interest when a female violinist is murdered on the roof of the Metropolitan Opera House, and why it is not when a decomposing body is found in an abandoned building, but intuitively most know the answer.
In a city in which there are, on average, six homicides each day, the ones that get more than a paragraph tend to be the killings in which the event is unusual or the victim compelling.
In the measure of column inches, their deaths are given more weight.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the reduction of the prison sentence of Stanley Simon, the former Bronx Borough President who was convicted in the Wedtech racketeering case, incompletely described the legal status of another defendant, John Marriotta.
A Federal appeals court reversed Mr.
Marriotta's conviction on racketeering and bribery charges, but upheld his conviction for mail fraud and tax evasion.


Lutcher Slade Brown; Producer, 68
Lutcher Slade Brown, a theatrical producer, musician and businessman, died on Saturday.
He was 68 years old.
Mr.
Brown's most successful Broadway production was the 1960 musical "Bye Bye, Birdie." He also produced a number of other Broadway shows, including "Entertaining Mr. Sloane," "All American," "A Joyful Noise" and "The Rink."


Gold-Stock Funds Win in Quarter
When it came to stock mutual fund performance in the second quarter of this year, it turned out that what glittered really was gold.
Gold-oriented mutual funds greatly outpaced the stock market from April to June, making them one of the few bright spots among mutual funds investing primarily in common stocks.
Stock funds, in general, fell a bit more than the stock market did.


Canterbury Educational Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


ADS Associates Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


British Syndicate Out
The Port Pendennis syndicate of Britain, lacking the funding to build a yacht, has withdrawn from the 1992 America's Cup.


People
*
Thomas F. Maxey, vice chairman of Ayer Inc., New York, is adding the new title of chief operating officer.
Dominick F. Rossi Jr. is promoted to president of Ayer U.S.A., from president of Ayer New York, a position that will not be filled.


Molly McKaughan, Writer, Marries
Molly McKaughan, a writer and editor, and William Michael Garner, a lawyer, both of Upper Montclair, N.J., were married yesterday in Montclair, N.J.
Judge Golden Johnson of Montclair Municipal Court officiated at the Municipal Courthouse.
The bride, 46 years old, is the author of "The Biological Clock: Balancing Marriage, Motherhood and Career." She is also a consultant to the Commonwealth Fund in New York, and an advisory editor for The Paris Review.
She is a cum laude graduate of Smith College.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


Indians Latest to Fall To Yankee Youth Corps
The Cleveland Indians, who seem to be in an eternal youth movement, have 8 rookies among their 25 players.
The Yankees, in a highly uncharacteristic youth movement of their own, have six rookies on their roster.
So in a game of our-rookies-are-better-than-your-rookies, the Yankees defeated the Indians, 8-5, last night.
Wade Taylor, one of the Yankees' three rookie starting pitchers, pitched a passable six innings and earned his fourth victory against two defeats.
Mike York, the third rookie in the Indians' starting rotation, didn't make it out of the fifth inning, giving up the Yankees' first four runs.
Dave Otto, another rookie, relieved York and allowed two more runs.


LEBANESE CLAIMING VICTORY OVER P.L.O.
The Lebanese Government said today that its army had routed Palestinian guerrillas at their major strongholds in southern Lebanon after a fierce daylong battle.
The Defense Ministry said troops backed by tanks, artillery and rocket-launchers had seized the main bases and arms depots of Palestine Liberation Organization fighters in the area of Sidon and had forced thousands of guerrillas to retreat to two Palestinian refugee districts on the outskirts of the port city.


Cupertino National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film; The Marquis Turns Serious In a Lighthearted Way
In "Marquis," a Belgian-French film featuring actors wearing masks that suggest barnyard animals, a spaniel-faced Marquis de Sade spends much of his time discussing philosophy, morality and strategy with a baguette-size likeness of a penis, which has a mind of its own.
This is no idle conceit.
In the film's closing credits, the performer who supplies the voice of the penis -- the character is named Colin -- is given second billing.
Although the bawdy, flippant "Marquis," which opens today at Film Forum, is clearly not for everyone, it turns out to be considerably more deft than might have been expected.
As directed by Henri Xhonneux, with art direction by Roland Topor, the caricaturist, "Marquis" has a consistently acerbic style and a definite viewpoint, one steeped in late 18th-century French political and literary history. (Much of the film takes place in the Bastille, where the Marquis has been imprisoned for defiling a crucifix with the perverse gusto for which he remains famous.)


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-8
Slovenian and Yugoslav forces fought in several areas of Slovenia, shattering a brief cease-fire.
The Yugoslav Army, seeming to act on its own, vowed to destroy the Slovenian independence drive.
Page A1
News analysis: Yugoslavia's center comes apart A6


Her Fame Is Ruled His Too: Soprano Must Share Income
"The Marriage of Figaro" did not end like this.
A New York State appeals court ruled yesterday that the mezzo-soprano Frederica von Stade must share with her former husband money she made during their 17-year marriage.


YUGOSLAV TROOPS BATTLE SLOVENES, ENDING CEASE-FIRE
Fierce fighting broke out today between the Yugoslav Army and forces battling for independence in the republic of Slovenia, shattering a brief cease-fire.
The Yugoslav Army, which seems increasingly to be acting on its own in the civil strife here, vowed to destroy the Slovenian independence drive.
The country appears to be in a state of chaos, with no clear indication of what direction the weeklong independence drive by Slovenia and neighboring Croatia will take.
About a dozen Yugoslav Army soldiers were reportedly killed today in clashes in Slovenia, the westernmost of the multi-ethnic country's six republics and the most militantly autonomous region in the fracturing Yugoslav federation.
Shooting in Croatia
In Zagreb, the capital of Croatia, at least three people were killed and seven wounded tonight when Yugoslav Army troops opened fire on a crowd of 1,000 people who tried to block a tank convoy from leaving its barracks.


Micro Bio-Medics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Crest Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A School's Tests Are Investigated Over Tampering
A public school on Staten Island that has ranked among the top schools in New York City in reading scores is under investigation for possible tampering with standardized student tests, Board of Education officials said yesterday.
Public School 5 on the borough's South Shore -- which has had the highest reading scores on Staten Island for the last five years and which last year ranked third in reading scores among the city's 619 elementary schools -- is being investigated to determine whether someone tampered with scores on reading and mathematics tests used to determine grade-level abilities, a Board of Education spokesman, Frank Sobrino, said yesterday.


Book Notes
A Review Rejected
Is it politically correct to write novels about mass murderers of women?
Apparently, The Atlantic magazine thinks not.


Helian Health Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 31





Foreign Investment in U.S. Decreased Last Year
Foreigners invested much less in the United States last year than in previous years, according to Commerce Department figures released today.
Largely as a result, the excess of foreign investment in the United States over American investment abroad -- sometimes referred to as the nation's net debtor position -- barely widened last year and may actually have shrunk, the figures also showed.


Executive Telecard reports earnings for Year to March 31


Terrence McNally's Four Stars Talk Happily of His 'Lips Together'
Swoosie Kurtz is sitting in the lobby of the Manhattan Theater Club talking about "Lips Together, Teeth Apart" when Nathan Lane, her husband in the hit new Terrence McNally play, enters the room, about 10 minutes late.
Mr.
Lane quickly maneuvers his fireplug of a body over to Ms.
Kurtz and offers her his hand.
"Hi," he says. "I'm Nathan Lane."


Ilio Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Rent-A-Wreck of America reports earnings for Year to March 31


Oil Exporters and Users Agree to Continue 'Dialogue'
Twenty-five oil-producing and consuming countries ended a two-day conference here today with an agreement to continue "a dialogue" that the United States has steadfastly opposed.
Six members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, including major producers like Saudi Arabia, Venezuela and Iran, sent their oil ministers to the conference, called the Ministerial Seminar for Oil-Producing and Consuming Countries.


CHRONICLE
PRINCE CLAUS , the husband of Queen Beatrix of The Netherlands, was hospitalized for depression, the Government announced yesterday.
He has suffered from depression-linked disorders, which were acknowledged publicly in 1982, The Associated Press reported.


Apple-I.B.M. Pact Is Said To Be Near
Apple Computer Inc. and the International Business Machines Corporation are expected to announce Wednesday the formation of an alliance that would combine the strengths of two of the most powerful companies in the computer industry.
The agreement, which has been the subject of industry speculation for several weeks, is expected to be even broader than what has already been reported.
In addition to a technology exchange, the pact is expected to pave the way for the two companies to sell some of each other's products, according to one industry executive who spoke on the condition that he not be identified.


A New Operating Head Of Sumitomo Trust Unit
Hiromasa Yakushiji, the new head of the Sumitomo Trust and Banking Company's operations in North and South America, faces a double challenge: improving Sumitomo Trust's lowered credit ratings while contending with a sluggish real estate market.
Mr.
Yakushiji, 47, has been named director and general manager of business planning for the Americas after 25 years with the Osaka-based commercial bank.
Sumitomo Trust, one of the world's major banks, is separate from the Sumitomo Bank Ltd., which is even larger than Sumitomo Trust.


Vengeance Remains Sole Reason to Support the Death Penalty
To the Editor:
"Mr. Cuomo Principled on Death" (editorial, June 15) notes that New York's Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo "can't tolerate the thought of executing an innocent person." This is an excellent reason for Mr.
Cuomo and all of us to oppose the death penalty.


Tescorp Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


American Air Pessimistic
American Airlines, the nation's largest carrier, said today that the recession and the Persian Gulf war had lowered air traffic and created an unsatisfactory second quarter.
If American's problems are mirrored by the industry, it would be the third straight quarter that weak traffic, higher fuel costs and the recession severely hurt airline earnings.


Success Starts With Finishers for Yanks
The season moves forward, still unpredictable and still not ready to dismiss the Yankees.
But for all their late-inning comebacks, all their youth and all their renewed muscle, they remain a team with a curious foundation: relief pitching.
Without it, the Yankees might be sharing last place with the Cleveland Indians in the American League East.
With it, the race is still within their reach, as much because of the bullpen as the brawn.


COMPANY NEWS;
A bankruptcy judge granted the Lionel Corporation $50 million in debtor-in-possession financing, which will provide money for the bankrupt toy retailer to operate while it reorganizes its debts.
Judge Burton R. Lifland agreed to the loan from CIT Group Holdings Inc. at a hearing at Federal Bankruptcy Court in New York.
Lionel, which operates the Kiddie City toy chain, filed for Chapter 11 protection on June 14.


New York Plans Speedier Justice For Physicians
Legislative leaders announced a long-awaited agreement today on a bill to streamline the state's cumbersome physician discipline process by removing the state health commissioner and the State Board of Regents from the review of cases.
The bill, expected to be approved before lawmakers recess on Wednesday, is intended to provide swifter justice by compressing an unwieldy 12-step process that now takes two to three years to navigate.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed similar legislation and is expected to sign the bill.


New Miller Lite Advertising Ends a 17-Year 'Argument'
After 17 years of encouraging the great debate among beer drinkers over whether Miller Lite tastes great or is less filling, the Miller Brewing Company is declaring the debate over in an advertising blitz whose new slogan asserts: "It's it. And that's that."
The intensive campaign is scheduled to begin Tuesday, with commercials during CBS's telecast of baseball's All-Star Game.
The new pitch is Miller's first comprehensive overhaul of the imagery of its largest-selling brew since it hired the Leo Burnett Company in March to replace Backer Spielvogel Bates on the $110 million account.


Regal International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Silicon Valley Shutdowns
Several companies in the Silicon Valley's high-technology computer industry have closed some plants this holiday week in an effort to cut costs.
The International Business Machines Corporation has closed at least one San Jose plant with 2,000 workers and has shut down its Armonk, N.Y., headquarters through Friday.


Another Inquiry For U.N.L.V.
Nevada-Las Vegas, already under investigation by the National Collegiate Athletic Association for possible violations involving the recruitment of Lloyd Daniels, has acknowledged receiving a letter of inquiry from the N.C.A.A. on another matter.


Interspec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CHRONICLE
VANILLA ICE has bought a $1.8 million house down the road from GLORIA ESTEFAN on Star Island, an exclusive enclave off Miami, and is spending $1 million more to renovate it.
The rap singer, whose real name is Robert Van Winkle, may out-Miami Beach Miami Beach.
Blue neon lighting is a prominent design element, said MOHNI KUNDNANI , a designer with First Impressions, the firm doing the job; it also did the Manhattan apartment of DONALD TRUMP .
There will be acres of rare white Italian marble to set off white leather furniture, accented with shocking pink and purple.


Ewing Rejects Knicks' Millions to Seek a 'Choice'
Patrick Ewing has filed for an arbitration hearing against the Knicks that could result in his becoming an immediate free agent and possibly even leaving the team before next season.
The move abruptly ends speculation that the Knicks and their franchise center were close to an amicable resolution of differences over Ewing's contract.


Community Psychiatric Centers reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Outlook Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Weekend on Friday about free activities in New York City mistakenly referred to Congregation B'nai Jeshurun, a synagogue at 257 West 88th Street in Manhattan.
It is closed for ceiling repairs.


Varsho Leads Pirates in Rout; Sandberg Hurts His Right Hand
Gary Varsho hit two homers including the first of his major league career -- and also had a triple, a sacrifice fly and six runs batted in today, leading a 22-hit attack that carried the Pittsburgh Pirates to a 13-4 victory over the Chicago Cubs.
Bobby Bonilla and Mike LaValliere had four hits apiece as the Pirates had their biggest hit total since Aug. 11, 1979, when they had 23 against Philadelphia.
The club record is 27 hits on Aug. 8, 1922, also against Philadelphia.


Whitman Medical Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Anti-Semitic Taunt at Wiesel Talk in Romania
An anti-Semitic incident marred the commemoration today of the pogrom staged here by the Romanian Army and police that took the lives of about 8,000 Jews half a century ago.
A middle-aged, well-dressed woman provoked pandemonium in the packed Municipal Theater by repeatedly shouting "Lies!" and interrupting a speech in which Elie Wiesel, the Nobel Prize-winning author, eulogized the victims and delivered a warning about renascent anti-Semitism.


Chiang Hsiao-wu; Taiwan Diplomat, 46
Chiang Hsiao-wu, a son of the late President Chiang Ching-kuo and former head of Taiwan's diplomatic missions in Singapore and Japan, died on Monday, a hospital reported.
He was 46 years old.
Mr.
Chiang died of heart failure caused by chronic inflammation of the pancreas, officials at Veterans General Hospital here said.


Electronics, Missiles &amp; Communications Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Court Nominee Is Linked to Anti-Abortion Stand
In a 1987 speech, Clarence Thomas, President Bush's nominee to the Supreme Court, strongly praised an essay arguing that a fetus had an inalienable "right to life." The article also said the landmark 1973 Court ruling legalizing abortion was immoral and violated natural law.
The disclosure of Mr.
Thomas's remarks, which seemed to constitute an indirect endorsement of the anti-abortion position of some fellow conservatives, seems certain to intensify the questioning he will face about his views on abortion when he appears before the Senate Judiciary Committee at confirmation hearings this fall.


J. Clark Merritt; Lawyer, 87
J.
Clark Merritt, a lawyer, died on June 16 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old.
Mr.
Merritt, a native of Bethany Center, N.Y., was a lawyer in Manhattan for many years and specialized in workmen's compensation cases.
He retired in the late 1980's.


Standard Microsystems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Arthur J. Schwartz; Broker, 81
Arthur J. Schwartz, a retired securities broker, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami Beach.
He was 81 years old and lived in Miami Beach.
He died of emphysema, his family said.
He had been a resident of New York City before moving to Florida in the 1950's.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Baltimore County, Md., is offering $39.2 million in tax-exempt public improvement and general obligations bonds through Prudential Securities Inc.
Yields range from 4.5 percent in 1992 to 6.45 percent in 2004.
The rating is Aaa by Moody's Investors Service and AA+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Santa Monica Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mondale on Ames Board
Walter F. Mondale, Vice President during the Carter Administration, has been elected to the board of Ames Department Stores Inc., increasing the number of directors to 13.
Mr.
Mondale, 63 years old, is a partner in the Minneapolis law firm of Dorsey &amp; Whitney.
Ames, which made the announcement yesterday, sought bankruptcy court protection last year and has said that it could emerge from the proceedings in the first half of 1992.
Ames is based in Rocky Hill, Conn.


The Yugoslavia Blowup: The Center Comes Apart
One week into Yugoslavia's civil strife, the authority of the central Government is in shreds.
With the collapse of the center, Serbia, the largest and most populous of the Yugoslav republics and until now the country's binding agent, is experiencing a dramatic surge of nationalism.


Mandela Says Talks on Power Are Near
The African National Congress today convened its first full conference inside South Africa in three decades with a rousing call from Nelson Mandela for the organization to gird itself for tough negotiations with the white minority Government.
"Despite our own heroic efforts, we have not defeated the regime," Mr.
Mandela told 2,000 delegates who gathered in the sports hall at the University of Durban's Westville campus.
"We see negotiations as a continuation of the struggle leading to our central objective: the transfer of power to the people."


Melee Follows Protests Against Police Slaying
One night after black teen-agers smashed store windows downtown, the police reinforced patrols tonight to prevent further disturbances in this community, which has been the site of angry demonstrations following the fatal shooting of a 25-year-old black man by a white police officer.
The police did not impose a curfew, and Lieut.
Michael Kurzeja said there was no direct evidence linking the outbreak of vandalism by young blacks to the shooting by the police officer on Sunday.


Wine Talk
THERE is a little place on West 46th Street in Manhattan where, for wine at least, time stands still.
At Crepe Suzette -- does anybody actually eat crepes suzette anymore? -- it's still possible to get a decent bottle of wine for $8.
Crepe Suzette is a serious little bistro with decent bistro food.
"Bistro" is a trendy word in New York these days.
We are all supposed to be a bit shamefaced about our 80's excesses and eager to get back to basics.
Goodbye tuna carpaccio, hello beef bourguignonne.
Goodbye '78 Mouton, hello '90 Beaujolais.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 28
June 21
June 29
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.3
7.3
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
3.0
Gasoline stocks
219.2
218.0
215.3
Distillate stocks
113.6
113.1
111.1
Crude imports, daily
6.7
6.1
6.7
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.9
2.3
Crude stocks
349.1
354.0
384.3
Crude production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
89.6
90.8
90.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Gorbachev Welcomes New Opposition Movement
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev offered words of welcome today to the new opposition political movement founded by some veterans of his Kremlin team, with his spokesman saying that "it inspires cooperation" from supporters of his liberalization program.
The new Democratic Reform Movement "can only be welcomed" provided it lives up to its premise of avoiding divisiveness, said the spokesman, Vitaly N. Ignatenko.
Mr.
Ignatenko added that by stressing cooperation and social accord rather than confrontation, the movement was "a positive fact."


Fines Raised in Connecticut
Drivers in Connecticut who are caught speeding will have to pay an average of 22 percent more in fines because of increases that took effect on Monday.
Legislators approved the higher fines last year as part of the effort to bridge the budget gap.
The new fines mean that someone caught driving 45 miles per hour in a 25 mile-per-hour zone will have to pay a fine of $182 instead of the previous $150 fine.
For those caught without a driver's license or stopped while making an improper turn, the fines have risen to $92 from $78.


Fighting It Out on TV, With Fists, Pies and Slime
Got a quarrel with a neighbor, friend, relative or mate that you want settled on national television?
You don't have to take your case to Judge Wapner and "The People's Court" anymore.
Now you can simply slug it out on "The Grudge Match."
In the latest twist in reality programming, people who might otherwise be in small claims or divorce court are entering a boxing ring and going three rounds against each other, cheered on by a studio audience that picks the winner.
"It may not be PBS, but it's a real hoot," one production assistant said on Monday during taping of the program, which began production late last month.


Citing Race Bias, U.S. Vetoes 2 States' Redistricting
In a signal that it intends to enforce the Voting Rights Act with new vigor, the Justice Department has blocked legislative redistricting plans devised by Mississippi and Louisiana on the ground that they discriminate against blacks.
Assistant Attorney General John R. Dunne today expressed sweeping objections to the redistricting plans for the Mississippi State Senate and House of Representatives.
On Friday, he objected to a plan for the Louisiana Senate.


Time on Your Hands? It May Be Increasing
PEOPLE are always talking about how busy they are, how starved they feel for time.
But do they really have less of it today?
John P. Robinson, a University of Maryland professor of psychology who has been studying the way Americans spend their waking moments for 25 years, asserts that the perception does not match the reality.
His findings show a steady increase in free time.
"I'm the guy with the odd data," said Professor Robinson, who directs the Americans' Use of Time Project at the university's Survey Research Center in College Park.
He agrees with the widely held notion that people feel more harried.
Surveys by poll takers like Louis Harris and Associates, for instance, say they have found that people believe that the work week has been increasing and leisure time has been decreasing.


Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Collins Quits Army
JIMMY COLLINS, leading scorer on Army's 1990-91 basketball team, has resigned from West Point and will not return for his senior season, a spokesman said yesterday.


Neuharth and Lois Are a Team Again
Allen H. Neuharth, the founder of USA Today, and George Lois, the chairman of the advertising agency Mr.
Neuharth hired to promote the newspaper, have been reunited in a campaign for the Freedom Forum.
Mr.
Neuharth and Mr.
Lois have not worked together since Mr.
Neuharth retired as chairman of the Gannett Company, owner of USA Today, in 1989.
Lois GGK, New York, subsequently resigned the USA Today trade advertising account to take Time magazine's trade advertising account.


Some Western Nations Spilt Off on Yugoslavia
Uniform Western support for the territorial unity of Yugoslavia is collapsing, officials of the Bush Administration and Western diplomats said today.
Germany and Austria have told the United States they are considering proposing that Western countries accept the independence declared last week by Slovenia and Croatia, two of the six Yugoslav republics.


Vietnam Veterans to Get Benefits For Ailment Tied to Agent Orange
The Department of Veterans Affairs said Monday that Vietnam veterans exposed to the herbicide Agent Orange could receive disability benefits for a certain nerve disease, but that it did not find a link between the herbicide and lung cancer.
The department also put off a decision on whether diabetes is linked to Agent Orange exposure.
It said it was waiting for a National Academy of Sciences study, which is not expected to be concluded for another year.


Marriott Profit Down 41.3%
The Marriott Corporation said today that its second-quarter earnings tumbled 41.3 percent as the recession crimped demand for hotel rooms.
Marriott said it earned $27 million, or 27 cents a share, in the fiscal quarter ended June 14, compared with $46 million, or 46 cents a share, in the comparable quarter last year.


Independence Day Tomorrow
Fireworks: East River, 9 P.M.
Viewing from East 23d to east 42 Street, F.D.R.
Drive southbound will be closed from 7:30 to 10 P.M. from 14th to 42 Street.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK


Time Inc. Official Explains Magazine Reorganization
THE reorganization of the Time Inc.
Magazine Company's advertising sales force is no threat to each magazine's individuality, the executive in charge of the new effort says.
The reorganization is a hot topic for the advertising, marketing and media communities because for the first time corporate executives at Time Inc.
Magazines have been put in charge of ad sales for the individual publications.
"We are going to keep that uniqueness front and center," Richard Heinemann, vice president of advertising, said in an interview earlier this week at his office in the Time and Life Building in midtown Manhattan.
"That's why we've kept dedicated staffs in place by title."


Anita Hart Balter, 57, An Artist and Writer
Anita Hart Balter, an artist and writer well known for her role in fostering the arts in the Hudson Valley, died on June 29 at her home in Garrison, N.Y.
Mrs.
Balter, who was 57 years old and also lived in Palm Beach, Fla., died of complications from breast cancer, a family spokesman said.


Drop Cited in Drug-Related Hospital Visits
Drug-related visits to hospital emergency rooms declined sharply from 1989 to last year, but the rate of decline slowed considerably as 1990 wore on, the Bush Administration said today.
Bob Martinez, Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, said the figures were an indication that "we're getting close to the bedrock" of addicted drug abusers.


Calloway's Nursery reports earnings for 16wks to May 19


It's Not Enough to Admit Golf Club Bigotry; The Second Putt
To the Editor:
Re: "The American Way of Golf," (Op-Ed, June 17):
Arise, golfers of America!


Foreign Affairs; Why the Political Mess?
He was not surprised when I asked him whether he should be thinking about running for President.
"I would. It would be fun," Bill Moyers said in his intense, soft-spoken way.
But for the next two years, no, he has obligations.
"But why do you think I should be thinking about this?" he continued.


Shell Oil Beginning U.S. Layoffs
Confronted by depressed prices for natural gas and weak profits in refining and marketing, the Shell Oil Company is retrenching.
The nation's sixth-largest oil company and the largest gasoline retailer, Shell, which is based in Houston, has begun cutbacks that it said could reduce its work force by as many as 4,650, or 15 percent, of its 31,000 United States employees, in the next 12 to 18 months.


Graduate's Winning Ticket
While college graduates around the country are going through one of the most fruitless summers of job-hunting in memory, a senior at Arizona State University has shown how to make ends meet the easy way -- by winning the state lottery.
On Saturday, just two days before his last classes ended, Neil Midler was picked as a winner of almost a million dollars in the lottery.
Mr.
Midler will split $1.87 million with another ticket holder who has not yet come forward to claim his prize.Mr.
Midler, a 22-year-old finance major from Scottsdale, said he bought the winning ticket at a Circle K convenience store here.


17 News Executives Criticize U.S. For 'Censorship' of Gulf Coverage
Military restrictions on news gathering during the Persian Gulf war amounted to "real censorship" and confirmed "the worst fears of reporters in a democracy," a report by 17 of the country's news executives says.
The report, addressed to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, was delivered last week along with a statement of 10 principles that the journalists say should govern future war coverage.


Market Place; Handleman Deal Draws Praise
WHEN a movie becomes a successful home video or when Michael Jackson releases a hit recording there is rejoicing not just in Hollywood, but in Troy, Mich., home of the Handleman Corporation.
Handleman stocks videos, CD's, cassettes, computer software and other entertainment items on the shelves of mass merchandisers like K Mart and Wal-Mart.
While most video fans are renters, the market for purchased videos is sizable and growing.


Transat A.T. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


More Surgery for Cosell
HOWARD COSELL, the sports commentator, underwent further chest surgery Monday as part of his treatment for cancer, a statement from his family confirmed yesterday.
Cosell, 73 years old, had a malignant tumor removed from his chest on June 10.
He returned to the air for ABC Radio a week later.


Medical Action Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Lee Remick, 55, Actress in Roles From Enticing to Tormented, Dies
Lee Remick, the elegant actress who illumined dozens of films and many stage and television plays, died yesterday at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 55 years old.
The actress died of cancer after fighting the disease for two years, a spokesman for the family said.
In one of her last public appearances, a star was dedicated in her honor in April on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.


Amid Santa Fe Galas, Lightning for 'Traviata,' Rain for 'Figaro'
SANTA FE, N.M., June 30 -- For one weekend a year, Santa Fe's casual way of life takes a turn for the formal, with champagne receptions, black-tie dinners and waltzing the night away.
It's all in celebration of the opening of the Santa Fe Opera's summerlong season.
The festivities started Thursday evening at the Eldorado Hotel downtown, where a white tent was pitched over a courtyard so 350 guests could dine at tables covered with pink cloths, hear a recital by Mary Jane Johnson, a soprano, and dance to Michael Carney's orchestra, imported from New York for the occasion.


Food Notes
Tomatoes for All Seasons
For the family of Nancy Distefano, a 30-year-old former fabric designer from Flushing, Queens, as for many Italian-American families, summer meant putting up plum tomatoes by to use all year.
Now, capitalizing on a family tradition, she packages and sells tomato sauces commercially.


Japan Will Offer Arms Control Plan
Japan said today that it was drawing up a detailed plan for the meeting of the seven industrial powers in London later this month that would, for the first time, require nations to report all of their arms sales and imports, in an effort to track the spread of conventional weapons.
In recent weeks Japan's Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, has spoken repeatedly, if vaguely, about the need for United Nations action to monitor conventional arms transactions, saying such a system might have stemmed the flow of weapons to Iraq before the Persian Gulf war.


Roadway Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


Gradco Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Phils Extend Pact
LEE THOMAS's contract as general manager of the Phillies was extended for two years by Philadelphia president BILL GILES yesterday.
It now runs through 1994.


Man Indicted In the Killings Of Three Girls
A livery-cab driver, for months the prime suspect in the mysterious killings of five young people from the same area of the South Bronx, has been indicted on charges of murdering three of them, the Bronx District Attorney announced yesterday.
As one victim's mother screamed "desgraciado" -- Spanish for "bastard" -- the suspect, Alejandro Henriquez, 30 years old, pleaded not guilty yesterday afternoon to charges of killing Jessica Guzman, 10; Shamira Bello, 14, and Lisa Rodriguez, 21.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.28
6.38
8.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.59
7.70
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.71
7.59
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.13
8.13
8.40
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.43
8.43
8.38
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.45
9.45
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.19
7.19
7.46
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Wary State Control Board Tightens Monitoring of New York City Budget
Skeptical that New York City officials can carry out painful cuts in spending, the state's Financial Control Board yesterday put in place stricter monitoring procedures to assure that the reductions are actually made.
In an unusual move hours after the City Council adopted an austere $28.5 billion budget, the control board set up a stepped-up schedule of meetings to monitor the city's immediate and long-term fiscal problems.
The board normally meets once a year, but the new schedule calls for monthly meetings over the summer and quarterly meetings throughout the year.


Biggest and Most and Devoured in the U.S.A.
WHILE many other Americans will content themselves tomorrow with parades or fireworks, Mike DeVito will head to Coney Island to compete in Nathan's 75th annual Fourth of July Hot Dog Eating Contest.
The goal: To eat more hot dogs in 12 minutes than anyone else.
The record: 17 1/2 dogs, set in 1959.


NASA Plans Mission by 1994 To Repair Hubble Telescope
The space agency plans to spend $20 million to install corrective lenses on the Hubble Space Telescope by 1994, four years after the $1.5 billion instrument was sent into space and discovered to be nearsighted because a lens had been improperly ground.
Although no formal announcement has been made, a contractor for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is building the corrective lenses, which will be installed by astronauts during a spacewalk.


For Shakespeare, Just Log On
The development of a nationwide data network will allow personal computer users to tap sources as large as the Library of Congress or receive their own personalized electronic newspapers.
Several innovations, taken together, have already demonstrated that searching vast computer data bases can be easier than consulting a card catalogue, and not nearly as difficult or expensive as computer searches are today.
Computer users might read some Dickens more readily than they could check out David Copperfield from the local library.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Bank of New York named Althea L. Duersten senior vice president in its fixed-income division. *
Centocor Inc., Malvern, Pa., which produces health-care products, appointed Dr.
James N. Woody senior vice president and director of its research and development division, effective Aug. 1.
He is retiring as commanding officer of the Navy Medical Research and Development Command.


Medchem Products reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Kalinin and Sverdlov, Two Soviet Presidents
To the Editor:
"On the main highway," your June 17 front-page report from Russia's heartland, between Moscow and Leningrad, states, "signs to neighboring Kalinin have been replaced by signs for Tver, its ancient name before it was renamed for the first Soviet President." Mikhail Ivanovich Kalinin was not the first, but the second, Soviet President, from 1919 to his death in 1946.
The Soviet Union was established on Dec. 30, 1922, as a federation of Russia, the Ukraine, Byelorussia and Transcaucasia; other Soviet republics joined in stages.


A.T.&amp; T. Still Working on Accounting Plan for NCR Deal
One day after A.T.&amp; T. said it might be permitted to use a favorable accounting method for its merger with the NCR Corporation, people who follow the accounting industry expressed surprise yesterday because the pending transaction appeared inconsistent with the traditional interpretation of the rules.
The issue is before the Securities and Exchange Commission, the authority on domestic accounting matters.
Until now, the S.E.C. had been skeptical about the accounting method that the American Telephone and Telegraph Company wanted to use because it was prone to abuse.


Magadan's Hit in 9th Sends Mets Past the Expos
The swing hasn't been sweet at least in part because the left shoulder hasn't been right, and so Dave Magadan will have medical tests done during the All-Star Game break next week.
Perhaps the answers will solve the mystery of his season-long slump.
Until then, the fight is to block out the hurt, clear his mind at the plate and focus on the pitch of the moment.
It's a fight Magadan won tonight and to show for it there was a victory for the Mets.


Choice Drug Systems reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Jogging Track Becomes an Arena for a Class-War Debate
By all accounts, the running track at Bronxville High School is a wonderful place, popular among Westchester County residents from miles around for its scenic surroundings, safety and synthetic surface.
So when this prosperous village decided to issue up to 200 track passes for nonresidents -- charging $200 a year for each -- and to post security guards 16 hours a day to keep out those who don't belong, the reaction was less a sigh of disappointment than a declaration of war.


Labor Dept. Outlines Job Skills Students Will Need in Future
As part of the Bush Administration's effort to promote education as a Republican initiative, Labor Secretary Lynn Martin today made public a report outlining what American students must learn in school to compete in the workplace of the future.
The report, "What Work Requires of Schools: A SCANS Report for America 2000," defines the skills young people must have "to hold a decent job and earn a decent living."


G.M.'s Plan for a Nearly Nonstop Auto Plant
The General Motors Corporation and a local chapter of the United Automobile Workers union have tentatively agreed to begin near-nonstop assembly operations at G.M.'s Lordstown, Ohio, plant starting next summer.
The step would enable G.M. to effectively produce as many cars at one plant as the company can now assemble in two.
The move represents a growing trend among American auto makers to cut costs by wringing more use from existing plants.
The Chrysler Corporation, for example, has an agreement with the U.A.W. to step up mini-van production, if needed, by using three shifts instead of the usual two.


Quotation of the Day
"The point which must be clearly understood is that the struggle is not over, and negotiations themselves are a theater of struggle, subject to advances and reverses as any other form of struggle." -- Nelson Mandela.  [ A3:4. ]


Tranzonic Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Peters (J.M.) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Horizon Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Edberg Overpowers McEnroe
The defeated former champion patted the defending champion on the back, packed up his troubles in his old racquet bag, then strolled away from Wimbledon today unfulfilled and, to his mind, somewhat prematurely for the fifth straight time.
"Certainly it's a long shot, but hope springs eternal," said John McEnroe of his chances of claiming another Wimbledon title before he puts his racquets away for good after next season.
"Stranger things have happened. I'm certainly not expecting it to happen, but if it happened, I wouldn't be in shock."


Maradona Trial Put Off
The trial of DIEGO MARADONA in Naples on cocaine charges has been postponed again, this time until Sept. 18.
The trial had been rescheduled for yesterday, but Maradona's lawyer, VINCENZO SINISCALCHI said the Argentine soccer star was unable to go to Italy because he was in Argentina undergoing medical and psychological therapy.
Maradona, captain of Naples and of the Argentine national team, is under a 15-month suspension since testing positive for cocaine after a match. (AP)


What Can Fate Hold for John Sununu?; Carved in Granite
To the Editor:
It is perhaps not a coincidence that two major instances of abuse of office and colossal poor judgment on the part of a Presidential chief of staff involved former Governors of New Hampshire, John Sununu and Sherman Adams.
They both apparently took the state motto "Live Free or Die" quite literally.
Or maybe Mr.
Sununu believes the motto to be "Fly Free or Die." ROBERT M. JACOBS Englewood, N.J., June 24, 1991


Citicorp Views Loan Troubles
Credit problems for consumer and real estate loans have been mounting in the Western part of the country for at least the last month, the chairman of the nation's largest bank said.
"In the last month or so the West has joined the East," John S. Reed, the chairman of Citicorp, said on Monday.
He said loan problems peaked in February.
And while problems have been mounting in the West, Mr.
Reed said that conditions were worse in the East.


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Protocol Chief at White House to Resign Post
Joseph V. Reed Jr., the 53-year-old White House chief of protocol, has decided to resign his post in October to return to New York, White House officials said today.
Ambassador Reed, who left the job as Under Secretary General for Political Affairs at the United Nations to take the White House job in January 1989, will leave his current post at a time that coincides with the end of the annual general debate in the United Nations General Assembly.


Topics of The Times; Take the Blinders Off Justice
New York's Legislature is headed for adjournment with no apparent prospects for restoring television coverage to the state's court system.
Even a short-term extension of a three-year experiment that expired May 31 has passed only the Assembly and is blocked in the Senate.
That's ludicrous for a state with a rich tradition of public justice and a national name as a communications hub.
The legislative hang-up has been caused by the insistence of Senator Christopher Mega, the Judiciary Committee chairman, on stripping trial judges of their authority to decide when a particular witness may not be photographed during trial testimony.
Judges have not been accused of abusing their broad discretion, but Senator Mega wants each witness who is not a party to the case to have an absolute veto on the use of cameras to record his own testimony.
This would foil any serious attempt at coherent camera coverage.


Books of The Times; A Revolution That Many Still Look To as a Beacon
A Short History of the American Revolution By James L. Stokesbury 304 pages.
William Morrow. $23.
Once a year on Independence Day, it's useful to recall that the United States was created by colonial revolutionaries who wanted to govern themselves and not be ruled by kings or their modern equivalents in various despotic corners of the world.


Icot Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


Steego Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Soft Chip Orders For Intel Reported
The Intel Corporation's distributors are seeing a sharp increase in order cancellations for the company's 386DX microprocessors and are getting product returns, a Merrill Lynch analyst said.
The analyst, Thomas Kurlak, estimated in a report that up to 50 percent of the orders were being canceled.
The distributors, in turn, will probably cancel orders to Intel and return products to keep their inventories balanced, Mr.
Kurlak said.


Is the Party Over in Moscow?
"Normal societies have oppositions as a natural feature of the political landscape." So says Eduard Shevardnadze, the former Soviet Foreign Minister.
The Soviet Union has never been a normal society.
Ever since he resigned last December, Mr.
Shevardnadze has tried to make it one by encouraging reformers to band together, repulse Moscow's reactionaries and renew efforts to transform the country.
Now, in an even more astounding and hopeful development, he and other like-minded leaders have come together to found a new social democratic party, the Movement of Democratic Reforms.
That could give the Soviet people a taste of real pluralism.
And it could give beleaguered President Gorbachev a much-needed alternative to the increasingly reactionary, and discredited, Communist Party.


Image Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices declined today.
At the close of the trading session, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks stood at 23,373.47, down 622.29 points, or 2.59 percent.


Microwave Cooking
BREAD may be the staff of life, but it takes more than bread to keep up with the recommended intake of carbohydrates.
Turning to other grains and taking advantage of the microwave oven's successful way with risotto can bring some variety, particularly in hot months when we want cool cooking and lighter meals.
Vegetarians or those who want even lighter meals can make these risottos with vegetarian broth.
This broth takes advantage of a classic technique for making meat broths.
Before the broth is cooked, the tomato and onion are roasted in a regular oven, which intensifies their flavor and darkens the color of the finished broth.


On This Gulf Front, Drawing Line on War Booty
Inside a dingy brick building in one of Washington's roughest neighborhoods, the war on drugs has grown to a war on war booty.
Customs Inspectors and Army National Guard troops have teamed up to confiscate hundreds of contraband Iraqi bayonets, pistols and plastic explosives that American soldiers in the Persian Gulf have tried to smuggle home through the mail.


Personal Health
IF you live in America, chances are you have been on a diet.
And chances are you never reached your weight goal or, if you did manage to get into those size 10 jeans, you expanded right out of them again.
Millions of Americans are yo-yo dieters; experts believe that as many as 95 percent of people who succeed in losing weight gain most, all or even more of it back again.


Sports of The Times; Andre Boy's Wardrobe (Continued)
THE age of the athlete-as-model is now fully upon us.
Until Monday, athletes were merely clothes horses, wearing whatever their sponsors put on their backs, their trunks, their feet and their heads.
We are now into accessories, disposable accessories, worn by the game, the set or the match, depending on whim or prior arrangements.


Gains by Money Managers Proving to be Hard to Hold
For stock managers who were hot in early 1991, the challenge of the second quarter turned out to be holding on to the gains of the first quarter.
"It's more important to keep what you made," said Fred Astman, the chief investment officer of First Wilshire Securities Management of Los Angeles, which ranked second among investment advisers for the first half, according to estimates released yesterday by CDA Investment Technologies.


Early Retirement Offered by USX
The USX Corporation's steel unit said it would offer voluntary early retirement to about 315 white-collar employees, in the first significant management reduction since 1986.
The action by the nation's largest steelmaker was connected to a restructuring of USX's steel business announced earlier this year.
The Pittsburgh-based USX also plans to shut its steelmaking operations and a hot strip mill at a plant near Philadelphia, eliminating about 2,280 jobs.


Are You Ready for a Diet? A Quiz.
GOALS AND ATTITUDES
For the first two questions, score 1 for not at all, 2 slightly, 3 somewhat, 4 quite, 5 extremely.


Torotel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Win Stracke Is Dead; Folk Singer Was 83
Win Stracke, a folk singer, songwriter and pioneer of Chicago television, died on Saturday.
He was 83 years old and lived in Chicago.
He died of unspecified natural causes, his family said.


Corrections
An item in the Patterns column on June 25 misstated the size of Ralph Lauren's new penthouse executive suite.
It is 4,000 square feet, not 20,000.


Ephraim E. Urbach; Hebrew Scholar, 79
Ephraim E. Urbach, a rabbi and scholar who helped convert ancient Hebrew into a modern language and published works on Jewish history, died today.
He was 79 years old.
The cause of his death was not made public.
He died at Hadassah Hospital in Jerusalem after a long illness.


Ruth F. Corcoran; Councilwoman, 81
Ruth F. Corcoran, who became the first woman to be elected to a Suffolk County town board when she won a seat as a councilwoman in Huntington, L.I., in 1961, died on Friday at the Hilaire Farms Nursing Home in Huntington.
She was 81 years old.
She died of congestive heart failure, a daughter said.


Microtel Franchise reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


String of Phone Failures Reveals Computer Systems' Vulnerability
Telephone company officials and Federal investigators are perplexed by a weeklong string of nearly identical computer breakdowns that have affected about 10 million customers around the country.
So far, the computer breakdowns have disrupted local service in the area surrounding Washington, as well as in Los Angeles, San Francisco and Pittsburgh.
The problems in Pittsburgh began Monday and continued today, when callers received busy signals or were unable make local calls for about two hours.


Jeremiah Moynihan; Executive, 52
Jeremiah Moynihan, a real-estate executive in New York and Dallas, died on Monday at his home in Stillwater, N.J.
He was 52 years old.
He died of malignant melanoma, according to the Smith-McCracken Funeral Home of Newton, N.J.


West Now Split on Yugoslavia
Germany and Austria broke ranks with other Western countries, suggesting recognition of Slovenian and Croatian independence.
Page A6.


New York City Budget Hardly Final
When it comes to New York City's bad-news budget, Yogi Berra was wrong: even when it's over, it's not over.
At least, that's what Mayor David N. Dinkins and millions of New Yorkers, who would suffer from service cuts and higher taxes, have to hope.
What remains to be seen is whether the blueprint will get better or worse.


Factory Orders Up Sharp 2.9%
In a compelling report of economic rebound, new orders to American factories surged 2.9 percent in May, the biggest increase in more than a year, the Commerce Department reported today.
It was also the second straight substantial rise after five months in which factory orders declined.
The April gain, moreover, was revised upward to 2.1 percent from the 1.8 percent initially reported.


Dr. Daniel Horn Dies; A History Professor, 56
Dr.
Daniel Horn, professor of European history at Rutgers University, died on Monday at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 56 years old and lived in Highland Park, N.J.
He died as a result of continuing heart problems, a spokesman for the family said.


Review/Film; Boy and Girl, Both Romantics. Add an Older Woman.
Neil Jordan, the Irish-born director, makes movies not quite like anyone else.
This has already been demonstrated in "The Company of Wolves" (1985), his extravagantly decorated, sometimes funny Freudian meditation on the tale of Little Red Riding Hood, and "Mona Lisa" (1986), a shaggy-dog love story about a bigoted white hood and a beautiful black hooker.
Mr.
Jordan's newest film, "The Miracle," which opens today at the 68th Street Playhouse, is many things, including an irreverent variation on the kind of mother-love drama exemplified by "Stella Dallas."


What Can Fate Hold for John Sununu?
To the Editor:  In the wake of John Sununu's latest vehicular-political blunder, it occurs to me how strange it is the way everyone's head goes up, sniffing in the direction of the White House and crying foul, as if this was the most offensive thing anyone in the Republican Party had done in recent memory.
William Safire's June 20 column on Mr.
Sununu's transportation image problems was appropriately headlined, "In Deep Sununu." But when Mr.
Safire begins to praise Jimmy Carter, and ridicule a fellow Republican, one should be wary.


Command Security Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Local Running of Kentucky Schools Leads to Rewards, and Some Stress
For many educators in the Hardin County School District, the past year was an exercise in stamina and stress.
Under the first year of the most extensive statewide school restructuring plan in the nation, the system was pushed to initiate improvements in a variety of areas, including stronger curriculums, better teacher training and tougher academic standards.
The wear and tear sometimes showed on the teachers and officials.


Tridex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30


Harsco Order Increased by $247 Million
The Harsco Corporation said yesterday that it had received a $247 million expanded order for five-ton trucks destined for Saudi Arabia.
The order, for 2,486 trucks, came about when the Saudi Government exercised an option for more vehicles under an original order placed in February for 2,633 trucks.
It was the second option exercised by the Saudis under the original contract; in May, they called for 781 more trucks.


N.F.L.'s Steroid Policy Too Lax, Doctor Warns
Dr.
Forest Tennant, the former drug adviser to the National Football League, said yesterday that the league ignored the abuse of steroids by players for years and that its current policy, based on random testing, has not eliminated the problem.
Tennant, who resigned as the league's drug adviser in 1990, made his charges in the wake of recent statements by Lyle Alzado, a former Raider defensive lineman, that his inoperable brain cancer is the result of steroid abuse.
Alzado has said he used steroids throughout his N.F.L. career, and his personal physician said yesterday that Alzado used human growth hormone during his failed comeback last year.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 3


Sequent Computer Expects Loss in the Second Quarter
Sequent Computer Systems Inc. said today that it would report a loss for the second quarter, citing the combined effect of the recession and a significant decline in orders from original equipment manufacturers -- companies that resell other manufacturers' machines under their own names.
Sequent's largest original equipment customer, the Unisys Corporation, has had severe financial problems because of the recession, which has limited its ability to resell Sequent computers.


Consumers' Survey Shows Sharp Jump in Confidence
Consumers' faith in the present and future health of the economy jumped sharply in June, the University of Michigan's widely followed survey on consumer sentiment showed.
Richard Curtin, who oversees the survey, said yesterday that the latest soundings showed that the "slow but steady improvement" in consumer confidence that began early this year continued strongly in June.
"That is based on the expectation that the economy will improve, although the recovery is expected to be slow," he said.


Siemens Vice Chairman
Siemens A.G. today named Heinrich von Pierer vice chairman.
Mr. von Pierer, 50 years old, is likely to succeed the chairman of the consumer electronics giant, Karlheinz Kaske, when Mr.
Kaske retires.
The vice chairman's post has been vacant since 1981, when Mr.
Kaske, 63, was promoted.
A Siemens spokesman said the board had not specifically designated Mr. von Pierer as the next chairman.
"But if you look at Siemens history, the vice chairman becomes the chairman," he said.


New Firefighting Weapon: Send a Bill
A California rancher, Richard Donovan, was burning brush one afternoon when the Santa Ana winds picked up and blew his fire out of control.
Firefighters labored for two days in the dry hills, hauling water and scratching out fire lines.
Then they handed Mr.
Donovan a bill for $73,000, the government's cost of dousing the blaze.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing in Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to the titles of Victor H. Frauenhofer, an executive at the Connecticut Natural Gas Corporation, Hartford.
He has been named chairman, while remaining president and chief executive.


Bush's Court Choice; Panel Plans to Press Court Nominee
Members of the Senate Judiciary Committee predicted today that Clarence Thomas, President Bush's choice for the Supreme Court, would face more combative confirmation hearings than the last nominee, David H. Souter.
Most lawmakers questioned in interviews said they would bet that Judge Thomas, who is now a Federal appellate judge in Washington, would be confirmed, but not without intense questioning about his opposition to affirmative action and not without being pressed for his views on abortion.


Warily, Croats Move Toward Slovene Side
Pressure is growing on the Yugoslav republic of Croatia to intervene on the side of Slovenia, its neighbor and ally, a move that would push this disintegrating nation further toward full civil war.
Officials here in the capital of Croatia say they understand the chaos that would likely follow if they simultaneously challenged the republic's restive Serbian minority and the 55,000 Yugoslav Army troops stationed within Croatian borders.
But they insist that they will not stand aside if the army gains the upper hand against the Slovenes and said the violence in Slovenia has strengthened their resolve to secede.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, yesterday priced a three-part debenture issue, totaling $1.6 billion, through various securities dealers.
Fannie Mae said it priced $300 million in three-year noncallable debentures with a 7.45 percent coupon, at a price of 99.9375, to yield 7.473 percent, or about 11.5 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


BOARD IS SEEKING A 30-CENT STAMP
The Postal Service board of governors today unanimously rejected the rates that took effect in February, sending the matter back to the independent Postal Rate Commission for the second time.
The board, for example, wants a 30-cent rate for first-class mail instead of the current 29 cents.
But current postage rates will remain in effect until a final decision is made.


Phillips to Sell Unit
The Phillips Petroleum Company said it would try to sell its Avtel Advanced Composites business or shut it down by the end of the year.
Avtel is a trademark of the company's line of plastics reinforced with glass or carbon fibers.
Phillips said the time required to make the products commercially successful would be too long "compared with other attractive investments and opportunities." Avtel has 83 employees.


F.A.A. Pilots Gave Lessons to Skinner, A News Report Says
The Secretary of Transportation, Samuel K. Skinner, has taken flying lessons on Government jets with instruction from Government pilots at taxpayer expense over the last two years, CBS News said Tuesday.
The report, on "The CBS Evening News," was the latest of a number of allegations of abuse of privilege by Bush Administration officials.


Republicans Criticize Florio Over Borrowing Plan
With a judgment from Wall Street expected on Wednesday on the soundness of New Jersey's new budget, Republican legislators today assailed the Florio administration for a plan to float short-term notes to cover the state's operating expenses.
The plan will float $1.7 billion in tax anticipation notes beginning Wednesday.
It is the first time the state has gone to the bond market to cover a cash flow problem.
Tax anticipation notes are temporary borrowings used by state and local governments and special jurisdictions to even out irregular flows of income into their treasuries.


Echlin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Robert G. Wesson, 71, Expert on Soviet Union
Robert Gale Wesson, a senior research fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University who was a specialist on the Soviet Union and on Latin America, died Monday at his home on the Stanford campus in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 71 years old.
He died of cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Ultimate Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Back Manipulation Gains Respectability
FRUSTRATED by a lack of good treatments for back pain, doctors are turning to a therapy they have long dismissed as chiropractic quackery: spinal manipulation.
The American Association of Orthopedic Surgeons this year for the first time included a symposium on back manipulation at its meeting and, in a show of hands, almost a third of the 1,000-member audience bashfully admitted that they had referred patients for the technique.


With Jobs Scarce, Many Turn to Graduate School
From the beginning of the academic year, Dana M. Lew, a senior majoring in economics at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., knew that finding a job after graduation would be a nightmare.
So she, like a record number of this year's seniors, kept her options open by applying to graduate school.
As the term progressed, iss Lew, who grew up in Metairie, La., regularly checked the job listings at Northwestern's placement office but did not come across anything hopeful.
She spoke to several corporate recruiters who said they would be hiring half as many people as they had first expected.


Perceptronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


David Halper; Bridge Expert, 78
David Halper, a lawyer and leading bridge player, died on Saturday in New York Hospital.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He had suffered a stroke, said his daughter Vicki, of Seattle.


Park Electrochemical reports earnings for Qtr to June 2


A Dish Made for Baby Pleases Big Bambinos
IT'S good that the trendsetters who are scarfing up pappa al pomodoro nightly in some of the better Italian restaurants around the United States don't know its origins.
They might revert to antipasto.
This glorious mixture of very ripe tomatoes, chunks of stale Tuscan bread and the most fragrant of olive oils is somewhere between a soup and a stew and is described in many cookbooks as appropriate for children and sick people.


In Praise of Those Who Got Others a Share
The Major League Baseball Players Association celebrated an anniversary this week.
Twenty-five years ago, the labor organization, as we know it, came into being with the appointment of Marvin Miller as its head.
Miller gave the association its heart, its soul, its spirit.
He carried the players light years from where he found them, from the time when they had little more than gloves, bats, uniforms and indentured servitude.
Baseball players now have free agency and salary escalators that are inclusive, not exclusive, when it comes to management's sharing of the wealth.


6 Stowaways Die on Ship
Six of eight stowaways from the Dominican Republic who were sealed inside a wooden container on a freighter were found dead today when the ship arrived in Florida, the authorities said.
The Dominicans, who had paid to be smuggled aboard the ship, apparently suffocated.
Two of the stowaways survived by cutting their way out of the 40-by-8-by-8-foot crate.


The Pop Life
Desmond Child Solo
"I call my album 'Discipline,' because discipline is something I've searched for all my life," Desmond Child said recently.
"I grew up without a dad. No one ever told me right or wrong or good or bad or when to get up and when to go to school. I had to will myself to do everything. It's nightmarish to think that I could have ended up like cousins of mine who are on welfare and watch TV all day."


L.A. Gear Gets Credit Accord
L.A.
Gear Inc. said today that it had won commitments from its banks to restructure its current credit agreement.
It said the terms of the agreement, which involves a reduction in the credit to $200 million from $300 million, were also agreed upon by Trefoil Capital Investors L.P..


Southern Hospitality reports earnings for Year to May 31


Osaka Journal; Huge Airport Has Its Wings Clipped
The ground-breaking for the new Kansai International Airport's terminal went off splendidly, as the assembled dignitaries and the building's heralded Italian architect, Renzo Piano, gathered on the huge man-made island in Osaka Bay and performed an ancient Shinto ritual of cutting grass to make way for the structure.
It seemed an auspicious day for one of the most ambitious engineering projects ever undertaken.
But there was one small hitch: the architect and the client had still not agreed on what they were building.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about budget negotiations between New York City officials and labor leaders misstated the location of the meeting.
It was the office of District Council 37 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees.


Fibreboard Names Chief
The Fibreboard Corporation said today that it had elected John D.C.
Roach chairman, president and chief executive, effectively immediately.
Based in Concord, Calif., Fibreboard manufactures lumber, plywood and other building materials, and also owns a ski resort.
The company has been the defendant in a long-running series of asbestos suits.
Mr.
Roach, 47 years old, succeeds Lawrence C. Hart, who had announced his intent to resign on April 11, and subsequently tendered his resignation on June 18.
Mr.
Roach joins Fibreboard from the Manville Corporation in Denver, where he was executive vice president as well as president of the mining and minerals group, the Manville Sales Corporation and the fiberglass and specialty products group.
He had been chief financial officer.


Readicare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Yields Are Slightly Lower On Bank Funds and C.D.'s
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were down slightly for the week ended yesterday.
According to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest-rate publication, more savings institutions raised rates last week than in the previous few weeks.


Belle: His Short Fuse Has a Long History
Long before Albert Belle reached the Cleveland Indians, long before his conduct threatened the spot he has earned in the major leagues, his baseball coach at Louisiana State University had a rule for him.
Skip Bertman, the coach, made the rule a simple one as Belle's spectacular college career reached its junior year in 1987.
If Belle threw a helmet, if he abused an umpire, if he cursed on his way to first base, Jack Voigt, a reserve outfielder, would run to replace him in right field at the earliest opportunity.


Check Express Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Metropolitan Diary
JULY FOURTH NIGHTS  Back when summer used to start
as suddenly as a firecrackered sky
we would explode tin cans with
cherry bombs and chase freckle-faced girls
with hissing sparklers and
all the while, dream the dreams of
children who pretend to own their futures.
Of driving fast cars down slow streets
or laughing in love beneath the stars and
stripes of endless July Fourth nights.
And looking somewhere beyond the
bright booms and loud lights we clutched
at red, white and blue fantasies of
growing up, but never growing old. ROGER GRANET


Eating Well
NOW that we have all learned how to pronounce salmonella (though we haven't learned what to do about it), it is time to add another kind of bacteria to our lexicon: campylobacter (that's CAM-pill-o-back-ter).
As with salmonella, if you swallow enough of it, you can get very, very sick.
Dr.
Mitchell Cohen, director of the division of bacterial and mycotic diseases at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, estimates that 30 to 70 percent of the poultry in this country is infected with campylobacter.


Review/Film; In New 'Terminator,' The Forces of Good Seek Peace, Violently
Using his imagination and not much more, James Cameron devised "The Terminator," the lean, mean 1984 action film that became a classic of apocalypse-minded science fiction.
What this meant, in keeping with inexorable Hollywood logic, was that Mr.
Cameron would become a prime candidate for sequel sickness.
He would be able to follow up his original shoestring hit with a second installment whose budget is reportedly somewhere near the $100 million mark.
That figure suggests at the very least a typographical error, not to mention mistakes of a more serious kind.
Surprise.
Mr.
Cameron has made a swift, exciting special-effects epic that thoroughly justifies its vast expense and greatly improves upon the first film's potent but rudimentary visual style.
He has also broadened his initial idea to encompass better developed characters (after all, the first Terminator was barely verbal), a livelier wit and a more ambitious, if nuttier, message.


International Dairy Queen reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Payment Is Missed By America West
America West Airlines Inc. failed to make a $1.5 million monthly payment for its gates at McCarran International Airport here.
The troubled airline also has frozen the wages of all employess and said it would cut salaries next month.
America West's chairman, Edward R. Beauvais, asked for a 30-day extension to make the payment, but McCarran's aviation director, Bob Broadbent, said he did not have the authority to grant the extension.
"They're technically in default," Mr.
Broadbent said.
Officials will discuss the matter at a meeting on July 16, he said.


Dollar Soars Against Mark; Level Highest in 20 Months
The dollar closed yesterday at its highest level against the German mark in 20 months, pushed up by turmoil in Yugoslavia and data indicating strength in the United States economy.
The dollar closed at 1.8345 marks, up from Monday's 1.8305 marks, but still shy of the 1.8415-mark close reached Nov. 17, 1989.


For a Dean at Boston U., a Question of Plagiarism
At his commencement speech in May, the dean of Boston University's College of Communication delivered a sharply worded attack on the decline of morality in American culture to an audience of more than 1,000 fledgling journalists and their families.
But in his speech the dean repeated, virtually word for word, portions of an article by a PBS film critic.
A videotape of the speech, on sale by Boston University, shows that the dean, J. Joachim Maitre, copied the underlying theme and about 15 paragraphs from an article by Michael Medved, of the Public Broadcasting System's program "Sneak Previews." The article was first published in the February issue of Imprimis, a scholarly journal put out by Hillsdale College in Michigan.
The college has since reprinted half a million copies, and parts have been excerpted in The Wall Street Journal and Reader's Digest.


INSIDE
P.L.O.
Routed in Lebanon Lebanon said its army had routed Palestinian guerrillas at major strongholds in the south in its effort to reassert authority.
Page A3.
Gorbachev Welcomes Party


Response Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Burrell Heads Stockholm Field
Leroy Burrell, now regarded as the world's fastest man, has improved his times in winning each of his last four 100-meter races, including the world mark of 9.90 almost three weeks ago in New York.
On Wednesday, he will compete in Stockholm's Olympic Stadium, where 78 world records have been set since the 1912 Olympics.


U.N. Team Ends Iraqi Visit After Failure on Arms
A high-level United Nations Security Council mission wrapped up three days of talks in Iraq today without arranging an inspection of equipment experts say could be used to make a nuclear bomb, members of the team said.
At United Nations headquarters in New York, the Security Council was expected to meet in emergency session in the next few days after the apparent failure of the mission.


The City Council Comes of Age
New York City's new budget may be a model of Band-Aid accounting, but the negotiating process revealed an important and welcome political development: the city finally has a legislature.
For all its flaws, the City Council has learned how to give the Mayor a run for the city's money.
Empowered by the new City Charter, the Council took its job seriously and made proposals that pushed the budget process forward.
That is a far cry from the old days -- just two years ago -- when the Council was as short on professionalism as it was on independence.


Twins Put Erickson On Disabled List
SCOTT ERICKSON, who had been one of the chief contenders to be the American League's starting pitcher the All-Star Game next week, was placed on the 15-day disabled list yesterday by the Minnesota Twins with a strained right elbow and will miss the game.


South Korean Leader Begins Visit to U.S. by Meeting Bush
President Bush met with President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea today for talks on Seoul's role as an emerging Pacific economic power and the growing prospect of political and military changes in North Korea.
North Korea is said to be within a few years of producing nuclear weapons even as its estrangement from South Korea and the West shows signs of collapsing under the wave of changes sweeping the Communist world.


Head Leaving Card Marketer
Harold A. Grant will retire on Oct. 1 as president of Impel Marketing, a Durham, N. C., purveyer of football, basketball and other entertainment cards.
Impel is a subsidiary of the Brooke Group Ltd., formerly the Liggett Group Inc., the smallest of the nation's six cigarette manufacturers.
Impel was founded in 1989 as part of a bid to shift from the core discount-cigarette business.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly AD HOC COMMITTEE ON INDIAN OCEAN -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


About New York
Minnie and Mamie.
They have a lot in common, these two women of similar age and background.
They both spent their early youths in the South, now live in Brooklyn, are devoutly religious, have grown children and have been separated long enough from their husbands to prefer being addressed as Miss, thank you very much.
"We get along just like family," Minnie said of Mamie.


Topics of The Times; Another Opening, Another Show
Last week Karen Bennett of Wantagh, L.I., had a few friends over for potato chips and a video of her gallbladder operation.
This sounds like a really bad idea, until one considers the alternatives.
The evening
might
have been devoted to such staples on the home entertainment circuit as vacation slides or a tape of somebody's wedding.
A documentary on the hostess's surgery is, by comparison, refreshing.
True, the comments on the sound track ("We can see over here what looks like an artery") and from the audience ("Her body is smoking!" and "See how they nicked the liver a little bit") were best heard on an empty stomach.
And no slice-and-dice horror movie, however notorious, has had a line as profoundly riveting as "We're going to open the gallbladder for you and show you the inside."


Markets Closed
Because of the Fourth of July holiday, financial markets in the United States are closed today.


Hughes Awarded Contract For Saudi Military System
The Hughes Aircraft Company won an $837 million contract today to help build an air-defense system for Saudi Arabia, replacing the Boeing Company on the program.
In winning the contract, Hughes beat out competing proposals from the Westinghouse Electric Corporation and the Unisys Corporation.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Apple Computer and I.B.M. have signed a letter of intent to work together to create advanced software and powerful computers in a deal that, despite being rumored for weeks, still had the industry abuzz when it was officially announced.  [ Page A1. ]


INSIDE
Talks Collapse in Ulster Talks among political parties in Northern Ireland collapsed without progress toward phasing out direct rule from London.
Page A7.
Battle Lines on Nomination


YUGOSLAV TANKS MASS NEAR REBELS
The Yugoslav Army sent hundreds of tanks and other armored vehicles today toward the republics of Slovenia and Croatia, which proclaimed their independence last week.
After rolling westward from bases south of Belgrade, many of the vehicles had halted by midday near Serbia's border with Croatia.
But it was unclear whether new diplomatic efforts to avoid an all-out civil war had borne fruit or the military was simply regrouping for an attack against one of the two breakaway republics.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Scott Bailes, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to June 30.
Recalled Cliff Young, pitcher, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.


Football; Alzado Tumor Is Rare and Deadly
Central nervous system lymphoma, the cancer that has stricken Lyle Alzado, is a rare and deadly brain tumor that generally afflicts only people with depressed immune systems, leading the former Los Angeles Raider player and his doctor to point to steroids as the likely cause.
Two groups of people who commonly fall victim to the disease are people with AIDS, whose immune systems are destroyed by the HIV virus, and organ transplant recipients, whose immune response is blunted by drugs they must take to prevent organ rejection.
These drugs include steroids, but of a different type than those taken by Alzado.


Calendar: A Bridge Built by Students
Definitely Day Lilies
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
Day Lily Weekend, with talks, demonstrations and guided tours, will be held from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday.
A class on the history of day lilies, from their Chinese origins through contemporary hybrids, will be offered from 10 A.M. to 2:30 P.M.
Tuesday.
Fee, $35 ($32, members).


Briefs
*
ABB Canada, Montreal, a unit of ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd., said it had signed a $30 million contract to build nine autotransformers for Hydro-Quebec, the Canadian electrical utility. *
British Airways P.L.C., Middlesex, England, said its double-mileage plan for members of the United Airlines Mileage Plus program had been extended through Aug. 31 on British Airways' London service.


CHRONICLE
A Fourth of July concert from the lawn of the Capitol in Washington also celebrates the 40th anniversary of TONY BENNETT and his amazing recording career.
His first album was "Boulevard of Broken Dreams;" yesterday, a special edition of 87 songs was released by Columbia Records, under that title.
Today he will sing "I Left My Heart in San Francisco" in the Capitol concert.
"I love this event," Mr.
Bennett said yesterday.
"People are spread out on the lawn, having a good time. It's a very beautiful and patriotic occasion."


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-7
The Soviet Communist Party is on the brink of destruction, President Gorbachev has warned.
He accused hard-liners of destroying the party from within, according to remarks in the party newspaper.
Page A1
The Yugoslav Army sent tanks and other armored vehicles toward Slovenia and Croatia.
By midday the columns had halted, but it was unclear whether this was the fruit of diplomatic efforts or whether the military was simply regrouping.
A1


GORBACHEV SAYS HARD-LINERS RISK COMMUNIST DEMISE
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has warned that the Communist Party is on the brink of demise and accused hard-liners of destroying the party from within, according to remarks published today in the party newspaper Pravda.
The paper said Mr.
Gorbachev delivered his sharp criticism on Tuesday, the same day he gave tacit approval through his spokesman to plans by some of his former and present advisers to start a formal "progressive movement" that is being viewed here as the basis for an opposition party.


A Midsummer Day's Dream?
IT'S hard to tell what kind of a shop Mrs.
Pucks Household Department Store in Manhattan is.
Along a wall are negligees and bustiers, along another an antique cabinet of highball glasses with portraits of dogs and cats, golfers and sailfish ($10 to $22.50); in the middle, a conference table once used in the Puck Building, a city landmark, built in 1885, that housed a satirical magazine.


Court Gives Order To Navratilova
A judge has ordered Martina Navratilova to give a deposition on July 16 in a lawsuit filed against her by her former companion.
In the lawsuit filed June 4, Judy Nelson charged that Navratilova had ended their seven-year relationship but didn't keep an agreement signed by the pair in 1986.
Nelson contended that the agreement called for her to receive half of the tennis player's winnings and profits from business ventures since July 1984, when the couple began living together.


Quotation of the Day
"I'm not hanging it up. I still feel that I have some really good tennis in me. I just don't know how much of the heart is left." -- Martina Navratilova.  [ B10:5. ]


Pillsbury Sues Sunshine Biscuits
The Pillsbury Company today sued a rival baker, Sunshine Biscuits Inc., contending that the Hydrox cookie maker's Drox character infringed Pillsbury's longtime trademark, the Doughboy.
The suit, filed in Federal Court, seeks to stop Sunshine from using the Drox character, and to collect damages and recover legal costs.


Dow Drops 38.02 Points, To 2,934.70
Stocks tumbled yesterday in light pre-holiday trading as investors grew jittery over the possibility that a widening stock scandal in Tokyo could touch off heavy selling that might spread to Wall Street.
Although many people were focused on the Fourth of July holiday, traders said that program selling was much heavier than normal within minutes of the opening bell.


She Could Have Organized D-Day All By Herself
NANCY TAUB knew exactly what she wanted.
An instant country house, right down to dust ruffles on the beds and wicker on the porch.
A second home, comfortable, fully equipped and ready to receive guests.
There would be no browsing through antiques shops, no long weeks contemplating the possibilities of pink in the master bedroom.


60 Hurt at Melee During Concert
Sixty people were injured, 16 were arrested and a new theater was badly damaged Tuesday night when a melee broke out at a concert by the heavy metal group Guns 'n' Roses.
The incident at the Riverport Amphitheater in suburban St.
Louis began, witnesses said, when Axl Rose, lead singer for the group, yelled at security guards to take a camera from a fan and then leaped into the crowd.


Topics of The Times; Two Black Eyes for the Courts
Former District Attorney Elizabeth Holtzman was imprudent in 1987 when she leveled serious misconduct charges against a Brooklyn judge without nailing down all the facts.
But New York's court system has found its own way to bring the court system into disrepute -- by issuing an official reprimand that has now been sustained by the state's highest court.


Topics of The Times; The Barges' Night Out
Cleopatra's barge, Shakespeare wrote, was so splendid that it shone as though burning on the water.
The barges from which tonight's New York fireworks will be set off will inspire little poetry, but without them, as Mark Antony might have said, no fireworks.


Dr. John Summa, 59, Director of Cardiology
Dr.
John F. Summa, a physician who was director of cardiology at Waterbury Hospital in Connecticut, died on Tuesday at the Hospice Center in Branford, Conn.
He was 59 years old and lived in Southbury, Conn.
He died of cancer, a spokeswoman for the hospital said.


3 Steelmakers Plan to Raise Some Prices
The LTV Corporation, the nation's third-largest steel producer, has told customers that it intends to raise prices on some products by about 5 percent, beginning Sept. 29.
The USX Corporation, the nation's largest steel producer, and the Wheeling-Pittsburgh Corporation, the eighth largest, said they would match the proposed increase.


Michael Kalil, 47, an Innovator As an Abstract Interior Designer
Michael Kalil, an interior designer who worked for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, died on Tuesday at his mother's home in Bridgehampton, L.I.
He was 47 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Kalil died of pulmonary complications associated with cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Russ Togs Brings In Executive From Saks
Despite the bleak short-term outlook for the apparel industry, James R. Clifford says he sees reasons for optimism about the future of Russ Togs Inc.
Mr.
Clifford recently left Saks Fifth Avenue to become chief financial officer and chief administrative officer of the New York-based apparel company.
Mr.
Clifford replaced Mortimer F. Zimmerman, who retired on Monday after 21 years with the company.


CONFLICT IN YUGOSLAVIA: In the Two Breakaway Yugoslav Republics, Fear of War but a Brave Face; In Croatia, the Cafes Are Full But Talk Is of Hostile Serbs
For the last few nights, Ivica Rendulic's 6-year-old daughter has been frightened by the images of war and destruction beamed into the family living room.
"She keeps saying: 'What's happening. What will be?' " Mr.
Rendulic said.
"I tell her it will be good tomorrow."


Shearson Must Pay Investor
Shearson Lehman Brothers and three stockbrokers were ordered to pay nearly $600,000 to an unemployed plumber's assistant whose account was depleted in risky trading.
A New York Stock Exchange arbitration panel ruled that, among other wrongdoing, a Shearson broker altered a document to make it appear that the customer was an experienced investor when he was not.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
"A PLACE for everything and everything in its place" is a motto that owners of even small collections of home-repair tools can do well to heed.
Few things add as much frustration and time to home repairs as misplaced tools.
And tools that are stored haphazardly can injure someone sorting through them, cause damage to the tools themselves and lead to the use of tools that are at hand rather than those that are appropriate.
Whether you own many tools or a few, keep them in one place if possible, or maintain a small kit of necessary items in a readily accessible location, like under the kitchen sink.


Israeli Tourist Is Released by Kidnappers in India


When the Landscape Needs Improving
FOR many gardeners, outdoor furniture and ornaments are as important as the landscape.
"These objects don't just appeal to serious gardeners," said Thomas K. Woodard, co-owner of Thos.
K.
Woodard American Antiques and Quilts.
"Collectors who have run out of space inside are beginning to look outdoors, too."


General Dynamics Chooses Virginia
The General Dynamics Corporation said it had chosen northern Virginia for its new headquarters.
The company said it expected to complete the move from its headquarters in St.
Louis by early November.
It did not say which northern Virginia communities outside Washington were being considered.


Correction
Because of an editing error, the meaning of the opening lines of an article yesterday by Graham Allison and Grigory Yavlinsky was changed.
It should have read: "Is it realistic to envision that over the next decade or two the Soviet Union could become a market economy? Many factors weigh in the balance against Soviet success."


For the Elegant Dog, His Master's Sheets
LET sleeping dogs lie . . . in chintz or tartan, mattress ticking or khaki herringbone.
These all-cotton, machine-washable fitted sheets have faux-down pillows. (They're really polyester, but they feel like down.) Also available are white, black, mahogany stain or dark green wicker beds.


Celebrating Columbus and Spain's Role; Bahamas Landfall
To the Editor:
"The Invasion of the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria" (The Week in Review, June 2) states that Christopher Columbus made his 1492 landing "in the Caribbean." Not so.
Columbus landed in the Bahamas, the actual island being the subject of a spirited landfall controversy.
There are persuasive advocates for several Bahamian sites -- Grand Turk, Egg and Samana Cay, among others -- though most authorities favor San Salvador, formerly Watling.


New Arrests Reported in Algeria
The Algerian Army has reportedly conducted a new wave of arrests of fundamentalists, including a number of foreigners, as it continues its campaign to dismantle the opposition Islamic Salvation Front.
The army, which has placed the country under a state of siege for the last four weeks, said it arrested another 172 people, including foreign nationals from Tunisia, Iran, Lebanon and Libya, who are accused of joining the fundamentalists in what the Algerian authorities describe as an attempt to overthrow the Government.


Review/Opera; Three Diverse Views of Mozart At the Glyndebourne Festival
The English summer has been so damp this year that when the sun emerges long enough for a game to be played at Wimbledon, the press reports it sarcastically as a historic event.
This is of some relevance to opera lovers here, because the Glyndebourne Festival has been under way since late May, and part of its tradition is leisurely intermission picnicking on the estate's magnificent grounds.
One hears it predicted with surprising cheer that the weather is bound to improve before the festival ends on Aug. 23.
This year Glyndebourne is devoting itself entirely to Mozart in honor of the bicentennial of the composer's death.
Bicentennial or not, Mozart has been the composer closest to Glyndebourne's heart ever since John Christie established the festival at his home here in the Sussex countryside in 1934.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 4
Neither Ted Williams nor Joe Dimaggio played today because of rain


Dr. Alan H. Barrett, 64, Physicist And Pioneer in Radio Astronomy
Dr.
Alan H. Barrett, an authority in radio astronomy and a professor emeritus of physics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died yesterday in Denver, where he was staying with his son and daughter.
He was 64 years old and lived in Center Harbor, N.H., and Key Colony Beach, Fla.
He died of intestinal cancer, his family said.


Gardens on Display at a SoHo Gallery
MAX PROTETCH, owner of the SoHo gallery that bears his name, describes his latest show as "not
the
story of 20th-century garden designs but certainly
a
story."
The exhibition, titled "Green," includes models and drawings of landscapes by familiar and not-so-familiar designers.
All but one of the pieces contains at least a trace of the color green.
The works will be on view at the Max Protetch Gallery at 560 Broadway (Prince Street) until Sept. 28.


2 Exchanges Plan to Open At 9 A.M.
Two of the nation's largest stock exchanges announced yesterday that they would soon open for trading 30 minutes earlier, at 9 A.M.
Eastern time, beginning on Sept. 9.
The announcements by the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange signal another step in the march toward 24-hour trading.


Judge Thomas Faces Bruising Battle With Liberals Over Stand on Rights
As a coalition of liberal groups displayed new life today in opposing Judge Clarence Thomas's confirmation to the Supreme Court, his backers said they were bracing for a tough fight.
To begin planning how to head off the expected onslaught, Judge Thomas is scheduled to meet on Monday with John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh and others at the White House.
He also plans to begin courtesy visits next week to members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, which is expected to hold confirmation hearings in September.


James M. DuPont, Manufacturer, 79
James Maxime DuPont, founder and chairman of Thermoplastics Inc., a producer of plastic materials for automotive, textile and other products, died on Monday at his home in Watchung, N.J.
He was 79 years old.
He died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


Chongqing Journal; China's Dismal Truth: 100 Million Out of Work
A score of grubby, lanky men marched into the cavernous and crowded Big Sheep Gully market, hauling buckets of potatoes, bricks and cloth on poles across their shoulders.
These men, who earn 64 cents a day for winding through the tangle of carts and peddlers and pungent smells, are part of the human migration of millions of Chinese peasants.


Spruce Falls Takes Charge for Cutback
The Spruce Falls Power and Paper Company, a joint venture of the Kimberly-Clark Corporation and The New York Times Company, has recorded a pretax charge of $90 million (Canadian), or about $78.8 million (United States), as of last Sunday to cover the estimated costs of cutting back the operations by the end of the year, Kimberly-Clark said yesterday.
Darwin E. Smith, Kimberly-Clark's chairman and chief executive, said the charge includes employee severance costs, losses on the disposition of equipment and other related expenses.
Both Kimberly-Clark, which owns 50.5 percent of the joint venture, and the Times Company, which owns the rest, have already written down their investments in Spruce Falls and will not record any losses related to the downsizing.


For Bush, a Special Day at Rushmore
President Bush came to this mountain of Presidents today to begin a two-day celebration of what he called "an extraordinary Independence Day."
When he addressed a joint session of Congress in March, Mr.
Bush urged Americans to thank the troops in the Persian Gulf war who had missed Christmas and New Year's at home by making the Fourth of July "a day of special celebration for our returning troops, a holiday they'll never forget."


Adele Wood Timpson, Principal, 87
Adele Wood Timpson, one of the first blacks to become a school principal in New York City, died on Saturday at the Arden House convalescent home in Hamden, Conn.
She was 87 years old and lived in Hamden.
Mrs.
Timpson, a native New Yorker, held bachelor's and master's degrees from Hunter College.
She taught and was a principal at Public School 100 in Upper Manhattan before her retirement in 1973.


Continental Wins Ruling
Continental Airlines received bankruptcy court approval today to use a $120 million credit line that the ailing carrier had sought as a financial cushion.
The long-term credit is backed by Chase Manhattan, Mellon Bank and the New York branch of NMB Postbank Groep N.V.


Britain Approves Sale Of New Abortion Pill
Britain today became the second country after France to authorize sales of the RU486 abortion pill, which induces miscarriages during early pregnancy.
The United States has banned the pill under pressure from the anti-abortion lobby, although clinical trials have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration.


Piper Aircraft Seeks Chapter 11 Protection
Piper Aircraft, a leading maker of small planes, has filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code, saying the potential for plane-crash lawsuits had scared off potential lenders.
Even though Piper, based in Vero Beach, has a $100 million order backlog, the privately owned company has been unable to find any financial backers after becoming self-insured four years ago, Piper's president, C. Raymond Johnson, said today.


WAR IN YUGOSLAVIA FEARED BY BAKER
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that Yugoslavia could be on the brink of "a full-fledged civil war," that its army appeared to be out of the central Government's control and that the United States and its allies were considering imposing an arms embargo on Yugoslavia and suspending all financial assistance.
Mr.
Baker also acknowledged a subtle shift in United States policy on Yugoslavia.
He spoke to reporters after a meeting on Yugoslavia at the State Department with Hans van den Broek, the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands, which is the current head of the European Community.


For Hundreds Laid Off, Now It's Back to Work
Ronna Weiss, a psychologist and the head of a substance abuse program at North Central Bronx Hospital, expected to sleep well last night for the first time in weeks.
Ms.
Weiss was laid off last week.
But yesterday she was notified that her job had been saved with the final budget agreement between the Dinkins administration and the City Council. a pact that averted some of the worst program and service cuts initially proposed.


Rikers Maxi-Maxi Dungeon: Too Brutal?
Prisoners and guards call it the Bing -- three dungeon-like cellblocks on Rikers Island where New York City's most disruptive inmates are quarantined in virtual solitary confinement.
Each prisoner is locked in a 6-by-8-foot cell for 21 to 23 hours a day.
Unlike other inmates, they have no television or radio.
They cannot smoke or buy personal items or snacks from the prison canteen.


Baseball; Candiotti Gets First for Jays And Carter Belts Two More
Tom Candiotti won for the first time with Toronto and Joe Carter hit two home runs as the Blue Jays captured their fifth straight game with a 4-0 victory tonight over the slumping Minnesota Twins.
Carter hit a two-run homer off Allan Anderson (4-7), a drive just inside the left-field foul pole, in the first inning.
In his next at-bat, Carter hit an 0-1 pitch over the fence in left in the third inning for his 19th homer of the season.
Minnesota has lost seven of its last eight games.


Abortion Issue Divides Advocates for Disabled
Barbara Faye Waxman would cringe when she heard her co-workers at a Planned Parenthood clinic in Los Angeles discuss prenatal screening and the need to abort a disabled fetus.
For Ms.
Waxman, who must use a wheelchair and needs a respirator to breathe because of a neuromuscular impairment, such conversations were painful.
"There was a feeling that there were bad babies," said Ms.
Waxman, who is editing an anthology on the sexual and reproductive rights of women with disabilities.
"There was a strong eugenics mentality that exhibited disdain, discomfort and ignorance toward disabled babies."


For King Center in Atlanta, New Leader and New Focus
The center founded to carry on the work and legacy of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. today announced the hiring of a Harvard University administrator as its new executive director, a shift in focus and $1 million in new corporate financing.
Two years after Dr.
King's son, Dexter Scott King, was installed amid great fanfare as executive director only to step down four months later, the Martin Luther King Jr.
Center for Nonviolent Social Change Inc. here named Ronald L. Quincy, associate vice president and assistant to the president of Harvard, as its new executive director.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Ohio, Cleveland, named Frank J. Rudavsky Jr. executive vice president for marketing. *
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Toronto, appointed James E. Anderson vice president in charge of its new corporate finance group that specializes in the American electronics industry.
The group will be based in San Francisco.


Irina Nijinska, 77, Champion Of Her Mother's Work, Is Dead
Irina Nijinska, a dancer and teacher who spent much of her life in a one-woman crusade to preserve the choreography of her mother, Bronislava Nijinska, died on Tuesday at the Daniel Freeman Memorial Hospital in Inglewood, Calif.
She was 77 years old and lived in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
She died of cardiac arrest, her husband, Gibbs S. Raetz, said.


Strawberry Activated
The Los Angeles Dodgers reactivated outfielder Darryl Strawberry today, the same day he was voted to a starting spot on the National League All-Star team.
Strawberry was in the lineup for tonight's game against the San Diego Padres.


Pacificorp Reduces Non-Utility Units
Pacificorp said it was moving to consolidate and reduce its financial services and real estate businesses.
The utility company, based in Portland, Ore., said it would contribute the capital stock of its Pacific Development Inc. real estate subsidiary, which totals about $50 million, to its financial services subsidiary, Pacificorp Financial Services Inc.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption in Science Times on Tuesday about oil exploration in a nature reserve in Peru misidentified an animal species in the reserve.
It is a spectacled caiman, not a speckled caiman.


Dr. Kara Mason, Dentist, Marries
Dr.
Kara Mason, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Mason of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married in Tarrytown, N.Y., yesterday to Bruce Jonathan Rader, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Rader of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbis Amiel Wohl and Arnold Turetsky performed the ceremony at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill.
The bride, 28 years old, is a dentist in New York and White Plains.
She graduated cum laude from Indiana University and received a D.M.D. degree summa cum laude from Fairleigh Dickinson University.
Her father owns the Atlas Design Corporation of Beaufort, N.C.
His mother, Lenore Mason, is an agent at Marjorie Wohl Real Estate in New Rochelle.


CHRONICLE
MAXIM SHOSTAKOVICH , who resigned in April as music director of the New Orleans Symphony in part because he had not been paid for the previous season, will be back in the fall as principal conductor.
The orchestra said in a statement that Mr.
Shostakovich, son of Dmitri Shostakovich, has now been paid the $100,000 owed him.
EDWIN LUPBERGER , president of the symphony board, which has heavy debts, said that Mr.
Shostakovich would have the new title of principal conductor; he was music director for five years before he left.
JAMES PAUL , music director of the Baton Rouge Symphony, will be the new artistic director.


'Junk Bond' Funds Show Strength
A revival of the high-risk "junk bond" market pushed up the value of high-yield fixed-income funds in the second quarter of this year and made them the star performers among all bond mutual funds.
New figures by Lipper Analytical Services Inc. also show that a rise in interest rates from April to June lifted 93 percent of all bond funds.
The average return for all taxable bond funds was 2.05 percent.
And junk-bond funds rose by 6.54 percent.


Iraqi Army Blockading Shiites In Marshes, U.N. Team Says
Iraq's armed forces are blockading 40,000 to 100,000 dissident Iraqi Shiite Muslims in the marshlands of southern Iraq under appalling conditions and periodically shelling them, a team of United Nations officials say.
Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, the United Nations relief coordinator for Iraq, plans to visit the marshes next week in an attempt to get the refugees released when he travels to Iraq to assess the country's humanitarian needs and decide whether to recommend some easing of trade sanctions.


Tyco's Head and Sons Out; Company's Stock Jumps 11%
In an unusual conclusion to a board room struggle, Benson A. Selzer, the chairman of Tyco Toys Inc., and his two sons have agreed to sever all ties to the company they helped to take public.
And in the stock market's cold-hearted opinion, Tyco is worth $27 million more without them than with them.
The breakup, announced yesterday, was seen as a clear victory for the many shareholders who complained bitterly about the company's cronyism, and about several deals that appeared to benefit the Selzers more than other investors.


Dueling Fillies to Star In Celebrity Weekend
Meadow Star and Lite Light both tested the track at Belmont Park yesterday morning as they rehearsed for the starring roles in their return match on Saturday in the Coaching Club American Oaks, the dramatic high of a holiday weekend of racing razzle-dazzle in New York.
The long weekend of stakes races will feature half a dozen of the season's celebrity horses, including Lost Mountain, Izvestia, In Excess, Chief Honcho and the undefeated filly Shared Interest.
On Sunday, the Dwyer Stakes will feature the return of Fly So Free, who won the Eclipse Award as the champion 2-year-old colt.


Basketball; Possible Tactic for Ewing: A Collusion Charge
With an arbitration hearing scheduled for July 22 in Patrick Ewing's contract case against the Knicks, lawyers for both sides began speculating yesterday about the possibility that Ewing will file a collusion claim against the team and the National Basketball Association if he loses the arbitration.
Ewing's lawyer, David Falk, did not offer specifics about the player's strategy, saying he fully expected to win the arbitration case.
"We have several options open to us, but we haven't decided which one," he said.
"We're going to win this one."


In Capitol Halls, Little Sense Of Government Emergency
The Capitol felt today like the Capitol so often feels on the eve of a long holiday weekend: empty and maybe a little bit irrelevant, with aides' unhurried footsteps travel- ling almost empty corridors and the occasional curious tourist.
And so it was today, even though the day was one for the history books: Many government operations were shut down and the state was operating without a budget in a new fiscal year for the first time this century.


Fourth of July Journal; For Songwriting Executive, The Tempo Is Flag-Waving
Fourth of July. Fireworks. Flag-waving. Drumbeating. Seventy-six trombones.
It's just another day for Ervin Litkei, Patriot.


A New Plan to Buy S.&amp; L.'s.
Postmaster General Anthony M. Frank and Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the Wall Street buyout firm, are considering a plan to take over several troubled California savings and loans financed by private money and Government assistance.
If such a deal can be put together, Mr.
Frank presumably would leave the Postal Service to run the institutions.
He said he had no immediate plans to leave but added that he had served longer than his three predecessors and did not rule out a return to the savings industry.


Heinz's Pilot Lacked Experience in Plane
The captain of the plane in which Senator John Heinz of Pennsylvania was killed in a midair collision with a helicopter had less than three hours of experience commanding the plane, according to reports released today by Federal investigators.
One witness interviewed by the National Transportation Safety Board said the captain, Trond M. Stegen, had difficulty operating an identical twin-engine Piper Aerostar in a flight three days before the April 4 collision in which the Republican Senator and six other people died.


Black Quandary Over Court Nominee
The nomination of Clarence Thomas, the black appellate court judge selected by President Bush for the Supreme Court, presents black civil rights leaders with an uncomfortable choice: Should they cheer his success, fight his nomination, or both?
"Yes, it's painful, I won't deny that," said Joseph E. Lowery, president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
"But what's important here more than his color is his sensitivity to be fair and just and whether or not we can trust this man to protect our basic rights."


Elizabeth V. Stern, 98, A Professor at Hunter
Elizabeth Vera Loeb Stern, professor emerita of English at Hunter College, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 98 years old.
Mrs. Stern died of natural causes, a spokesperson for the family said.


To the 'Nonessential,' Weicker's Shutdown Stings
Everyone in state government is essential, but some are more essential than others.
Connecticut's capital bowed to the Orwellian inevitable when government shut off every service save those deemed vital but not without bringing confusion and anger to its citizens -- and considerably wounded pride to its bureaucrats.
Many of the latter, in fact, had trouble recognizing themselves in the unflattering description, "nonessential."


After War, Patriotism Unfurls for Fourth of July
Vera Sautter, a volunteer at a senior citizens' center in this parched prairie town, remembers when people bought war bonds and followed serials on the radio and when grown men took their hats off when the flag passed by in a parade.
Those were the days before Vietnam and Watergate and assorted crises surrounding anything from oil to the hostages in Iran, the days when people were not embarrassed to say they were American and patriotism was right up there with Hula Hoops and apple pie.


Los Angeles Police Complaint System Is Criticized
The first official report stemming from the beating of a black motorist by white police officers widely criticizes the Los Angeles Police Department's procedure for handling allegations of misconduct.
It also calls for an overhaul of the citizen complaint system.
The Los Angeles Police Commission, a five-member civilian review board responsible for setting department policy and procedures, ordered the department on Tuesday to make sweeping changes in policy.
The changes would require police officials to assume that a person is telling the truth when it is his word against an officer's, and would create a better way to inform people about how a complaint can be filed.


Cuomo Signs Bill to Prohibit Identifying Sex Crime Victims
The police in New York State will be prohibited from disclosing the names of sex crime victims, under a bill signed into law today by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The Legislature passed the bill after some news organizations, including The New York Times, set off controversy this spring by printing the name of a woman who said she was raped at the Kennedy compound in Florida.


Robert M. Bock, 67, Biologist and a Dean
Robert M. Bock, a molecular biologist and a former graduate school dean at the University of Wisconsin in Madison, died Tuesday at University Hospital and Clinics in Madison.
He was 67 years old and lived in Madison.
Mr.
Bock died of injuries suffered Sunday after falling in a pond while clearing weeds at his property in rural Wisconsin, a spokesman for the family said.


Alline Elizabeth Davis, Civic Volunteer, 83
Alline Elizabeth Davis, a past director of the Gramercy Park Neighborhood Association who was active in community affairs, died on June 18 at her son's home in Vista, Calif.
She was 83 years old and until recently lived in the Gramercy Park section of Manhattan.
Mrs.
Davis died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Debt
*
Maine Municipal Bond Bank is offering $14.6 million in bonds with a maximum yield of 7.15 percent for an issue due 2011 through Paine Webber.
Yields on short-maturity serial bonds range from 5.25 percent in 1993 to 6.65 percent in 2003.
Another bond with a maturity date of 2007 is offered at a price to yield 7.125 percent.
The financings are rated Aa by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P. *
Sears Receivables Financing Group Inc., a subsidiary of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co., Chicago, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for the sale of $500 million of Sears Credit Account Trust 1991 C pass-through certificates through Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
Common Stock  *
Magellan Corp., Monrovia, Calif., a producer of special global positioning system receivers, is temporarily delaying its initial public offering to assess the impact of Sony Corp.'s announcement on Monday of two new positioning system products.
Ratings  *
Worcester, Mass. general obligation bond rating lowered to Baa-1, from A, by Moody's.


Consumer Rates; Yields of Money Market Funds Up Slightly
Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were up slightly for the week ended yesterday.
Tax-exempt money fund yields, up slighly for the week, show the average number of days to maturity of securities held in portfolios rising to 51, from 45.
The large jump in average days underlines the efforts by fund managers to keep yields up by buying securities with longer maturities.


The Palaces of Florence On Shawls and Pillows
ARCHITECTURE-INSPIRED objects like plates with cornice motifs or mugs decorated with column capitals or earrings based on the shape of crown moldings have been popular for the last several years.
Now a collection of scarfs, shawls and pillows also feature building facades.
And they come with a Gucci label.
"They were inspired by the plans of various palazzi here in Florence and the plans for the surrounding gardens,"said Richard Lamberton, design director of Gucci.


Vehicle Sales Dip, but Selling Rate Picks Up
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks fell 10.1 percent in late June compared with an unusually strong period a year earlier.
On a seasonally adjusted basis, however, the results provided new evidence that the sluggish American automotive market is gaining strength.
The seasonally adjusted annual rate of car sales was 7.4 million for the June 21-30 period, the highest rate since late December.
The late June rate compared with an 8.1 million rate a year earlier and a 6.5 million rate in mid-June.


U.S. Rescinds Approval of A Malt Liquor
The Government ordered the G. Heileman Brewing Company yesterday to stop marketing its Power Master malt liquor, whose high alcohol content had brought protests.
Heileman, which said it would comply, will be able to sell existing stocks of the beverage for four months.
Heileman had been told earlier in the day that it faced a potential boycott of its top-selling Colt 45 brand if it continued to market Power Master.
The company announced that it was agreeing to discontinue the product because of the "economic burden a legal contest would entail."


Marian Anderson Prize Goes to Denyce Graves
The American mezzo-soprano Denyce Graves has been named the recipient of the 1991 Marian Anderson Award, which carries a cash prize of $25,000.
The prize is not a result of a competition; Ms.
Graves was selected by a panel of critics, artistic directors and orchestra managers from a group of more than 40 singers, none of whom knew they had been nominated.
She will receive the award at a Sept. 1 concert at the Charles Ives Center for the Arts in Danbury, Conn., where the Anderson Award Fund is based.


Bridge
Parents early in this century taught their children to play "second hand low." That was an exaggeration, but the idea was right.
Even today, the average player probably errs more often by playing "second hand high."
A subtle example is the diagramed deal from a game at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, Manhattan.
Jack Sonnenblick found himself in three no-trump after aggressive bidding from his partner, and received the lead of the spade deuce.


Celebrating Columbus and Spain's Role
To the Editor:
I was very disturbed by "The Invasion of the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria" (The Week in Review, June 2).
Yes, there were some bad things done by Columbus and his men and other people later.
But can you deny how far-reaching the consequences of his discovery were?


Making Photos Fib a Bit
Devereux Ltd.
200 West 57th Street, Suite 200, New York, N.Y. 10019; (212) 245-1720.
The camera may not lie, but pictures handled by Iris Devereux, a photograph restorer, sometimes fib a little.
Faces can have sleek new noses.
Wrinkles can disappear.
Eyelashes are added, tattoos subtracted.
People can be added or taken out.


Talks on a New Ethiopia Affirm Right to Secede
A conference of Ethiopian political factions agreed today on the structure of a transitional government and affirmed, in theory, the right of the nation's ethnic groups to create their own countries.
A charter adopted by the delegates, meeting after the overthrow of Lieut.
Col.
Mengistu Haile Mariam's Marxist Government more than a month ago, stated that the driving force of the new government would be self-determination for the East African country's scores of nationalities.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices fell today amid fears of new developments in the scandal involving the top brokerage houses.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues opened almost 500 points lower, falling below the 23,000 level.
It recovered to close the morning session down 270.23 points, about 1 percent lower, to 23,103.24.
The index lost 622.29, or 2.59 percent, on Wednesday.


The Swatch Is In Again, At a Collectible's Price
WHEN it was introduced eight years ago, the Swatch was affordable .
That was the point.
But even Swatches have become subject to collector's whims and art-market cycles.


Talking Deals; Did Time Warner Want Even More?
WHEN Time Warner Inc. announced its $3 billion rights offering in early June, both the size and structure surprised many.
But the company had already scaled back its plans from the $6 billion it had hoped to raise when it talked to investment bankers in early May, some of those bankers say.
"They wanted four, five, even six billion," recalled one investment banker who spoke to Time Warner officials.
He declined to be identified.
Geoffrey Holmes, a Time Warner spokesman, denied that the company had ever wanted to raise more than $3 billion.


To a Couple With a Philippine Daughter-in-Law
To the Editor:
This week, I have been a small part of the military-civilian effort on the beautiful island of Guam to ease, as much as possible, the suffering of people being torn from their Philippine homes by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo and transported to the safety of the United States mainland.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about immigration to Israel referred incorrectly to recent Soviet Jewish immigration statistics.
The number of Soviet immigrants last month was the highest since December, not October.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
DANIEL GOULD recalls the look of pain on the face of his 8-year-old niece when she dropped the football during a game at a family gathering.
Earlier, the girl's father had been trying to motivate her by teasing whenever she made a mistake.
With this fumble, the girl became overwhelmed with emotion.
"She cried out: 'I'm a klutz! I'm no good!' " said Dr.
Gould, a professor of exercise and sport science at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro.
"She didn't want to try to catch another ball because she didn't want to be embarrassed and fail."


Weicker Broadening Shutdowns In Pressing for Fiscal Compromise
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. expanded the shutdown of Connecticut's government today, turning up the gas still further under the pressure cooker that surrounds the search for a budget compromise with legislative leaders.
About 20,000 state employees were told to stay home, out of a total work force of 48,000.
Every state park but three was ordered closed at sundown.


I.B.M. and Apple Give Up Rivalry To Preserve Grip on Their Industry
Apple Computer Inc. and I.B.M., longtime archenemies, threw in their lots together today in a bold attempt to maintain their powerful yet threatened positions in the computer industry.
The two companies have signed a letter of intent to work together to create advanced software and powerful computers in a deal that despite being rumored for weeks still had the industry abuzz when it was officially announced.


Money Fund Assets Off
Assets of the nation's 552 money market mutual funds fell $2.05 billion, to $452.25 billion, for the seven-day period ending yesterday, the Investment Company Institute said.
Those of the 200 institutional funds increased $258.3 million, to $127.02 billion.
The assets of the 260 general-purpose funds dropped $969.7 million, to $177.46 billion.
The 92 broker-dealer funds decreased $1.34 billion, to $147.76 billion.


A.T.&amp; T. Alters Merger To Win Audit Ruling
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it had modified the terms of its merger deal with the NCR Corporation to settle questions about the accounting method to be used in the transaction.
The telecommunications giant is seeking approval from the Securities and Exchange Commission to use the pooling-of-interest accounting method for the merger transaction, but some aspects of the deal may not qualify for the favorable treatment.


Japanese S.E.C. Urged
Japanese business executives urged today that a watchdog body be established similar to the Securities and Exchange Commission in the United States to prevent unfair dealings by securities firms in Japan.
Kunio Noji, an official of the 1,500-member Japan Association of Corporate Executives, said today that the group's top officers were among those suggesting that a regulatory body be set up.
"Japan now should study the possibility of establishing a Japanese version of the S.E.C.," he said.


Panel Cites Two Nations
The International Trade Commission ruled provisionally today that pipe fittings from China and Thailand had injured American manufacturers, opening the way for anti-dumping investigations by the Commerce Department.
If it is determined that the fittings were sold below fair value and if the commission makes a final ruling finding injury, special duties will be imposed on the imports.
A decision is expected in 45 days.


Albany Session Stumbling Toward Its End
The State Legislature, handicapped for six months by fiscal myopia, stumbled toward a Thursday conclusion to a session that may be remembered for how little was accomplished in its closing hours.
A number of high-profile bills all died today, the victims of either too little time or too much opposition.
They included legislation to restrict the sale and distribution of tobacco products, to allow counties to build low-income housing, to prohibit discrimination against homosexuals, to allow cameras in courtrooms and to boost personal-injury awards.


Ulster Talks Collapse as Four Parties Fail to Agree
Talks among leaders of four of Northern Ireland's major political parties collapsed today without making significant progress toward agreement on a form of regional government.
The collapse killed any immediate possibility that the British Government might be able to return a large degree of home rule to Northern Ireland as the British had hoped.


Ford's Prices Cut in Britain
The Ford Motor Company's British unit cut prices today to try to increase sales in a car market hurt by recession.
British car sales usually peak in August, when a 12- month period for new registrations begins.
Buyers often wait until Aug. 1 so that they can obtain license plates with a new prefix letter denoting the year of registration.
In Britain, license plates last for the life of the car.
About a fifth of Britain's total annual sales are made in August, Ford said.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Dodger-Pirate Trade
Outfielder JOSE GONZALEZ , 0 for 28 this season, was traded by the Los Angeles Dodgers yesterday to Pittsburgh for outfielder MITCH WEBSTER .
Gonzales, 26 years old, is the only position player on an opening-day roster who is still without a hit.
He is 0 for 13 as a pinch-hitter.
A right-handed batter, Gonzalez appeared in 106 games last year with the Dodgers and batted .232 with two homers and eight runs batted in.
Webster, 32, is a switch-hitter who appeared in 36 games for the Pirates and batted .175 with one home run and nine r.b.i. (AP)


Scandal and the Heat Did Zachary Taylor In; Buchanan's Complaint
To the Editor:
Tests of the White House drinking water to determine the cause of the autoimmune disorders afflicting President and Mrs.
Bush, as well as their dog Millie, are not a first in United States history.
Such a problem occurred before, killing the nephew of one of President Bush's predecessors and nearly claiming the chief executive himself as he prepared to commit nearly one-third of the United States Army against a powerful desert ruler.


Colleges; Study Shows Graduation Rate Differences
White athletes graduated from college in the last five years at a rate nearly twice that of black athletes, according to a study released today by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
The findings are the first part of an academic study of 3,288 athletes, both men and women, from 85 Division I schools who entered college in 1984 and 1985.


Ames Sees End To Bankruptcy
Ames Department Stores Inc. said yesterday that it hoped to emerge from Federal bankruptcy protection early next year.
But the company reiterated an earlier statement that its creditors would probably receive "substantially less" than the face value of their claims.
The discounter, based in Rocky Hill, Conn., filed for Chapter 11 protection under the Federal Bankruptcy Code in April 1990.
Afterward, Ames closed 234 stores and laid off 20,000 employees.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Connecticut budget crisis misidentified the manager of the Department of Motor Vehicles branch in Hamden.
He is Jack Melia.


Review/Dance; At Festival, 3 Premieres Saturated With Emotion
Since its days at Bennington College in Vermont in the 1930's and after World War II at Connecticut College in New London, the American Dance Festival has focused on modern dance in all its variety.
Based at Duke University in Durham since 1978, the festival has -- like the art form it represents -- undergone further change.
The three premieres presented on Tuesday night at the Reynolds Theater here as part of the Young Choreographers and Composers in Residence program crystallized some of these changes at the festival.


Hold on, Here Comes The Next Bank Fiasco
To the Editor:
"New Finance Woes: F.D.I.C. Loss Worse; S.&amp; L. Crisis Deeper" (front page, June 11).
"Court Backs Banks' Sales of Insurance" (Business Day, June 11).
There is a connection here.


End of Slump Forecast For Industrial World
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development predicted today that the industrial world's economic slowdown would end in the second half of this year, led by a recovery in the United States.
The O.E.C.D., a group of 24 industrial nations that promotes economic growth, added that the rebound would be modest and would not be strong enough to reduce unemployment in most of the industrial world.


2 Airlines Post Traffic Rise
Two of the nation's largest airlines, American and Delta, reported yesterday that they had sizable traffic increases last month but that flights were less full than a year earlier.
American Airlines, the biggest United States carrier, said its traffic in June was the highest ever, with passengers flown 7.4 billion miles, up 8.1 percent from June 1990.


Do You Toil In the Soil Or Dig in The Dirt?
A FRIEND of mine who often writes for a prestigious American gardening magazine tells me that he is increasingly angered over editorial high handedness in changing his prose.
Every time he writes the word "dirt," an editor crosses it out and substitutes "soil." My friend is deeply annoyed.
This delicate antipathy toward "dirt" is not universal among editors of garden writing.
I ran across the word just the other day, in an article in HG, a magazine that hardly has a reputation for filthy language or for encouraging plebian tastes.


At a Corner Near You: Fireworks
Considering that yesterday was the day before the Fourth of July, the sales pitch was hardly a shock.
"Bottle rockets!" barked a street peddler named Rob, as he thumbed through a wad of cash, making change for a half-dozen customers.
"Roman candles! Sparklers! I got the fireworks, folks! Check 'em out!"
Rob's location, though, was unusual: the corner of 46th Street and the Avenue of the Americas in midtown Manhattan, far from Chinatown, where New York's illegal fireworks dealers have congregated for decades.


New-Home Sales Fell 3.3% in May
The Government today reported a surprising drop in new-home sales in May, raising questions about the strength of the housing recovery and sending builders and bankers scrambling for explanations.
The Commerce Department said sales of new homes fell 3.3 percent in May, contrary to economists' expectations of a 2.3 percent rise.
Furthermore, April sales were revised downward to a drop of two-tenths of a percent, instead of the 1.2 percent gain originally reported.


International Paper Is Fined
The International Paper Company was fined $2.2 million today after pleading guilty in Federal District Court to criminal charges of illegally storing hazardous waste solvents and falsifying records at its paper mill in Jay, Me.
A Federal judge imposed the fine as part of the plea agreement.
International Paper faced fines of up to $2.5 million.


Baseball; So What if It Was Cleveland, It's Still a Sweep for Yanks
When you are Cleveland, things like this happen: Sandy Alomar Jr. hits an apparent home run and is already in the dugout when it is reduced to a double.
Bad luck follows bad teams.
When you are the Yankees, especially these days, better things happen: Scott Kamieniecki, a 27-year old right-hander who has been in the majors less than a month, pitches a nifty three-hitter into the eighth inning and wonders if it is a silly dream.
It is no dream.
Good luck follows hot teams.


The Bank Bill: More Profit, Less Loss
Radical bank reform could still be tampered with, even torpedoed in coming days, but the story so far can be told in four happy words: good and getting better.
The House Banking Committee has now voted to reshape the banking system, improving on an already wise proposal by the Bush Administration.
The bill must snake through the House energy and Senate banking committees; members have expressed opposition to various provisions.
The bill can and should be improved.
But its two main provisions are essential -- to close failed banks early and to let banks increase profits.
Meddling here would doom effective reform.


Sports People: HOCKEY; Coach for Canada Cup
BOB JOHNSON , who coached Pittsburgh to the Stanley Cup in May, was named to coach the United States' Canada Cup team yesterday by USA Hockey.
Johnson coached the last three United States Canada Cup teams, in 1981, 1984 and 1987.
He also coached the 1976 United States Olympic team and coached the United States National Team four times.
Johnson's boss with the Penguins, General Manager CRAIG PATRICK , will serve as co-general manager of the American team, which will be made up entirely of National Hockey League players.
Chicago's BOB PULFORD is the other co-general manager. (AP)


Baseball; Mattingly Likes Streaks; Just Don't Get Personal
Don Mattingly did not want to talk about singles, doubles, triples or Joe DiMaggio.
"Streak?" he said, before the Yankees defeated the Cleveland Indians, 3-2, last night at the Stadium.
"I have no streak. Fifteen games is no streak. Thirty games is a streak, maybe."


Paris's Glass House Comes to TriBeCa
LIKE clockwork, a neighborhood resident, a tourist and a homeless person will walk by 172 Duane Street on any given day, climb onto the loading dock outside and peer through the cast-iron arches and the glass panes and the glass blocks.
Each goes inside and asks what the building is.
Is it a law firm? A gallery? A caterer? An architect's office?


Pretoria Exile Returns, to Unhappy Surprise
Conflicting signals sent out by the South African Government as it moves to dismantle apartheid rang loud and clear for Peter Malebane-Metsing when he returned from exile, briefcase in hand, to attend the African National Congress's conference here this week.
Mr.
Malebane-Metsing had been promised temporary immunity from prosecution for his role in an unsuccessful military coup in the South African homeland of Bophuthatswana on Feb. 10, 1988.


CONFLICT IN YUGOSLAVIA: In the Two Breakaway Yugoslav Republics, Fear of War but a Brave Face; In Slovenia, Word of Tank Column Jangles Nerves
The rumble of Yugoslav Army tanks has yet to echo down Ljubljana's streets, and may never do so, but residents are bracing for the worst.
"It's very difficult in this situation," said Tina Jankovic, a 20-year-old hosiery saleswoman in a downtown department store.
"People are very, very afraid."


Navratilova Finds 15 Beats 34 at Wimbledon
Callow youth thumbed its nose politely but firmly at age and experience today as 15-year-old Jennifer Capriati completed a 6-4, 7-5 quarterfinal victory over 34-year-old Martina Navratilova, the unofficial queen of Centre Court at Wimbledon.
While Navratilova, the defending champion, fell short in her quest for a 10th singles title here, Capriati wrote herself into Wimbledon's lengthy legend by becoming the youngest female semifinalist in the tennis tournament's history.
On Thursday, Capriati will face Gabriela Sabatini in one semifinal, after Steffi Graf plays Mary Joe Fernandez.


Boise Cascade Sale
The Boise Cascade Corporation said it had agreed to sell its 50 percent stake in Duropack Holding A.G., an operator of corrugated container plants in Austria and Germany, to its Austrian partner in the venture, Constantia Industrieholding A.G., for $50 million in cash.
Boise, the big forest-products company, said it expected the sale would improve its results for the 1991 quarter in which the sale was completed, although the company did not say when it expected to complete the deal.
In trading on the New York Stock Exchange today, Boise Cascade's shares fell 50 cents, closing at $25.375.


New Publishers At Times Units
The New York Times Regional Newspaper Group yesterday named Lynn O. Matthews publisher of The Sarasota (Fla.) Herald-Tribune and appointed Michael J. Parman to replace him as publisher of The Press Democrat in Santa Rosa, Calif.
Mr.
Matthews, 46 years old, has been publisher of The Press Democrat since January 1988.
He is moving to The Herald-Tribune to replace J. Elven Grubbs, 60, who will retire on Aug. 31.
The group, based in Atlanta, said Mr.
Matthews would join The Herald-Tribune on July 15, with Mr.
Grubbs assisting in the transition.


Pop in Review
Eddie Palmieri  and Hilton Ruiz
Blue Note  131 West Third Street  Manhattan  Through Sunday
When two world-class Latin-jazz pianists share a double bill at a major jazz club, the least a listener can expect is a good piano.
So it was disheartening to visit the Blue Note on Tuesday night and find that Eddie Palmieri and Hilton Ruiz are leading their bands from behind an electric grand piano.
The instrument is touch-sensitive and sounds something like a piano in its middle registers, between the dinky bass and tinny high notes.
But it has none of the heft and resonance of the real thing.
A spokesman for the Blue Note said yesterday that the musicians had requested the electric piano.


Topics of The Times; The Rising Sun on Plymouth Rock
Plymouth, Mass. -- "America's home town" -- has had Fourth of July band music as long as anyone remembers.
But the recession made it harder to find sponsors this year.
Enter Kao Infosystems, which makes floppy disks for computers -- and friends for Japan.


LEBANON AND P.L.O. CONTINUE BATTLES
Artillery and rocket battles between the Lebanese Army and Palestinian guerrillas continued for a second day today at two large Palestinian districts in southern Lebanon, as troops consolidated advances and the Palestine Liberation Organization sought to defend its last strongholds in the area.
The police said at least 8 people were killed in the new exchanges, raising to 35 the number killed in the last day.
More than 70 people were wounded.


2 Planes Nearly Collide Over N. Carolina
Two jet airliners converging almost head-on missed colliding over North Carolina on Sunday by less than a mile and a half, and a new emergency device in one of the planes, designed to warn of collision threats, failed to alert the pilots.
It was a close brush with disaster, one that involved a freakish combination of breakdowns and mistakes.
Those included temporary clearance by controllers for one plane to use an unorthodox though legal altitude and assorted problems with radio transmissions to and from both planes.


An Insurer In California Is Seized
The Great Republic Insurance Company, troubled by increasing financial and consumer-related problems for two years, has been seized by the California Department of Insurance.
Great Republic's liabilites exceeded assets by $454,000 when Judge Patrick L. McMahon of Superior Court signed an order late Monday placing it under control of Insurance Commissioner John Garamendia.


Reviews/Television; Summer Camp Humor In 'Salute Your Shorts'
It's time for summer camp.
The youngsters and counselors are circling one another warily.
Social hierarchies are being established, with wheeler-dealers at the top and hapless victims at the bottom.
Elaborate pranks are being devised.
The campers are ready for anything.
Most parents are simply relieved.
The familiar rituals have hardly been overlooked by producers of programming for young audiences.
NBC's "Camp Candy" has long been a staple of Saturday-morning cartoons.
Now Nickelodeon/Nick at Nite, one of the three cable channels operated by MTV Networks, is offering "Salute Your Shorts," a live-action series set in the fictional setting of Camp Anawanna (say it fast and it comes out "I don't wanna").
The show is being given a sneak preview today, at 9 A.M. and 5 P.M. on Nickleodeon, and at 8 P.M. on Nick at Nite.
It begins its regular run -- Saturdays at 5:30 P.M., Sundays at 11:30 A.M. -- this weekend.


CHRONICLE
Is JOHN H. SUNUNU mounting a charm offensive?
For the first time in remembered history, the White House chief of staff, who has been blaming the press for his current troubles, stopped in at a press room yesterday, to schmooze after PRESIDENT BUSH 's dedication of the Mount Rushmore monument.
He would not talk news or about his much criticized personal use of Government and corporate aircraft, but he tried to chat about his childhood and religious background.
When EDWARD ROGERS , his aide, was asked whether Mr.
Sununu would now attempt to woo opinion makers, he replied, "I don't think he knows he's in the press room."


Accord on Wine Drink
The Federal Trade Commission says it has reached an agreement with the Canandaigua Wine Company to stop selling Cisco, a fortified wine, as a low-alcohol drink and to stop encouraging distributors to market it with low-alcohol wine coolers.
The commission said Tuesday that Canandaigua's advertising, packaging and marketing of Cisco as a low-alcohol, single-serving drink had led to cases of severe alcohol poisoning.


Essay; Rating Our Spooks
"We have destroyed all of their nuclear reactor facilities," declared Gen.
Norman Schwarzkopf on Jan. 27; Iraq's nuclear capability had been "neutralized."
The general was misinformed.
We now know that many bomb damage assessments provided by our intelligence "assets" were wrong.
Not only did our bombers fail to destroy many of the targeted nuclear sites, but our $30 billion-per-year array of satellites and Big Ears and array of experts failed to learn of other facilities making weapons of mass destruction.


Pop in Review
Meat Beat Manifesto
Limelight  660 Avenue of the Americas,  at 20th Street
Meat Beat Manifesto's show on Tuesday night did the modern thing and conflated pain and pleasure.
The group, which is from Great Britain and is one of the better industrial dance bands, turned each piece into a symphony of slamming doors, with a huge beat allowing high-pitched whines: samples of a scream or percussion that sounded like chains flailing corrugated iron.


Sterling Drug Sues Bayer of Germany
Sterling Drug Inc., a unit of the Eastman Kodak Company, said it was suing Bayer A.G., the German drug maker, over the use of the Bayer name in the United States.
Sterling lists Bayer aspirin among its products and has an agreement with Bayer A.G., dating back to 1964, limiting the German company's use of the name in this country.
The agreement was amended in 1986 to allow Bayer A.G. limited American use of the name, but Sterling contends the German company has overstepped the bounds of the revised accord.
Lawyers in the case declined to comment on the suit.


Corrections
An obituary on June 14 about a New York State Supreme Court justice from Rochester misstated his first name.
He was Wilmer J. Patlow.


Ernest Gruenberg, 75, Psychiatrist And Professor in Mental Hygiene
Dr.
Ernest Matsner Gruenberg, a psychiatrist and epidemiologist who pioneered in community mental health, died on Tuesday at Washington Hospital Center in Washington.
He was 75 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.
He died of multiple organ failure, his daughter said.


Sports of The Times; Patrick, David and Groucho
PATRICK EWING and his agent, David Falk, are big kidders.
They can slay you with one-liners.
Like the one David was quoted as getting off the other day.
He said that although Patrick has a contract with the Knicks, there is a window in it, and he and Patrick are, more or less, considering climbing through that window.
But -- and here is the funny part -- Falk said the issue "is not about money; it's about freedom of choice."
I don't know.
I wasn't sure, upon reading that line, whether I should laugh or I should cry.
Laugh because the line is ludicrous, or cry because Patrick is being taken advantage of and needs serious redress.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Lewis Second in 200  Carl Lewis faltered in his first 200 meters in two years and Noureddine Morceli of Algeria missed a predicted 1,500-meter world record yesterday at the DN Galan '91 Grand Prix meet in Stockholm.
Frankie Fredericks of Namibia surprised Lewis in the 200, clocking 20.41.
A rusty Lewis led until 20 meters were left in the race.
But Lewis, usually a strong finisher, didn't have it this time, finishing five one-hundredths of a second behind.
Lewis was also second to Dennis Mitchell in the 100 meters in France on Monday, a race billed as the re-match with Ben Johnson, who finished seventh.
Morceli, ranked No. 1 in the world, won in 3 minutes 31.01 seconds, .01 slower than his personal record, and the season's best time, set last Thursday in Helsinki, Finland. (AP)


The Donald Is to Marry! And Darlings, It's Marla!
Forget about who dumped whom because now it turns out that nobody dumped anybody.
Darlings, the story can be told: DONALD TRUMP and MARLA MAPLES are really, truly e-n-g-a-g-e-d.
Wouldn't you know that all those rumors about The Donald's fooling around with other women, like the supermodel CARLA BRUNI, were just that: rumors.
The real-estate developer and the Georgia Peach haven't set a date yet ("I promise you'll be the first to know," The Donald told us), but she's sporting a new diamond that's as big as the Plaza.
No, bigger.
Yes, of course it's bigger than the friendship ring he gave her last winter when he was still married to IVANA.
"That was just a regular ring, I would say -- a trinket," he confided to us.


City Pools, Saved From the Budget Ax, Open for Abbreviated Season


Police Hunt Fireworks And Youths
Darkness was already creeping through the neighborhood when the two officers spotted the suspects huddling suspiciously near the swings behind the Park Avenue Elementary School.
The officers heard the telltale "snap," just as an anonymous caller had reported, and the answering barks of the local dogs.
As they approached, the suspects, who turned out to be three boys in baseball caps, sheepishly turned over the evidence -- a pack and a half of tiny striped firecrackers.


Jimi Hendrix in Concert
Filmed just 18 days before his death on Sept. 18, 1970, but only recently edited into a complete film, "Jimi Hendrix at the Isle of Wight" captures a nearly hourlong set that the guitarist played before an outdoor audience estimated at half a million.
But except for an opening aerial shot of the event and some chaotic backstage scenes near the beginning of the film, the camera dwells fixedly on Hendrix's face and hands as he performs with the bassist Billy Cox and the drummer Mitch Mitchell.
Among the songs are "All Along the Watchtower," "Voodoo Chile," "Freedom," "Machine Gun" and "Red House."
The movie, which is at Anthology Film Archives, should certainly be of interest to Hendrix aficionados and to guitar students.
But its static camera work, grainy color and muddy sound will make it tough going for everyone else.
Looking for something of visual interest, one notices Hendrix's gum chewing, the quaintness of his rainbow-colored hippie attire, his slender, tapering fingers.
Compared to the gladiators of contemporary arena-rock, he cut a fragile figure.


A Bond Agency Lowers Rating For New Jersey
With the ink barely dry on a budget that Gov.
Jim Florio sold on the basis that it protected the state's gold-plated AAA bond rating, the state got the news today that the rating had been dropped a notch.
The fiscal news was not all that bad -- the state's rating remains among the strongest in the Northeast and several grades above New York's and Connecticut's.


Treasury Prices Modestly Higher
Prices of Treasury securities moved modestly higher yesterday in thin trading before the Fourth of July holiday.
A report of a 3.3 percent decline in new home sales during May, the second straight monthly drop, was seen as a catalyst behind the price improvement.


A Swan Song or Symphony, Mets' Darling Plays a Soulful Tune
Ron Darling, who appears destined for the bullpen or another team altogether, said he was fully aware that tonight's outing against the Montreal Expos might be his last start as a member of the Mets.
"I try not to dwell on it," Darling, who came up to the Mets in 1983 and who is the senior member of the team in continuous service, said before the game.
"But it'd be sad if it was."


Theories Narrowed in Phone Failures
A telephone industry official today discounted the possibility that sabotage or a basic design flaw in advanced call-routing computer systems caused several major service disruptions in the past week.
The official, John O'Rourke, who is leading the investigation of the disruptions in San Francisco, Los Angeles, Pittsburgh and Washington, said a more likely culprit was some kind of problem in the way the systems were constructed, used or connected together.
The systems have several suppliers, and each has written the underlying software differently.


Coopers &amp; Lybrand To Pay F.D.I.C.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, one of the nation's Big Eight accounting firms, will pay the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation $20 million to cover potential claims concerning the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association, the agency said.
Silverado was a Denver savings and loan that failed, leading to Government actions against its officers, including Neil Bush, a director of the institution and the son of President Bush.
The officers recently reached a $49.5 million settlement with the F.D.I.C.


Sports People: HOCKEY; Quinn Plans to Do It All
PAT QUINN will continue to run the Vancouver Canucks as coach, general manager and team president next season, he said yesterday.
Quinn, 48, took over as coach last season after dismissing BOB MCCAMMON on Jan. 31.
The Canucks rallied from last place to get a playoff berth in the Smythe Division.
Quinn's coaching record was 9-13-4.


Books of The Times; A Word Man's Perspective On Usage and Grammar
Unlocking the English Language By Robert Burchfield With an Introduction by Harold Bloom. 202 pages.
Hill &amp; Wang. $18.95.
It's O.K. to split infinitives under certain circumstances.
After all, hard-core hostility to the practice was not expressed in English usage manuals until late in the 19th century.
And double negatives were widely used by respectable writers until sometime between the 16th and 18th centuries, when they became socially unacceptable for reasons no longer discoverable.


Scandal and the Heat Did Zachary Taylor In
To the Editor:
President Zachary Taylor did not die of natural causes as you report June 27.
As Samuel Eliot Morison puts it in his "Oxford History of the American People," he died of a "combination of official scandals, Washington heat and doctors."


P.&amp; G. Deal Cleared
The Federal Trade Commission said it had cleared the Procter &amp; Gamble Company's acquisition of two Revlon Inc. subsidiaries.
The commission said Procter &amp; Gamble ended the required waiting period under Federal antitrust law on Tuesday.
In April, Revlon signed an agreement to sell the units -- Max Factor &amp; Company of the United States and Betrix G.m.b.H. of Germany -- to Procter &amp; Gamble for $1.14 billion in cash.


A Game Maker's Winning Moves
Jan Travers's young company did not have the money to advertise his new board game, Abalone, so he tried something few frustrated entrepreneurs would do: He gave the game away to small shopkeepers and played it in places like restaurants and beaches to drum up interest.
"You need a little strategy when you have a strategy game," said Mr.
Travers, president of the Abalone Games Corporation in New York.


Police Dept. Spared Brunt Of Fiscal Cuts
Nimbly juggling timetables and taking advantage of strategic legislative loopholes, New York City fiscal planners and police officials have spared the Police Department the brunt of budget cuts that have sapped other city agencies.
The Fire Department, for somewhat different reasons, seems also insulated from the deepest of the cuts that have drawn howls of protest from other agency heads and citizens' groups.


Sardi Offers Long View Of Theater And Close
When Vincent Sardi looks out from the theater district restaurant his parents founded in 1921, this is what he sees:
*The Shubert Theater, dark since "Buddy" closed in May.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.01
6.09
N.A.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.57
N.A.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.72
N.A.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.12
8.13
N.A.
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.41
8.43
N.A.
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.45
9.45
N.A.
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.18
7.19
N.A.
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers N.A. - Not available because of Independence Day **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


And Let's Bring Back Miss Subways Too
To the Editor:
Say goodbye to acne!
Who cares if you've been battered?
Dying for a drink?
Pregnant?
We can help.


A Weekend Guest Has Rights, Too
FOR years it has been known to even minimally civilized house guests that they have certain obligations.
They should, despite generally superficial protests, bring a gift.
They should not arrive too early, extend their stay or come on to the host's husband or wife.
They should contribute something of themselves: wit, knowledge, a sense of fun, verve.
They should, if there is household help, leave them a little or big something, and if there is no help, at least smooth out their own sheets and chop a few vegetables.


Scandal and the Heat Did Zachary Taylor In; Foul Play Suspected
To the Editor:
Re "President Zachary Taylor's Body to be Tested for Signs of Arsenic" (front page, June 15).


Sports People: BASEBALL; Santiago Apologizes For Hurling His Helmet
BENITO SANTIAGO of the Padres must have felt like crawling into a hole after throwing his batting helmet in anger and hitting San Diego Manager GREG RIDDOCH , knocking him groggy.
The incident happened after the sixth inning of the Padres' 4-1 loss to the Los Angeles Dodgers on Tuesday night.
"It was a freak thing, but on television they're already saying that I tried to hit him, that I did it on purpose," Santiago said.
"I threw it down and it bounced wild. I apologized to Greg. I don't want to hurt anybody."


Tennis; Becker Loses Only Temper; McEnroe Is Fined $10,000
Fretting over the potential of three more matches crammed into the next four days, Boris Becker lost a set this afternoon, and in the process lost his temper.
But the second-seeded player rebounded for a 6-4, 6-7, 6-1, 7-6 victory over Christian Bergstrom of Sweden to reach the men's quarterfinals.
In other matches in the round of 16, delayed by rain on Tuesday, Andre Agassi beat Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3, 6-4; Thierry Champion of France concluded his victory over Derrick Rostagno of the United States, 6-7, 6-2, 6-1, 3-6, 6-3, and Guy Forget of France finished his victory over Tim Mayotte of the United States, 6-7, 7-5, 6-2, 6-4.


New Braniff Gets New Chief
Before the new Braniff International Airlines had any planes off the ground, it changed its chief executive.
Gregory B. Dix, who ran charter flight operations for Princess Casinos Inc., has replaced Sheldon Srulevitch as chief executive of the carrier, the company said.


Lightning Kills Two Men
Two homeless men were killed by lightning Tuesday when they got caught in a sudden storm at a work farm here and took shelter under a tree, the authorities said today.
Two other people under the tree were treated for minor injuries, and three dogs were killed.
The dead men were identified as William Dials, 40 years old, and David Kidd Jr., 60, both of Washington.


Milton S. Gladstone, Advertising Executive, 86
Milton S. Gladstone, a retired advertising executive, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old.
He died of cancer of the pancreas and of the liver, his wife, the former Adrienne Goldman, said.


Stanford Billing Plan Assailed
Stanford University has proposed a research overhead rate for the next fiscal year that is almost as high as the one that got it into trouble with the Federal Government earlier this year.
"It shows a lot of chutzpah," James Collman, a chemistry professor at Stanford, said Tuesday.
"It certainly would appear to be a little bit arrogant. It's politically impossible."


Records Indicate Company Ignored Warning on Drug
The Swiss maker of a widely used sedative was warned by its American affiliate six years before the drug was marketed in the United States that in certain circumstances it could cause life-threatening side-effects, according to internal company documents.
Yet the company, F. Hoffmann-La Roche, went ahead with what the affiliate correctly predicted would be a dangerously concentrated formulation, and more than 40 deaths and about as many injuries resulted.


A Case of Highway Robbery, And Guess Who Is Arrested?
The Palisades Interstate Parkway, known for its leafy stretches and Hudson River views, has been the target of an undercover investigation into a series of highway robberies.
But instead of masked bandits, the victims said the culprits were actually police.
On Monday, a parkway police officer was charged with stealing $2,000 from an undercover detective who was investigating allegations that officers were robbing motorists on the scenic thoroughfare.


CONFLICT IN YUGOSLAVIA: A Toothless Europe?; Community Is Stung by Yugoslav Strife As Truces Unravel Before Ink Is Dry
When the Yugoslav crisis escalated last weekend, the European Community jumped at the chance to mediate, motivated as much by the need to forestall a civil war on its eastern border as by a desire to prove that it is a political force to be reckoned with.
So far, it has achieved neither objective.
Two European peace missions produced accords to end the fighting and start negotiations, but the truces that were brokered soon fell apart.
Now, feeling its influence waning, the 12-nation community seems unsure what its next steps should be.


Receding Ice on Arctic Sea Hints at Global Warming
In the latest indication that a warming climate has significantly affected the northernmost regions of the earth, scientists reported today that the extent of ice in the Arctic Sea declined about 2 percent from 1978 to 1987.
Three separate studies in the last year have found that the part of the Northern Hemisphere covered by snow has been shrinking, that sea ice near Greenland has become substantially thinner and that Alaskan snow melted two weeks earlier in the 1980's than in the 1940's.


Precious Metal Prices Soar On Fears About Yugoslavia
Precious metals futures prices jumped late in the session yesterday after the Bush Administration expressed fears about a civil war in Yugoslavia.
Gold closed $2.10 to $2.30 higher on New York's Commodity Exchange with the contract for delivery in July at $370.20 an ounce.
Silver settled 7.4 cents to 7.6 cents higher, with July at $4.448 an ounce.


Mixed Reviews on 5th Ave. To Veterans' Peddling Curb
Late Tuesday in Albany, the New York Legislature voted to amend an 1894 law that allowed disabled veterans to work as sidewalk peddlers in New York City regardless of municipal rules.
Yesterday afternoon on Fifth Avenue, Charles E. Story, a disabled veteran peddling T-shirts, called the vote "an absolute outrage."
But the Greek-born hot-dog vendor nearby who said her name was Stella said it was only fair.
And a peddler of books who called himself Nikolai said in his Russian accent, "I don't care."


Intech in a Shake-Up To Reverse Losses
Intech Inc., a small California technology company with heavy losses recently, said yesterday that it would restructure its board and management.
Four new board members were elected on Monday: Jerome C. Blair, Russell W. Hansen, Walter R. Smith and Michael J. Sullivan.
Mr.
Blair is a former vice president and a large shareholder; the others are longtime managers.


An Officer Kills a Teen-Ager Drawing a Gun, Police Say
An 18-year-old Brooklyn man was shot and killed by an undercover police officer in Prospect Park yesterday afternoon after he pulled a gun and tried to rob the officer, the police said.
The dead man, Shenine Smith of 511 Lincoln Place, had a .22-caliber gun in his hand when the officer shot him in the chest, the police said.
A second suspect, Salvatore Barnes, 27, of 449 Lincoln Place in Brooklyn, was taken to the 70th Precinct station house for questioning, the police said.


Baseball; New Teams Expect Approval Today
Miami and Denver are expected to be approved as the National League's 13th and 14th teams tomorrow, but the imminent departure of the president of the Pittsburgh Pirates to Miami has raised a question of a possible conflict of interest in the selection process.
Major league owners are scheduled to vote on the two expansion franchises in a conference call tomorrow afternoon.
Approval, which is considered a foregone conclusion, requires the votes of three-fourths of the National League owners and a majority of American League owners.
Once the teams are approved for play, beginning in 1993, the new owners will begin to build their organizations, and that is where the possible conflict of interest regarding the choice of Miami comes in.


Businessman Acquitted in Killing Of Reputed Chinatown Gangster
A Manhattan jury acquitted a Chinatown businessman of murder yesterday after concluding that he acted in self-defense when he fired 18 bullets into a reputed Chinatown gangster.
Defense lawyers and prosecutors said they could not recall any recent murder trial in which a self-defense plea was successful against a murder charge when so many bullets were fired.


Japan's Plan on Brokerages
The Japanese Ministry of Finance will ask the country's four leading brokerages to suspend business with corporate clients for several days in the wake of a scandal that has shaken the securities industry, a Japanese financial newspaper reported in today's issue.
The Nomura Securities Company, Daiwa Securities Company, Nikko Securities Company and Yamaichi Securities Company will be ordered to refrain from doing business with corporate clients for two or more days next week, the newspaper, Nihon Keizai Shimbun, reported.


Foundation Reverses Plan to Sell Paintings
In the wake of what it called "adverse publicity," the Barnes Foundation of Merion, Pa., announced yesterday that it had decided not to sell works from its art collection to raise endowment funds.
It has specifically deleted from a petition currently before a Pennsylvania court a request to be allowed to dispose of "one or more" paintings.
Richard H. Glanton, president of the foundation, said the decision had not been influenced by pressure from the foundation's advisory board.


Baseball; Don't Blame Alomar Jr. The Fans Did It!
Sandy Alomar Jr. accepted the congratulations with a smirk.
He shook his head, admitted he was confused and pleaded innocent to stuffing the All-Star ballot boxes.
Despite missing 40 of Cleveland's 75 games with a rotator cuff injury and despite a batting average that looks like the reading when he steps on the scale, Alomar will be traveling to Toronto to appear on Tuesday night as the American League's starting catcher.


Corrections
A correction in this space yesterday about an article in Weekend on Friday about free activities in New York City misstated the status of Congregation B'nai Jeshurun in Manhattan.
Only its main sanctuary is closed for ceiling repairs.
Religious services and other activities continue at the adjacent community center, at 270 West 89th Street.


Home Video
Back to Claudian Rome
For fans of "I, Claudius," the "Masterpiece Theater" production that first appeared on PBS in 1977, these are heady times.
Last month Channel 13 began rebroadcasting the 13-episode saga of treachery in ancient Rome, and now PBS Home Video has released the series in a set of seven cassettes (six of them two-hour and one one-hour).
The price is $24.95 apiece or $149.95 for all seven. (To find a store that carries the series, call 800-776-8300.)


Pop in Review
Greg Osby  S.O.B.'s
Many young jazz musicians try to ignore jazz after the 1960's, when electric instruments and the chance for commercial rewards changed the music.
Greg Osby, a saxophonist who performed Tuesday night, wants to revitalize the music his generation grew up on: pop-jazz and jazz-funk.
On Tuesday, he was better off with funk.


Independence Day
Fireworks: East River, 9 P.M.
Viewing from East 23d to East 42d Street F.D.R.
Drive southbound will be closed from 7:30 to 10 P.M. from 14th to 42d Street.
Here are holiday schedules.
New York Government offices: Closed.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.
Parking: Sunday rules in effect Sanitation: No collection.
Financial markets: Closed.
Transportation: Subways and buses on Saturday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North on holiday schedule Libraries: closed New Jersey Government offices: Closed Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: closed.
Transportation: N.J.
Transit trains and buses on holiday schedule.
Connecticut Government offices: Closed Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: closed.
Transportation: New Haven Line on holiday schedule.


In the Nation; Riding the Quota Wave
It used to be said down South that the only way to get a mule's attention was to hit it over the head with a two-by-four.
If anyone doubted that "quotas" and the Democrats' alleged partiality to them will be a Republican theme in 1992, Jesse Helms got out his lumber last week and gave them a good lick.
Mr.
Helms, the well-known "Senator No" from North Carolina, is not a man to let the voters wonder where he stands.
In 1989, when some optimists doubted he would run again, he dashed their hopes by taking up arms against the Mapplethorpe show -- as good as an announcement of his candidacy.


Pop in Review
Spider Saloff  and Ricky Ritzel
Adam's Rib  First Avenue at 72d Street  Manhattan  On July 12 and 13  Eighty-Eight's  228 West 10th Street  Manhattan  On Monday and July 15
Ira Gershwin is so set in the public's mind as the lyricist for the songs of his much more famous brother, George, that his career without George is only dimly perceived even though it includes such lastingly familiar songs as "I Can't Get Started," with music by Vernon Duke; "Long Ago and Far Away" (with Jerome Kern); "The Man That Got Away" (with Harold Arlen), and the songs from "Lady in the Dark" (with Kurt Weill).


Uncle Anselm, Uncle Sam
Listening to all the controversy about multicultural education, the man realized how lucky he had been as an immigrant boy in America.
He had his very own Uncle Sam.
Uncle Anselm, a cousin really, was born in this country but for him, foreign forebears were a source of pride.
To the boy, Uncle Anselm personified America.
He stalked the streets, tall, bald and correct.
As a concession to summer, he sported a straw boater but wore a vest even on hot days.
Though he seemed gruff, he talked easily of American wonders like scrimshaw, panning for gold and baseball.


Cuomo Will Allow An Income-Tax Rise For the Wealthiest
After months of insisting that he would reject even a "smidgen" of an income-tax increase, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today agreed to just such an increase as part of a broader deal to end the state's budget tumult.
The tax increase would have the effect of raising the tax rate for the state's wealthiest residents by applying the top rate to a larger share of their income.


Mitterrand Will Visit Iran; Easing Teheran's Isolation
President Francois Mitterrand announced today that he would visit Iran before the end of the year, becoming the first head of state from the European Community to visit Iran since the 1979 Islamic revolution.
French officials said the visit would take place this year, but they gave no date.
Iranian officials said that after Mr.
Mitterrand's visit, they would fix a time for a return visit to France by President Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran.


Dollar Is Generally Lower; Concern on Recovery Cited
The dollar retreated against most other major currencies yesterday as a thin pre-holiday market responded to overseas unrest and renewed doubts about the United States economic recovery.
Traders initially sold dollars in reaction to a report showing that United States housing starts were unexpectedly lower.
The report said single-family home sales fell 3.3 percent in May, compared with expectations of a 2 percent to 3 percent rise.


Jury Chooses Not to Indict 4 Police Officers in Shooting
After hearing testimony over several months, a Brooklyn grand jury voted yesterday not to indict four police officers who fatally shot the owner of a popular Williamsburg restaurant last winter.
Jose Arismandy Cruz, 36, owner of El Nuevo Paraiso restaurant on Broadway, died in a confrontation with several plainclothes officers from the 90th Precinct.


Inspection Urged on Jet Thrusts
Federal safety officials investigating a fatal jet crash in Thailand today issued a series of urgent recommendations calling for the inspection of thrust reverse systems in Boeing 767 jetliners equipped with Pratt &amp; Whitney engines.
Moments before a Lauda Airlines passenger jet crashed in Thailand in May, its crew thumbed through a Boeing handbook to learn that a flashing amber light could signal that an engine had been switched into reverse, t said officials of the National Transportation Safety Board today.


Israel Seeks a Prisoner Trade For 7 Servicemen in Lebanon
The Israeli Government is trying to keep alive faltering negotiations over seven Israeli servicemen missing in Lebanon, most recently by sending a message through the commander of the Israeli-backed militia in southern Lebanon that it is willing to exchange hundreds of Arab prisoners for the soldiers.
Here and in the West, officials hope that an Israeli prisoner exchange might also clear the way for the release of 12 Western hostages believed held in Lebanon.


Reviews/Television; Searching the Mideast For a New World Order
"Bob Simon: Back to Baghdad" is an understatement.
Tonight at 10 on CBS, the correspondent, who spent the weeks of the Persian Gulf war in an Iraqi prison, also returns to Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Israel.
He begins his determinedly unsentimental journey by asking whether there is in fact a new order in the Middle East.
What he finds are mainly old and depressing orders.
In Kuwait, he is struck mainly by the "lethargy, aimlessness and incompetence" of rulers who, back in their palaces after a brief and comfortable exile, seem unable to deal with such basic chores as cleaning up the rubble of war or collecting the garbage.
The sharp schisms in Kuwaiti society, between Palestinians and Kuwaitis and between the rich who fled and those who stayed and endured the Iraqi occupation, remind him of Lebanon.
"All of Kuwait," he says, "is in intensive care now." Mr.
Simon, who has a way with a phrase, describes the burning oil wells as "the bonfire of the insanities."


Corrections
A table in Business Day on Saturday titled "Leading Underwriters" misstated the source of the ranking of top managing underwriters of corporate securities.
It was IDD Information Services.


Sports People: TRACK AND FIELD; Plea From South Africa
A group of top South African athletes appealed to the world ruling body of track and field yesterday to end its boycott in time for them to compete next month in the world championships.
The 22 athletes made their plea at a meeting with an International Amateur Athletic Federation delegation visiting South Africa to report on political change and the move for unity among sports bodies without discrimination by race.
"We request the I.A.A.F. to recognize that all apartheid legislation has been scrapped and to lift the suspension of the South African Amateur Athletics Union," the athletes said in an open letter to federation chief PRIMO NEBIOLO, who is not in the delegation.


The Fourth, Continued
Here is a sampling of events planned around New York City for the Fourth of July weekend: Today
ANNUAL AIR SHOW, Coney Island, Brooklyn.
The United States Army's eight-member Green Beret parachute team is to land on the beach today through Sunday at 12:30 P.M.
Also taking part in the show tomorrow and on Sunday will be an Air Force F-16 plane, which will give an aerobatic display.
Best viewing is midway on the boardwalk, between the Cyclone roller coaster and the Wonder Wheel.
Free.
Information: (718) 265-2100 or (718) 266-1234.


Call It Voodoo, but Texas Surrenders in Beer Battle
Just when a skirmish with a Louisiana brewery was threatening to become a full-blown beer battle, the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission has thrown in the towel.
Effective today, Dixie Blackened Voodoo Lager Beer is no longer contraband in the Lone Star State.
Beverage officials banned the New Orleans brew in January because, they said, its name and label, which shows a swamp, conjure images of witchcraft and the occult.
But on Wednesday, faced with legal questions, a retaliatory ban on a Texas beer and widespread ridicule, the regulators changed their minds.


Don't Forget Inflation in Corporate Tax Figures
To the Editor:
In "Business Helps Schools" (letter, June 6), Richard W. Rahn of the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce would have us believe: "Corporate taxes have increased dramatically in the last decade. Total corporate taxes have increased 60 percent while profits rose 19 percent." Mr.
Rahn seems to be misusing statistics.


Strong Quake Hits Indonesia
A strong earthquake was recorded today near the Flores Sea, Indonesia, the Hong Kong Observatory reported.
The observatory said the quake, measuring 6.4 on the Richter scale, was centered about 1,200 miles east of Jakarta, in an area of sparsely populated islands.
No further details were available.


In Romania, Gypsies Face New Racist Peril
To the Editor:
I note with concern your June 19 report of rising verbal attacks on Romania's Jews.
The history of anti-Semitism in Europe warrants careful consideration of any trends that include anti-Jewish sentiment.
Yet I am surprised to see so little attention given to the plight of the gypsies.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 5


AIDS Cases Seen Leveling Off in Next 5 Years
The increase in the number of new AIDS cases in the United States will level off in the next five years as fewer people become infected and as they receive better treatment earlier, a study says.
Moreover, therapies, including the use of the antiviral drug AZT early in the infection and the use of inhaled pentamidine to prevent an AIDS-caused pneumonia, will delay the development of infection with the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, into AIDS, according to the study in the journal Science.


YUGOSLAV LEADERS DEMAND SURRENDER OF BORDER POSTS
Yugoslavia's collective presidency and a group of military leaders sought today to reassert control over the nation, demanding that the secessionist republic of Slovenia accept an immediate cease-fire and return control of all border posts to federal troops.
Slovenian leaders rejected the order as "completely unacceptable," plunging a one-day-old peace in the republic into uncertainty.


TV Weekend; Child of Television as Hero Manque
Meet Martin Tupper, a child of the 1950's, his head stuffed with scenes from all the series and old movies he watched on the family television set.
Martin's wife, Judith, has left him for Richard Stone, a paragon among men, who when not saving Brazilian rain forests is collecting Nobel Prizes.
Martin edits mildly dirty romance novels for a New York publisher.
His far-from-impressed secretary is Toby ("How's life on the other planet, Your Majesty?").
Martin's teen-age son, Jeremy, is a good kid who loves his dad despite everything.
Played with offbeat charm by Brian Benben, Martin is the hero manque of "Dream On," a Home Box Office sitcom that, when not devising the flimsiest excuses for putting topless young women in a scene, can be remarkably clever and disarming.
Created by David Crane and Marta Kauffman, Martin and company offer glosses on contemporary living that can get hilariously and uncomfortably close to the mark.


Review/Theater; The Weeks Before the 1959 Senior Prom, Set to Music
Popular culture has so severely strip-mined 1950's teen-age life that replays of "Grease" and "Happy Days" can no longer be counted on to yield nostalgic nuggets at the first drop of a "daddy-o." "Prom Queens Unchained," the amusing new 50's musical that opened on Sunday downstairs at the Village Gate, deals with this depletion of resources by evoking the period as a shrill, campy cartoon whose nonstop comic silliness stampedes any thoughts of nostalgia.
The show, which has music by Keith Herrmann, lyrics by Larry Goodsight and a book by Stephen Witkin, is set largely in the corridors and classrooms of Robert Underwood High School in the weeks before the 1959 senior prom.
As patrons enter the theater, a smiling Mom, dressed like a cafeteria worker, distributes bagged lunches along with advice not to open until instructed.
After the students troop in, everyone is asked to rise and pledge allegiance to the flag.


Slovene Rebels Revive Tito's Wartime Tactics
This country backroad was still strewn today with bits and pieces of demolished tanks, silent testimony to the success of guerrilla tactics against Eastern Europe's largest standing army.
A lightly armed contingent of amateur Slovene soldiers clashed here earlier this week with an armored column.
As they did in virtually every other encounter with the army, the Slovenes won, using discipline, knowledge of the terrain and strategies developed by Yugoslavia's famed guerrilla fighter, Marshal Tito, to overcome a lack of firepower.


Market Place; Equities Surging In Latin America
ON the economic ropes several years ago, Latin America is beginning to show real success in opening its economies, and one of the strongest signs is the flourishing of its stock markets.
As a group, stock markets in these developing countries have been the best performers of the year, outdoing both their competitors in the world's developed economies and their rivals in developing countries in Asia.
"They have replaced the Pacific Rim emerging markets as the flavor of the month," said Gary Kleiman of Kleiman International Consultants.
The problem for investors is figuring out how much higher some markets, like those in Mexico and Brazil, can go before a large correction occurs.


James Van Alen, 88, Innovator Who Changed Scoring in Tennis
James Van Alen, who changed tennis with his invention of the tie-breaker scoring system, died Wednesday after falling off a terrace at his home.
He was 88 years old.
Mr.
Van Alen's wife, Candace, said that his vision was impaired and that he had apparently not seen the three-foot drop off the terrace.
"It was a freak accident," she said.
He died at Newport Hospital, a hospital spokeswoman said.


Restaurants
There are two kinds of Indian restaurants in New York City: those that serve a familiar Mogul melange characterized by yogurt-marinated meats, cream-enriched sauces and tandoor-roasted ingredients (all of which can be wonderful), and places that offer more audacious regional fare.
Dawat clearly falls into the latter category.
Since its opening in 1985, Dawat has been under the culinary tutelage of Madhur Jaffrey, the Indian actress turned cookbook author.
Her extensive regular menu is supplemented by a half-dozen provocative regional specialties that should not be missed.


Whose Park Is This Anyway?Chris Angus writes the "Canoe Country" column for The Advance News in St. Lawrence County, N.Y.
When most New Yorkers think of the Adirondacks, they imagine a vast land of mountains, rivers and chain lakes held in a public trust for their use and enjoyment.
Sadly, they're mistaken.
Most of the rivers and lakes of the Adirondack Park are locked away -- posted and often patrolled by private landholders.
Of the 21 historic waterways that have been declared public since 1812, 18 are closed: two-thirds of New York State's wild, scenic and recreational rivers system is off-limits.


Road to Confirmation Is Getting Bumpier for Bush's C.I.A. Choice
The confirmation of Robert M. Gates as Director of Central Intelligence is unlikely to be as easy or swift as the White House at first hoped, according to a number of senators on the Select Committee on Intelligence and some of their staff members.
It is not that the mood of the committee has drastically shifted, at least not yet, or that the committee has uncovered a startling new piece of evidence that would disqualify the career Central Intelligence Agency official from the nation's top intelligence job for the second time.
Confirmation hearings are expected to begin in mid-July.


In Excess Unfurls a Record Time in Suburban
New York opened its Fourth of July weekend at the races with a skyrocket yesterday when the Irish colt In Excess won the 105th running of the $500,000 Suburban Handicap at Belmont Park and shattered the track record for the mile and a quarter by more than one full second.
The 4-year-old colt, imported from England one year ago, seems to glow on American holidays.
He won the Metropolitan Mile on Memorial Day at Belmont, and came right back to win the Suburban on Independence Day.
He now has won 6 of his 11 starts on these shores.


Waiting for Darkness Puts a Glow on Hawaii
The last time Dr.
Donald Hall chased a total eclipse of the Sun he was in a Concorde jet, flying under the shadow of the moon for an hour at 70,000 feet.
"It produced tantalizing but inconclusive results," said Dr.
Hall, director of the Institute of Astronomy at the University of Hawaii.


Qantas Talks To Northwest
Northwest Airlines may buy as much as 35 percent of Qantas Airways Ltd., the Australian international airline, the chairman of Northwest's parent company said today.
The chairman of NWA Inc., Alfred Checchi, who was meeting here with Qantas and Government officials, said Northwest would file an expression of interest with the Australian Government by Wednesday.


Pop/Jazz; The Mekons Shed a Label For a Curse That Works
On Sunday afternoon at Summerstage in Central Park, Jon Langford of the Mekons introduced a "song from our new album, 'The Curse of the Mekons.' " He paused, then added, "By the way, the curse worked." Then the band plunged into another rowdy, twangy rocker that had both band and audience dancing.
The curse of the Mekons is a long-running paradox: The band makes great, raucous, tuneful rock albums, but no one can figure out how to sell them.
Luckily, the band tours; it returns to the New York City area this weekend, with concerts tomorrow and Sunday at Tramps in Manhattan and Monday at Maxwell's in Hoboken, N.J.


Colombia's Rewritten Charter Opens Politics to New Forces
Raising hopes for a broadening of democracy here, Colombia's new Constitution goes into effect on Friday as the country's President lifts a seven-year-old state of siege.
The Constitution, which is intended to open Colombia's two-party system to new political forces, was written by a diverse assembly that included former guerrillas, Indian leaders and Protestant pastors.
It replaces one written in 1886, the oldest in Latin America.


Our Towns
Married couples often have an uncanny way of knowing what type movie their spouse will rent for relaxation after work.
That's why Robert Levin nodded the other evening when Patricia Levin arrived home with milk, bread and "The Little Mermaid." Since both sons are 15 years beyond toddlerdom, Mr.
Levin knew what that selection meant.
"I'd had another bad day at work," Mrs.
Levin recalls.
"I didn't want to think about anything significant." Mrs.
Levin has many bad days.
She's a registered nurse; there are a lot of them, too.
But there aren't many in her specialty: hospice.
Hospice nurses lose virtually every patient; their job is care of the terminally ill.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. and Siemens agreed to build a factory in France that will produce the world's most advanced computer memory chips.
The deal, I.B.M.'s largest joint production agreement ever, follows I.B.M's agreement to work with Apple Computer.  [ Page D1. ]


Honors
*
The Market Research Council, New York, inaugurated two members into its hall of fame, established in 1977: the late Sonia Yuspeh, a former senior market researcher with J. Walter Thompson and Grey Advertising, and Joseph G. Smith, the chairman of Oxtoby-Smith Inc., New York. *
Symon Cowles, head of the marketing consulting firm Cowles &amp; Company, Glen Ridge, N.J., and John Miller, executive vice president of marketing at NBC-TV, were inducted into the hall of fame of the Broadcast Promotion and Marketing Executives.


Waterford Wedgwood Names U.S. Officer
Waterford Wedgwood P.L.C. has wooed Joseph Sardella Jr., formerly senior vice president at the Calvin Klein Cosmetics Company, to Wedgwood U.S.A. in yet another step to exploit the strength of its brand names,
As chief operating officer, Mr.
Sardella said he would work to strengthen the company's relationships with department stores and to develop a stronger identity for Wedgwood in the United States, its second-largest market after Britain.


Protesters Assail 2 Dentists for Ad on AIDS
Protesters have accused two dentists of stirring hysteria by advertising in newspapers that they tested negative for the AIDS virus.
Chanting "fill teeth, not pockets," the protesters on Wednesday carried signs outside the dentists' office reading "Stop Novocaining Common Sense."


Corrections
A sports picture caption yesterday misidentified Boris Becker's opponent in his Wimbledon match on Wednesday in some copies, and misstated the course of the match.
Becker defeated Christian Bergstrom of Sweden, 6-4, 6-7, 6-1, 7-6.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about allegations that a dean at Boston University plagiarised a magazine article rendered the dean's name incorrectly in some copies.
A subheading in the same copies misidentified the source of the material.
The dean is H. Joachim Maitre.
The material first appeared in a scholarly journal, Imprimis.


U.S. WON'T INDICT BOSTON POLICEMEN
The United States Attorney's office here has announced that it will not seek indictments against the Boston police officers accused of coercing witnesses while investigating the murder of a pregnant woman, Carol Stuart, in 1989.
The United States Attorney, Wayne A. Budd, said on Wednesday that after 15 months, a Federal grand jury had found "some evidence of serious misconduct" but not enough to convict the officers of civil rights violations on charges of coercing witnesses into identifying a black man, William Bennett, as a suspect in the case.


Review/Art; Two American Moderns in Shows at the Met
In a mezzanine gallery in its 20th-century wing, the Metropolitan Museum of Art has installed "Arthur Dove: Nature Abstracted," a small exhibition of 30 works, many of them on paper, by one of America's major early modernists.
Dove's high-spirited, nature-inspired, small-scale abstractions are now widely recognized as one of the most important American artistic achievements between the two world wars.
In a gallery almost directly above it is an installation of 10 of the museum's 11 paintings by the bewitching, irrepressible Abstract Expressionist Clyfford Still.
His big, mud-slow, flame-light earthscapes helped release some of the natural and artistic energies that Dove had channeled into and stored in his paint.


Panel Discounts Many Adverse Effects Tied to Childhood Vaccines
While scientific evidence links the whooping cough and rubella vaccines to adverse effects like allergic reactions and arthritis in some people, there is little data to connect many other conditions previously associated with the vaccinations, an expert panel has concluded.
"The adverse events under consideration by the committee are, in most instances, rare in the exposed population," the report said.
"They also are known to occur in the absence of vaccination, are clinically ill-defined, and are generally of unknown causation in the general population."


Sigh of Relief for Ryan: Pain Is a Muscle Strain
It turned out to be nothing more than a scare for NOLAN RYAN , baseball's career strikeout leader.
After undergoing almost three hours of tests in the Memorial Hospital emergency room in Arlington, Tex., Wednesday morning to find the cause of his chest pains, it was determined that the 44-year-old Texas Rangers' right-hander has no cardiac problems.
The diagnosis after an electrocardiogram: a strained muscle attached to his breastbone.
The Rangers said yesterday that Ryan remains slated to start Sunday against California.


ERITREANS TO VOTE ON INDEPENDENCE
The province of Eritrea formally won the right today to seek independence from Ethiopia.
The move came after the first public appearance in a month of the Eritrean rebel leader, who is the head of one of Africa's most formidable military forces and the victor of a 30-year war.
But the referendum will probably not be held for two years.


Amateur Soldiers Enjoy Respite of a Fragile Truce
A week after fighting broke out in Slovenia, the guns have gone silent, the tanks are withdrawing and the jet fighters have disappeared, but the breakaway republic's red, white and blue flag still flies, for the time being, over this and all its other border crossings.
"It's super," said a Slovenian territorial-defense soldier leaning against a stainless steel bar at a border cafe, relaxed now that a new cease-fire has taken hold.
"I think that now, with this peace, if it holds, Slovenia will have its independence."


Review/Opera; Final Bolshoi Offering, 'The Maid of Orleans'
Too late to avoid a slightly tattered reputation and some patches of empty seats, the Bolshoi Opera finally came up with a production that provided real visceral pleasure on Wednesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
The opera was Tchaikovsky's "Maid of Orleans," which is another laudable rarity, though not so much of one for New Yorkers as might have been expected.
Eve Queler presented a Russian-language concert performance just over a year ago in Carnegie Hall, and her cast included two of the principals who sang on Wednesday, Oleg Kulko as the vacillating King Charles VII of France and Gleb Nikolsky as the Archbishop.


Dr. Adam Helfand Weds Miss Namkin
Tanya Namkin, the daughter of Jacqueline Pivawer of Yonkers and Richard Namkin of Glen Rock, N.J., was married last evening in Verona, N.J., to Dr.
Adam Jay Helfand, a son of Andrea P. Frost and Lawrence Helfand, both of Westfield, N.J.
Rabbi Jon Konheim performed the ceremony at the Richfield Regency.
The bride, 23 years old, graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and expects to graduate from the Pace University Law School in December.
Her mother is the manager of Forest Houses in the Bronx for the New York City Housing Authority.
Her father is a vice president of Wall Fabrics in Paterson, N.J.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front- page article on Tuesday about disruptions in telephone service incorrectly described equipment used by the Pacific Telesis Group in some copies.
The company was using an older version of the software that was used in other regions where there were problems.


14% Increase in Income Tax Approved for New York City
The State Legislature authorized New York City this morning to increase its personal income tax by an average of 14 percent, three days after city officials stitched together a budget that provided for it.
The approval, which had been expected and which is expected to be signed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, will allow Mayor David N. Dinkins to raise an additional $335 million to help keep the city's new $29 billion budget in balance.
The vote came at 6:34 A.M., shortly before state lawmakers recessed for the summer.


Critic's Choice/Film; Meanest Woman
The meanest individual on screen this summer is not a half-human, half-mechanical enforcer with a penchant for shoving innocent bystanders through brick walls.
No, that honor belongs to Tatie Danielle, the frail-looking old lady who is the title character of Etienne Chatiliez's wicked satire about middle-class French mores.
Tatie Danielle, who lives for the glee of humiliating those weaker than she, is a sublime monster.
And "Tatie Danielle" revels in her incomparable talent for giving offense.


Art in Review
&gt;'Redemption Songs II' Cavin-Morris 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) Through today
"Redemption Songs II: Spirit Works From the Black Diaspora" is a moving collection of 42 works by more than a dozen artists.
Some of them, including the painters Bill Traylor and Minnie Evans and the sculptor Georges Liautaud -- all capable of generating images of human beings and nature that radiate affection and wonder -- are at least minimally known in New York City; most are not.
A number of images suggest script (including the stark and striking altar irons, each one representing a different orisha, or god, from Bahia, Brazil); John Harvey's expressionist paintings include passages of Scripture.


Experts Find Deaf Can Hear At High Ultrasonic Ranges
People can understand words spoken at high ultrasonic ranges once thought to be far beyond the capacity of human hearing, scientists have found.
The ultrasonic speech must be conducted by an awkward laboratory device that transmits it through the bones of the skull, but when delivered in this manner even those who are profoundly deaf can comprehend the words.
The findings raise the possibility that people may have a second, previously unknown acoustical organ that is distinct from the cochlea of the inner ear, which detects the sounds of everyday life.
And they suggest a new approach for designing devices to help those who can hear little or nothing in normal audio ranges.


Airlines' Woes Raise Questions on Service
With four of the nation's airlines operating in bankruptcy, and at least one other a likely candidate, it seems fair to ask whether a correlation exists between a carrier's financial health and its overall performance, as well as between financial health and safety?
Such questions have gained new prominence with the publication of the July issue of Consumer Reports magazine, with its first survey of the airline industry.


Events
FRIDAY Music
BOLSHOI OPERA, Tchaikovsky's "Maid of Orleans," Metropolitan Opera House, 8.


Corrections
A news analysis article yesterday about the European Community's role in the Yugoslav crisis misstated the number of community members that border on Yugoslavia.
There are two, Italy and Greece.


No Progress On Tax Plan In Connecticut
After agreeing on how much Connecticut should spend in the fiscal year that is now four days old, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and legislative leaders met for more than seven hours today without settling on a tax plan to raise that money.
On a holiday when all but three of the state's parks and beaches were closed because there is no budget, Mr.
Weicker and six Senate and House leaders did reach a consensus on one issue: what goods and services should be subject to the state's sales tax.
But they did not disclose which goods and services those were.


Sports of The Times; Capriati Had to Work On the Fourth
SHE was 15 years and 96 days old, and she had no time to dream.
A few hours after she had beaten the "lege," the legend of her chosen field, Jennifer Capriati was back on the practice court.
That's how it goes at the top of the tennis tour.
You hit the ball; the ball comes screaming back.


Basra Journal; Iraqi Hospitals Struggle With Wounds of War
In the worst days of the war, some Iraqi doctors here and around the country say they performed surgery by the light of kerosene lanterns.
They boiled dressings from one patient to use on another.
They collected water from the streets and backed up sewers for straining and boiling.
And at times they buried their patients in the garden when the morgues overflowed.
Western-trained Iraqi physicians and surgeons, who a year ago diagnosed ailments with multimillion-dollar CAT scan systems, the latest X-ray machines and lab facilities, have reverted to basic medical tools: the stethoscope, the thermometer, the probing hand and their gut instincts.


New Campaigns
*
Aetna Life and Casualty has adapted its television campaign to print.
Six ads, created by Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, carry the same tagline, "A policy to do more," and feature similar flash-card-style messages about issues like AIDS and prenatal care.


Sounds Around Town
Latin Jazz
Eddie Palmieri Octet and Hilton Ruiz Quintet, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Manhattan, (212) 475-8592.
The Blue Note's annual monthlong summer mix of Latin music and jazz is now in its third week, with two strong groups pointing up the creative vitality that is surging through Latin jazz.
The pianist Eddie Palmieri began his career in the 1950's, a decade after Machito and his Afro-Cubans gave that music its foundation in the United States, and he has been in its vanguard ever since.
Hilton Ruiz, also a pianist, was classically trained and was guided into jazz by one of its most thoughtful teachers, Mary Lou Williams.
His distinctive playing has been shaped by his classical and jazz studies set against his barrio background.
His quintet will feature Daniel Ponce as a special guest on conga.
Both groups will play tonight, tomorrow and Sunday at 9 and 11:30 P.M., with a 1:30 A.M. show added tonight and tomorrow.
At tables there is a $20 music charge and a $5 minimum; admission to the bar is $15.


Lansford Getting Closer
Oakland third baseman CARNEY LANSFORD , a career .292 hitter, said yesterday he expects to complete rehabilitation from reconstructive knee surgery within two weeks.
Lansford, 34, underwent major surgery after he was injured in a snowmobile accident on New Year's Eve.
He said he would report to Tacoma, Wash., next Thursday to play for the Tacoma Tigers, Oakland's Class AAA farm team, then rejoin the parent team about July 18. (AP)


Sounds Around Town
Weekend Matinees
Marshall Crenshaw and Zin and Foula, Central Park Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, midpark at 70th Street, Manhattan, (212) 360-2777.
Marshall Crenshaw writes the kind of songs that just seem to roll off the guitar, winsome and tuneful.
But there's a twist: behind his mild-mannered singing and well-turned guitar lines is a deep suspicion of faith that love makes everything all right.
Saturday at 3 P.M.; admission is free.
On Sunday afternoon, two Haitian bands, Zin and Foula, are likely to have people holding each other and dancing the compas as circular guitar lines and insinuating rhythms fill the air.
Show time is 3 P.M.; free admission.


Market Place; Equities Surging In Latin America
ON the economic ropes several years ago, Latin America is beginning to show real success in opening its economies, and one of the strongest signs is the flourishing of its stock markets.
As a group, stock markets in these developing countries have been the best performers of the year, outdoing both their competitors in the world's developed economies and their rivals in developing countries in Asia.
"They have replaced the Pacific Rim emerging markets as the flavor of the month," said Gary Kleiman of Kleiman International Consultants.
The problem for investors is figuring out how much higher some markets, like those in Mexico and Brazil, can go before a large correction occurs.


Despite Furor Over Research Fees, Stanford Plans Similar Rate Again
Stanford University has proposed a research overhead rate for the next fiscal year that is almost as high as the one that got it into trouble with the Federal Government earlier this year.
"It shows a lot of chutzpah," James Collman, a chemistry professor at Stanford, said Tuesday.
"It certainly would appear to be a little bit arrogant.  It's politically impossible."


P.L.O. and Lebanon Reach an Accord
Palestinian guerrillas in the south of Lebanon agreed today to stop fighting army forces and turn over their heavy weapons to the authorities, a Government official and a Palestine Liberation Organization representative said.
"The war is over and agreement has been reached with our Palestinian brothers," Abdullah al-Amin, a Cabinet minister without portfolio, said today of the agreement, which followed two days of fierce fighting around Sidon, a port 25 miles south of Beirut.


Stock Prices Gain in London; Dollar and Gold Advance
Stocks rose in London and were mixed in Frankfurt yesterday, while the dollar advanced against most major currencies.
Gold prices were also higher.
Trading on some overseas markets was light and uneventful.
American exchanges were closed for the Independence Day holiday.


Small Scale, Great Beauty: The Bridges of Central Park
TO speak of the bridges of New York City is to conjure a realm where spidery cables lace brawny Brooklyn to towering Manhattan, where crisscrossed girders form triumphal arches high above the Hudson.
But there is another realm of New York bridges, more than two dozen, each within walking distance of the next.


Warner A. Morse, 53, Philosophy Professor
Warner Alden Morse, a professor in the department of philosophy at the University of Kansas in Lawrence for 25 years, died Monday at St.
Francis Medical Center in Topeka.
He was 53 years old and lived in Lawrence.
Dr.
Morse died of complications following surgery for cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Let Frenchmen Be Ashamed of Ogling
To the Editor:
When Prime Minister Edith Cresson of France complains that "Anglo-Saxons are not interested in women as women" and asserts that 25 percent of them are homosexual (news article, June 20), it is not British, German and American men who should be upset, but Frenchmen.
Anglo-Saxons, she implies, simply look with neutrality at a woman strolling down the street.
That is, they are free of the ogling sexism of Frenchmen.
What the Prime Minister deplores is that many British and American men do not instantly sexualize women, whereas "in Paris, men look at you."


No Durham for Bulls
After a series of unpleasant contract negotiations, the Chicago Bulls have dismissed JIM DURHAM , their broadcast play-by-play voice for the the last 18 years.
TOM DORE , a former University of Missouri basketball player, has been named to replace Durham.
He will join JOHNNY KERR to do play-by-play on SportsChannel on cable television.
Originally, the Bulls said that Durham would be relegated to play-by-play radio broadcasts in the 1991-92 season.
But now, he will not even be heard on radio.


Art in Review
Howard Halle Randy Alexander Gallery 270 Lafayette Street Through July 13
Howard Halle's exhibition is best viewed barefoot.
The entire space in this small new gallery devoted to younger artists has been carpeted in green, grassy sod.
The turf is holding up fairly well and it adds a sensuous note to Mr.
Halle's wry, late 20th-century Conceptual art.
The grass also seems in character for an artist who makes frequent use of contemporary Americana, including lawn and garden accessories.


INSIDE
Palestinians to Yield Arms Palestinian guerrillas in the south of Lebanon agreed to stop fighting and turn over their weapons, a Government aide said.
Page A3.
Shevardnadze Quits Party


Teen-Agers Show Ignorance on Alcohol
To the Editor:
As disturbing as the number of underage drinkers ("With Teens and Alcohol, It's Just Say When," The Week in Review, June 23) are their reasons for drinking and their ignorance about alcoholic beverages.


Whitehurst Hurls Mets By Expos, and Into 2d
O.K., how about Dwight Gooden going to the bullpen?
That, of course, is a joke.
All else about the competition for the fifth starter's job, though, has become quite serious.


Art in Review
Raymond Pettibone and David Moreno Feature 473 Broome Street Through tomorrow
Although extremely different in style and medium, the works of Raymond Pettibone and David Moreno share a certain emphasis on the dark side of life.
It is overt in Mr.
Pettibone's ink drawings, nonchalantly pinned to the wall here, which catalogue a series of strange encounters and situations, usually with captions that may or may not make sense.
Mr.
Pettibone's terse, semi-lurid drawing style owes something to illustrated manuals, film noir and adult comic books, although the sexual innuendo in many of his images is rarely explicit.
If Raymond Chandler or Dashiell Hammett had drawn pictures, they might have looked something like this.


Civil Rights Museum Is Dedicated at King Assassination Site


A Judge Finds The Funny Bone Can Be An Appealing Way To Connect With Law Clerks
Judge Richard Neely of the West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals describes himself as a judicial pragmatist.
No one who reads his annual pitch to prospective law clerks could quarrel with that characterization.
These days, some state court justices find themselves scratching for qualified applicants for these jobs.


Marketers Favor Tales Of 2 Brands
For years, marketers have used spokesmen and spokeswomen to advertise their consumer products.
Now, they are also using "spokesbrands" -- products from other marketers that serve as endorsers, just like human stars.
The idea is for the spokesbrand's celebrated character to rub off on the product being advertised, the same way that Michael Jordan eating Wheaties cereal is meant to suggest to consumers that his basketball prowess is a bowlful of flakes away.


Tracy King Weds Patrick J. Memmi
Tracy King, a daughter of Katrina H. Huyett of Reading, Pa., and E. Drummond King of Allentown, Pa., was married yesterday in Paris to Patrick Joseph Memmi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert Memmi of Paris.
The ceremony was performed by a representative of the Mayor of Paris in the Town Hall of the 15th Arrondissement.
The bride, 28 years old, was until recently a consultant with Public Financial Management in San Francisco.
A cum laude graduate of Williams College, she received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
Her father is the senior partner in the law firm of King, McCardle, Herman &amp; Freund in Allentown.
Her stepfather is Judge Daniel H. Huyett 3d of Federal District Court in Reading.
She is a stepdaughter of Judith McGough King, the executive vice president of the Allentown Economic Development Corporation.


Ellis Island: All Too Like The Old Days
ON a drizzly morning 10 years or so ago, I took a trip to the ruin that was Ellis Island.
At that time, the National Park Service was giving limited tours of the site, and the cobwebs of history clung like moss to the vaults of the old Registry room.
Then, it was a moody, somber place in which my only touristic companions were echoes and ghosts.
So it was with a sense of expectation and promise that I made my way recently to Castle Clinton in Battery Park about 9:30 one weekday morning to visit the 10-month-old Ellis Island Immigration Museum.


Despite Furor Over Research Fees, Stanford Plans Similar Rate Again
Stanford University has proposed a research overhead rate for the next fiscal year that is almost as high as the one that got it into trouble with the Federal Government earlier this year.
"It shows a lot of chutzpah," James Collman, a chemistry professor at Stanford, said Tuesday.
"It certainly would appear to be a little bit arrogant. It's politically impossible."


Winfield Bypassed for No. 13
Dave Winfield has been to 12 All-Star Games, and he thinks it should be 13.
But the 39-year-old Winfield was not among the American League reserves selected today even though the California Angels outfielder is hitting .285 with 17 homers and 56 runs batted in.


Guyana Marxist, Mellowed, Makes a Comeback
Surrounded by plaques and medals struck with likenesses of Marx and Lenin and other political mementos that seem almost quaint after Communism's collapse, Cheddi Jagan, a 73-year-old leftist crusader, lacks no enthusiasm for explaining why his time has finally come.
His face lit beneath a wispy halo of white hair, Dr.
Jagan proclaims his rebirth, calling himself a "Gorbachev before Gorbachev," 27 years after the United States and Britain helped maneuver him from power for fear of seeing a Communist beachhead on the South American mainland.


Assistant Prosecutor Is Shot
An assistant Manhattan district attorney was shot in the back and robbed Wednesday night at an automatic teller machine in downtown Brooklyn, the police said yesterday.
The attorney, David Breen, 25 years old, was listed in stable condition at Bellevue Hospital Center yesterday, said a police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch.
Mr.
Breen's assailant had not been identified or arrested yesterday, Officer Bloch said.
Mr.
Breen had just completed withdrawing cash from the Chemical Bank branch at 50 Court Street.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with the continuation of an article about the maximum security cellblock at Rikers Island was published in error.
It showed a regular cellblock, not a maximum security one.


WILDER APOLOGIZES ON THOMAS REMARK
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder has said that he did not mean to offend Roman Catholics when he said the nominee for the United States Supreme Court, Clarence Thomas, should disclose his views on abortion because he was reared as a Catholic.
"If they're offended, I apologize to them," said Mr.
Wilder, a Baptist who supports the right to abortion.
The Governor, a Democrat, is considering a bid for President next year.


We're for Real, Yanks Say As They Flirt With .500
Once upon a time, the baseball standings in this morning's newspapers would have been viewed as the barometer for determining the outcome of the pennant races.
The teams in first place after the games played on July 4, the old saw went, would become the pennant winners.
That barometer has never been overwhelmingly accurate and since division play began in 1969 has held even less validity, but last year it was perfect.
The teams that led the four divisions after games of July 4 -- Oakland, Boston, Cincinnati, Pittsburgh -- went on to win division championships.


A Transfer Down Under For Sara Lee Executive
Philip J. Hiscock has worked in drugstores and hosiery, and now he will work Down Under.
Mr.
Hiscock, 54, has been promoted to group vice president for the Sara Lee Corporation's newly acquired personal-products companies in Australia and New Zealand.
He had been president of Sara Lee's Hanes Hosiery division since 1987.


Compulsory Jury Seclusion: New York Benefit or Waste?
New York State's court system is the only one in the country, legal experts say, that requires the sequestering of jurors during deliberations in every criminal case -- from the notorious to the downright dull.
Jurors are often astounded to learn that their service is bound to subject them to mandatory lodging (double occupancy) in some of New York's less renowned hotels and undistinguished chicken dinners from special "jurors' menus." Otherwise the requirement goes largely unnoticed -- except by the court officers who earn overtime because of it and whose union every year fights a proposal to do away with the requirement.


Quotation of the Day
"The United States is at a crossroads. It cannot continue to be the 911 emergency number for the rest of the world and refuse to be 911 for its own children." -- Keith B. Geiger, president of the National Education Association.  [ A8:5. ]


Traffic Alert
U.S.O.
Street Fair: Seventh Avenue will be closed Sunday from 34th to 42d Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Across America, a Fourth of July Tradition


People
*
Patrick J. Cunningham, chief creative officer of Ayer Inc., New York, has been named a vice chairman of the agency. *
Bert Metter has stepped down as chairman of J. Walter Thompson USA and will be working as a full-time consultant and trouble-shooter at the agency.
He will continue to carry out many of his previous duties, though all new-business development has been assumed by Brian Johnson, who was recently appointed executive vice president and director of new-business development for J. Walter Thompson North America.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a near collision of two jet airliners misidentified a spokesman for Bendix-King, the manufacturer of the anticollision device on one of the planes.
He is Lee Haines.


Hitachi Drawn Into Stock Market Scandal
Japan's biggest stock market scandal in years spread further today when Hitachi Ltd., one of the country's most prominent computer and electronics companies, was accused of receiving more than $23 million in payments from the Nomura Securities Company to make up for losses that Hitachi suffered when the Tokyo stock market turned down last year.
Embarrassed Hitachi officials admitted late today that they had received the payments.
But they insisted that Hitachi had never asked Nomura to guarantee that it would not lose money, and that they had been unaware that Nomura was using its own funds to cover losses suffered when it was managing Hitachi's huge portfolio.


South African Sanctions: Go Slow
The anti-apartheid sanctions imposed by Congress in 1986 have fostered change in South Africa.
What made them credible was Washington's ability to speak with a bipartisan voice.
Yet a big foreign policy success is now threatened by domestic politics as President Bush and the Democratic Congress square off for a needless row on when to lift the sanctions.
Mr.
Bush impatiently hints that Pretoria has fulfilled all but one of five conditions for ending sanctions, which is debatable.
Prodded by a black caucus deeply suspicious of White House racial politics, Democratic leaders claim that South Africa has barely met a single condition, which is more debatable.


Flea Markets Pit School Against Merchants
The fund-raising flea markets at the high school -- source of scholarships, gifts for schools and students, and angst -- have embroiled just about everyone in town in a nasty fight.
Local merchants are mad at the Board of Education for opening the high school to out-of-town vendors and bargain-basement prices that, they complain, undercut their stores.
The parents and teachers who sponsor the flea markets and return their earnings to the school system are angry at the merchants and are threatening to boycott their stores on South Washington Avenue.


Johnson Is a Certified Star With Viola and Sanderson
Howard Johnson and Frank Viola were named today to represent the Mets for the National League in Tuesday night's All-Star Game in Toronto, where Scott Sanderson will be the only Yankee representative for the American League.
The three were chosen as Manager Lou Piniella of Cincinnati and Manager Tony La Russa of Oakland filled out the rosters for the annual exhibition.
For Johnson, who was honored and excited over having been named in 1989 for the first time, today's announcement of his second selection as an All-Star brought a smile and a nod.


Listen to the Backhoe Bird
A man walking down Bleecker Street on a quiet Sunday afternoon was mystified at hearing the warning beep-beep-beep that a backhoe makes when it is in reverse.
There was no digging going on anywhere around; so, following the beeps, he came to a little enclave where, in a tree, sat a mocking bird, mimicking the machine sound.
There is also a mocking bird on West End Avenue that imitates ambulance sirens and the gear-changing of No. 103 buses, but what mockers mostly imitate are other birds.
Officially they are named
Mimus Polyglottos
, or "many-tongued mimic," and some of their virtuoso performances are enshrined in ornithological history.


Rating Cut Is Expected For Insurer
The Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, which is experiencing growing problems with its investments in commercial real estate, is expected to lose its top rating today from a leading rater of insurance companies.
In addition, Mutual Benefit is expected to announce on Monday that it will lay off about 450 of the 1,500 people employed at its headquarters in Newark.
Mutual Benefit is the nation's 18th-largest life insurer, with more than $13 billion in assets and 400,000 individual policyholders nationwide.


Joan Gallagher Marries on L.I.
Joan Marie Gallagher and Dr.
Neil Jay Kremen were married yesterday at the Westbury (L.I.) Manor by the Rev.
Donald E. Babinski, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Howard Cohen.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Gallagher of Rockville Centre, L.I.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold O. Kremen of Delray Beach, Fla.
The bride, 28 years old, is a respiratory nurse clinician at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park.
She graduated from Molloy College, where she is completing studies for a master's degree in nursing.
Her father is the carpenters' foreman at The New York Times.


Ralph N. Mould, 83, Presbyterian Minister
The Rev.
Dr.
Ralph N. Mould, a Presbyterian minister and peace advocate, died on Wednesday at Waveny Care Center in New Canaan, Conn.
He was 83 years old and lived in New Caanan.
Dr. Mould died of kidney failure, his sister, Jean Lillis, said.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League BOSTON RED SOX -- Recalled Kevin Morton, pitcher, from Pawtucket of the International League.
Sent Daryl Irvine, pitcher, to Pawtucket.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Claimed Efrain Valdez, pitcher, on waivers from the Cleveland Indians.
National League MONTREAL EXPOS -- Activated Andres Galarraga, first baseman, from the 30-day disabled list.
Optioned Chris Haney, pitcher, to Indianapolis of the American Association.
Football Canadian Football League HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Traded Stephen Jordan, defensive back, and Rae Robirtis, center, to the Edmonton Eskimos for an undisclosed 1992 draft pick.
Released Edmond Bardwell, running back; Cal Duncan, defensive end; Robert Malcolm, fullback; Floyd Salazar and Albert Thomas, defensive backs; Ralph Scholz, offensive lineman; and Michael Vaughn, wide receiver.


Charles C. Colt Jr., 66, State Housing Official
Charles Cary Colt Jr., an administrator for the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal, died on Wednesday on Naushon Island, off Cape Cod, Mass., where he was on vacation.
He was 66 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Colt died of a heart attack, his wife said.


Review/Art; An Exhibition About Art Exhibitions
To see the latest theories of art history squeezed and prodded into exhibition format, there's no place in Manhattan quite like the Whitney Museum's downtown branch at Federal Reserve Plaza.
Several times a year, a group of graduate students from the museum's independent study program are given the run of this sleek exhibition space, whose gleaming metal accouterments can bring to mind scenes from Charlie Chaplin's "Modern Times." These students are well-read, conscientious and almost terminally up to date, and they tend to orchestrate shows that stand out in one way or another, even if they're not completely outstanding in the visual sense.
This summer's offering, "Constructing American Identity," organized by Elizabeth Bingham, Eric Miles, Andrew Perchuk and Ellen Tepfer, is no exception.
The exhibition, which includes more than 60 paintings dating from the late 1920's to the late 60's, is a show that nourishes the mind while frequently starving the eye.
It outlines an ambitious subject but often treats it too skimpily.
It also commits some glaring curatorial errors, the most prominent of which is too much required reading.
A nearly one-to-one ratio of text panels to actual artworks is not a good idea.


Shevardnadze Sees a Party 'Inquisition'
Former Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze has accused the Communist Party leadership of conducting witch hunts "in the spirit of the Inquisition" against members dissenting from standard party doctrine, according to a letter of his made public today, and he said he resigned his membership so as not to be partner to such unlawful "persecutions."
In his letter of resignation after 43 years in the party, delivered on Wednesday to the Communist leadership and published today by the independent Interfax news agency, Mr.
Shevardnadze vehemently condemned the party leadership for repressing those who dared to differ and said such practices have led the party to "a profound crisis of popular trust."


Small Company Scrutinized In U.S. Phone Breakdowns
A prime suspect in the recent spate of telephone system breakdowns around the country is an aggressive Texas-based company that has boomed as the nation's telephone network has been modernized.
Starting as a six-person garage-shop operation in 1981, the company, the DSC Communications Corporation of Plano, Tex., has become a half-billion-dollar international business in just a decade.
Its success has been based on providing the computer equipment for services that transform lines that carry only voices into "electronic gateways" that transmit computer data, allow new services like caller identification, accommodate cellular phone traffic and in the future will carry video signals.


Accounts
*
Kroger Co., Cincinnati, has restructured its advertising account, said Paul Bernisch, a spokesman.
The supermarket chain has discontinued a $20-million-plus national account, handled by Campbell-Mithun-Esty, and has shifted to a structure of 10 regional accounts.
The account for southern Texas and Louisiana, valued at $4.5 million, has been awarded to Taylor-Smith, Houston.
Additional assignments are to follow, Mr.
Bernisch said.


Spur to Summit Action; Yugoslav Crisis Brings New Pressure For Rich Nations to Help the Soviets
British and American officials say that the threat of civil war in Yugoslavia has increased pressure on the world's seven largest industrial democracies to consider ways of helping the Soviet Union avoid the same kind of disaster.
The pressure will come at the summit meeting of the seven here later this month, but British officials getting ready for the meeting here repeated today that no large-scale financial or economic aid was likely to be offered when President Mikhail S. Gorbachev addresses the seven leaders, plus the European Community, after the summit conference ends on July 17.
A New Warning
The West German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, whose Government has given, lent, or pledged about $31 billion to the Soviet Union in exchange for its consent to the reunification of Germany and the withdrawal of more than 300,000 Soviet troops from the eastern part of the country by 1994, is going to Kiev on Friday to consult with Mr.
Gorbachev before the summit.


BANKERS EXPECTED TO STAY HESITANT TO LEND FOR YEARS
Just as the bank failures in the Depression years bred a generation of conservative bankers, the new banking crisis is creating a cautiousness among lenders that bankers themselves say may slow the flow of loans long after the recession ends.
Many factors affect a bank's willingness to lend, from the health of the bank to the size of its underlying capital base.
But none are as important as the mindset of the bankers themselves.
And there is widespread evidence that that mindset has changed in a way that may transform banking for months or years to come.


CHRONICLE
For more than a year, a documentary on DONALD TRUMP financed by a real-estate rival, LEONARD STERN, has languished, unable to rouse interest among broadcasters in the already overexposed Mr.
Trump.
The frustrated producer, NED SCHNURMAN, screened the documentary on Wednesday night after Mr.
Stern ordered him not to.
And he did it in Bridgehampton, where Mr.
Stern has a home.
Mr.
Schnurman explained his provocative act as an effort to "get public reaction and stimulate interest in sale and distribution." The 90-minute documentary, "Trump: What's the Deal?" was shown to about 800 people at two free screenings at the Bridgehampton Community House.
It chronicles the rise of Mr.
Trump through his divorce last December and his current financial woes. (No, it does not include Mr. Trump's sudden engagement to MARLA MAPLES on Tuesday.)


CHRONICLE
Pity ED FINKELSTEIN . For 15 years, he has worked on every Fourth of July.
Envy Ed Finkelstein.
For 15 years, he has enjoyed a ringside seat at one of the most lavish, most creative and possibly the longest fireworks blasts going.


Diner's Journal
100 Sorbets
Duane Park Cafe, the eclectic American restaurant at 157 Duane Street in TriBeCa, is offering a rotating roster of 100 sorbets on the summer menu.
Ten flavors are available daily, including strawberry-champagne, pomegranate, passion fruit, huckleberry, watermelon-Campari, peppermint and rose-geranium.
And yes, there is lemon.
The cafe is closed this weekend and will reopen Monday.
Telephone: (212) 732-5555.


The Truth Is Self-Evident: The Yankees Are Doing Dandy
The Kelly on second base stole third.
The Kelly at bat poked a grounder through the drawn-in infield to win another game.
So elemental, these Yankee victories.
There is an economy of motion, of deeds, of words.


Teachers' Union Assails Bush's School Strategy
In the first national gathering of teachers since President Bush outlined his ambitous strategy for improving American schools, educators today called many of his proposals misdirected and said that the Bush Administration is not adequately addressing the needs of children.
"I can guarantee our fellow citizens that schools are improving," said Keith B. Geiger, president of the National Education Association, which represents more than two million teachers and education workers.
"It's childhoods that are not."


For Fed, a New Set of Tea Leaves
From corporate offices to the headquarters of the Federal Reserve, economists are always looking out for new indicators that will give them clues to where things are headed.
David W. Mullins Jr., a governor of the Federal Reserve and its vice chairman-designate, is betting that an experimental indicator of bond market jitters will help tell him whether investors expect inflation to flare.
The index's current calm readings suggest that the Fed has some latitude to ease its monetary policy if other conditions warrant -- though Mr.
Mullins and other Fed officials have made it clear that they see no reason for easing right now.


Review/Film; Cashing In on Juvenile Delinquency
Bad kids are big business, which is the only explanation for "Problem Child 2," a film angling for its share of the Bart Simpson-"Home Alone" mini-delinquent market.
In this case the budding anarchist of choice is Junior (still Michael Oliver), now relocated with his father, Ben (John Ritter), to a town named Mortville and up to his same old troublemaking tricks.
Wearing his familiar malicious smirk, Junior does what he can to disrupt his father's love life by rewiring the front doorbell, so that a would-be date gets an electric shock that makes her hair stand on end.
He gets even with an obnoxious neighbor by turning on the propane tanks attached to the neighbor's barbecue and blasting the man sky-high.
He somehow flushes a lighted stick of dynamite down a toilet.
Bathroom jokes abound.
If you aren't amused by the idea of Junior's urinating into a pitcher of lemonade, or by runaway roaches in the salad greens, then you're too old for this film's brand of humor.


Egypt's Arms Control Plan for Region
The Egyptian Foreign Minister unveiled new proposals today for Middle East arms control, including the demand that Israel be subject to the same restrictions as Arab countries on weapons of mass destruction.
Announcing the plan at a news conference for foreign journalists, Foreign Minister Amr Moussa declined to respond directly to a question about a report on British television last week that an Egyptian-based company, jointly owned by Arab and British interests, was cooperating with North Korea to develop and manufacture an extended-range version of the Scud-B missile.


The Final Four: Edberg, Becker, Stich and Wheaton
Summer finally struck at Wimbledon today, but Andre Agassi and Jim Courier, two Americans who survived a rainy first week and achieved career firsts by reaching the quarterfinals here, struck out.
Agassi, who was on his best behavior as he spiraled onward through the draw despite his nonexistent track record on grass, was hampered by a strained right thigh muscle and ultimately bowed to David Wheaton in five uneven sets.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-7
The Slovenes rejected an ultimatum from Yugoslavia's collective presidency and the military.
The ultimatum, aimed at reasserting national control, demanded a cease-fire and the return of border posts.
Page A1
The guns in Slovenia are now silent and the tanks are withdrawing, but the breakaway republic's red, white and blue flag still flies, for the time being, over its border crossings.
A6


Ailing Comrade of Mandela to Be Given New Post
The African National Congress today created an elevated new post of national chairman for its ailing president, Oliver Tambo, clearing the way for Nelson Mandela, who has been his deputy, to assume the presidency.
The congress is holding its first full conference in South Africa in over three decades since being legalized by President F. W. de Klerk on Feb. 2, 1990.
The decision about Mr.
Tambo was announced here as nominations closed for the election of a new leadership Friday and Saturday.


Graf and Sabatini Storm Into Wimbledon Final
Steffi Graf and Gabriela Sabatini, players with little in common save a rivalry so ferocious that it has become more the province of psychologists than tennis coaches, used identical tactics today in advancing to the women's singles final at Wimbledon.
Each behaved like a dictator on court and each achieved her desired result in straight sets.
There was little to doubt about the outcome of both matches, for Graf and Sabatini had already undone their respective semifinal opponents in all five previous meetings.


Jersey Casinos' Revenues Fall
Revenues at Atlantic City casinos fell 1.4 percent last month, with Donald J. Trump's three gaming properties among the five posting declines, the Casino Association of New Jersey said.
The trade organization said Tuesday that the city's 12 casino-hotels had unofficial gross casino revenues of $254.8 million in June, down from $258.5 million in June of last year.


Auctions
What Christie's describes as the most important drawing by Thomas Gainsborough to appear on the market since World War II is to be auctioned on Tuesday at its London gallery.
Discovered last summer in an attic in America, the black chalk study on buff paper is the most tender version of five drawings in this series, which the artist completed in 1785.
Each depicts a different pose of a beautiful woman in a large hat walking in a garden.
The drawing at Christie's is the only one in which she is seen strolling hand in hand with a small child.
"This Gainsborough has caused a great stir," said Andrew Clayton-Payne, a Christie's specialist in British drawings, by telephone from London this week.
"I have rarely known a response like this. When anyone has asked to see the drawing, it was either a very serious collector or someone from a museum. What makes this Gainsborough so special is the richness of detail and the texture."


Giants Keep Pruning
MIKE LaCOSS is the latest pitcher to feel the San Francisco Giants' move toward youth.
The 35-year-old LaCoss, who began the season in the starting rotation, was waived late Wednesday.
Last month, RICK REUSCHEL , 42, was let go.
LaCoss, who had a 1-5 record and a 7.23 earned run average, was in the last year of a contract that will pay him $1.4 million this season. (AP)


Algerian Premier Vows to Pursue Free Elections Despite the Unrest
The Algerian Prime Minister said today that neither the military nor its Islamic fundamentalist opponents would prevent him from pursuing free elections and democratization.
Prime Minister Sid Ahmed Ghozali, who was appointed to his job after a state of siege was imposed four weeks ago, set no dates, but asserted that his Government would organize free parliamentary and presidential elections.
His Government is in power for the duration of the state of siege, which is to last until September.


Mission to Yugoslavia To Monitor Cease-Fire
The 35 nations of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe agreed today to send a mission to Yugoslavia to monitor troop movements and help stabilize a cease-fire.
After a marathon session that ended eary today, delegates urged acceptance of a cease-fire, the return of all troops to barracks and a three-month suspension of the declarations of independence by the republics of Croatia and Slovenia.


Officer Is Videotaped Beating Texas Suspect
A police officer in Fort Worth was videotaped on Wednesday afternoon striking a handcuffed suspect with a baton at least 28 times.
The suspect, Ernest Anderson, 21 years old, of Fort Worth, was trying to escape from a moving police car when the officer stopped along Interstate 30 and began striking him, the police said.
Mr.
Anderson, who was arrested on suspicion of stealing a car, was treated at a hospital and taken to jail.


Those Who Bicycle and Walk to Work Also Deserve subsidy; Lanes Need Painting
To the Editor:
It's warm weather again, and some 12,000 people are commuting to work by bicycle.
New York City's designated bicycle lanes are in urgent need of repainting.
With all the road work being done throughout our city, many of the painted bicycle lanes have been obscured by retarring, as well as by general wear and tear over the winter.
Vehicular traffic is slipping back into these bicycle lanes.


Economic Scene; U.S. Will Press Plan for Growth In London Talks
IN an interview on Wednesday, the Treasury Secretary, Nicholas F. Brady, said that at the London economic summit conference of the seven major industrial countries later this month, the United States would press for a "three-pronged strategy" to lift the world economy out of stagnation and help rescue the economies of the fledgling democracies of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
At the end of the meeting of the rich industrial countries, Mikhail S. Gorbachev will arrive for talks on reconstruction, trade and aid, first with President Bush and then with the other Western leaders.


In Romania, Gypsies Face New Racist Peril; Democracy in Albania
To the Editor:
Several points in "The Last Domino" (Op-Ed, June 20) by Sali Berisha, chairman of the Democratic Party in Albania, need clarification.
For all the euphoria, the Communists in Albania have not been overthrown, their ranks decimated or their power diminished.
They are still in charge, entrenched in the bureaucracy, and have the powerful forces of the army and Sigurimi under their control.


Admiral Makes Navy History
The Navy put its newest warship into service today, the $864 million destroyer Arleigh Burke, and for the first time in Navy history the man for whom a ship was named was on hand to see her commissioned.
The 89-year-old retired admiral, who graduated from the Naval Academy in 1923, was a World War II battle hero who rose to Chief of Naval Operations under President Dwight D. Eisenhower.


Those Who Bicycle and Walk to Work Also Deserve a Subsidy
To the Editor:
I wholeheartedly agree with "A Screwy Subsidy for Drivers" (editorial, June 17), which points out the unfair tax breaks provided to people who drive to work over those who take public transportation.
However, those who bicycle or walk to their workplace are discriminated against even more severely.


Soviets Sign Economic Pact With Mexico


CHRONICLE
The former Costa Rican President and Nobel laureate OSCAR ARIAS SANCHEZ and the French medical aid organization, Doctors Without Borders, received this year's Philadelphia Liberty Medal.
DR.
RONY BRAUMAN, president of Doctors, accepted the medal.
The two shared the $100,000 award, underwritten by the Bell Atlantic Corporation and Pepper, Hamilton &amp; Scheetz, a law firm.
Mr.
Arias was cited as a peacemaker in Central America.
Doctors, an independent emergency medical aid organization, was honored for aiding refugees and civilian victims of the Persian Gulf War.


Chip Deal Ties I.B.M. To Siemens
In its second major alliance in two days, the International Business Machines Corporation said today that it had agreed with the German electronics giant Siemens A.G. to build a factory in France that will cost about $700 million and will produce the world's most advanced computer memory chips.
The deal is I.B.M.'s largest joint production agreement and provides a means of offsetting the immense costs of building a computer chip factory.
Because the agreement with Siemens allows for additional partners, I.B.M. officials and industry analysts said the venture could improve the technological capabilities of Europe's struggling chip manufacturers.
Alliance Already Made
On Wednesday, I.B.M. and Apple Computer Inc., formerly fierce rivals, announced a broad technology agreement for the development of both hardware and software.


On Stage, and Off
A Busy, Busy Man
There's just not enough Tommy Tune to go around.
A very successful revival of "Bye Bye Birdie" starring Mr.
Tune and Ann Reinking has been on tour since May, and every theater on the road circuit is eager to get in on a good thing.
But when The Washington Post ran an ad on June 16 announcing "Birdie" at the Kennedy Center in Washington for unspecified dates in December and January, things got a little out of hand.


Excerpts From Letter By Shevardnadze
Following are excerpts from Eduard A. Shevardnadze's letter of resignation from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, as distributed in English by the Interfax news agency.
In the letter, Mr.
Shevardnadze said he was resigning because of an investigation into his statements ordered by the Central Control Commission of the party:
My deep conviction is that my statements of the need to set up a party that would perform on a par with the C.P.S.U. give no legal or moral grounds for actions of this kind.


Markets Closed
Because of the Fourth of July holiday, financial markets in the United States were closed yesterday.
News of foreign markets appears on page D4.


CHRONICLE
TOM SELLECK filed a $20-million libel suit in Los Angeles on Wednesday against the supermarket tabloid, The Globe.
His name appeared under a story headlined, " 'Gay' Stars Stop Traffic." The story, in the July 2 issue, lists several celebrities whose pictures were posted around New York City carrying the banner, "Absolutely Queer."


Ethnic Plan For a School Seen Fading
Nearly six months after a proposal was made for the creation of an experimental high school focused on the problems of young black and Hispanic men, prospects for the controversial plan appear dim.
Advocates of the school, to be called the Ujamaa Institute, have envisaged it as a collaborative venture run jointly by the New York City Board of Education and the City University of New York.


U.N. Unit, Back From Iraq, Says It Was Denied Inspection Access
Senior United Nations experts met with Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar today to report on their failure to gain access to Iraqi nuclear equipment.
The team members played down difficulties encountered during their three-day visit to Iraq and said United Nations inspection of Iraqi atomic installations and equipment would continue.


At the Movies
Rudin's Long Agenda
"I work very long hours," said Scott Rudin.
He must.


China Wins a Bigger Say in Hong Kong
Britain and China announced a breakthrough today in their bitter 18-month dispute over the future of Hong Kong, agreeing that the colony can build an expensive new airport, but on the condition that China will gain even more influence over Hong Kong's affairs.
It was an ambiguous resolution at best to the highly emotional airport battle, which was seen by each side as a test of the other's good faith and by some as a sign of China's impatience for control over the prosperous capitalist enclave.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Four Share Lead Ray Floyd missed only two greens and did not make a bogey in a six-under-par 66 that gave him a share of the first-round lead in the Western Open in Lemont, Ill.
He was joined in the top spot by left-hander Russ Cochran, Mark Lye and Mike Sullivan, who birdied all the par-5 holes on the Dubsdread course at Cog Hill.


Political Memo; Cuomo's Tax Shift Reflects Fiscal Squeeze
As a leader whose power flows from his mastery of words, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is often careful to leave himself plenty of linguistic wiggle room.
Rather than making a Shermanesque statement of disinterest in the Presidency, for instance, Mr.
Cuomo prefers to say that he has "no plans and no plans to make plans" to run.
The implicit suggestion, of course, is that plans can change.


Twins Pull a Substitute Ace From Sleeve as West Beats Jays
David West, just off the disabled list, gave up only two hits in seven innings today as the Minnesota Twins beat Toronto, 1-0, and ended the Blue Jays' winning streak at five games.
Steve Bedrosian pitched the eighth inning and Rick Aguilera got the last three outs for his 21st save, preserving the Twins' ninth shutout of the season.


Wendy Weitman, A Curator, Weds
Wendy Sheryl Weitman and Jed Walter Brickner were married yesterday at the Mark Hotel in New York by Jean Kotkin, a leader of the New York Ethical Culture Society.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Weitman.
The bridegroom is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip Brickner of Riverdale, the Bronx.


Connecticut Adrift
Connecticut has no budget for the fiscal year that began Monday -- and, alas, no leadership.
Gov.
Lowell Weicker and the Legislature's Democrats and Republicans are in a three-way standoff, mainly over adopting an income tax.
It is time to end the brinksmanship.
The Legislature, under Democratic control, has passed two no-income-tax budgets in recent days.
Mr.
Weicker, an independent, wants an income tax and vetoed both.
The House then passed a budget with an income tax, but Senate supporters couldn't muster a majority.
The key holdout is the Democratic leader, Senator John Larson, who aspires to be governor himself someday.


On My Mind; Suicide on the Fourth
For those Americans who share a certain specific vision of their country and countrymen, this Fourth of July must have been a wonderful day, rich in confirmation of their beliefs and hopes for the future.
All American bigots and racists, all who detest blacks, despise aliens, loathe Jews, all who preach their passionate vision of separateness -- "America is ours alone; all others are corrupting strangers" -- were entitled to hug themselves with delight.


Tests Speed Effectiveness of Biological Pesticide
In what is described as an important step toward controlling crop-destroying insects without chemical pesticides, scientists have successfully used genetic engineering to hasten the work of biological pest controls.
In two separate experiments, researchers say they removed toxin-producing genes from mites and scorpions and inserted them in viruses that kill insect pests.
The toxins paralyzed the insects and prevented them from eating vegetation for much of the time it took the slowly working viruses to kill the pests.
Ordinarily, the insects would go on eating crops until they died.
But because they were immobilized, plant damage in one experiment was half what it would otherwise have been.


Corrections
Because of another editing error, an article on the problems yesterday referred incorrectly to the company that makes the malfunctioning equipment.
It is the DSC Communications Corporation of Plano, Tex.


Have Some Complaints? Just Call These Homes
Two advertising agencies are asking consumers to make house calls on their clients.
"Here are the directions to our C.E.O.'s house," reads the headline in an advertisement for Giant Carpet Stores of America of Moonachie, N.J.
The ad, which includes a map, tells customers to pay the chief executive a visit at home if they have complaints with Giant that go unsatisfied after a visit to a store.
The ad, created by Buckley DeCerchio Cavalier, New York, has appeared in several newspapers, including The New York Times.


Flags and Barbecues: Two Sure Signs of the Fourth of July


Romania's Dirty Secrets
Romania once had a flourishing community of 750,000 Jews.
Only 18,000 remain.
Hundreds of thousands were slaughtered during World War II; others fled Communist rule afterward.
For nearly 50 years, Communist governments concealed the horrifying facts about Romanian complicity in Nazi massacres.
Yet even now, as the truth struggles to the surface, those who speak it are vilified and Romania's ex-Communist leaders seem immobilized, even as a gutter press spews new hatred against all minorities -- Jews, ethnic Hungarians and gypsies.
In what should have been a redemptive gesture, Romania dedicated a memorial in Bucharest this week to the 400,000 Jews who fell victim to "German, Romanian and Hungarian Fascists." Sadly, this was followed by the ugly taunting of Elie Wiesel, a Nobel laureate who survived the pogroms in Transylvania.
And it was preceded by the Romanian Parliament's rehabilitation of Ion Antonescu, ally of the Nazis, who initiated the mass killings.


An Old-Fashioned Day of Patriotism
President Bush wanted the day to be a special celebration for the Persian Gulf troops.
It was to be a day filled with the "good, old-fashioned kind of patriotism," with teen-age drum majorettes and middle-age Shriners, with flag-bedecked babies and yellow-beribboned grandmothers, with horses and cows and antique cars and red wagons, with unicycling clowns and hoop-jumping dogs and beauty queens in convertibles and Rotary Club members atop lawn mowers.
President and Mrs.
Bush got all that and more today, as they attended two Middle Western Fourth of July parades.


Let Frenchmen Be Ashamed of Ogling
To the Editor:
"On Ogling Women" (editorial, June 24) would maintain the sanctity of the female sex by censoring whistles, whoops and hollers at women passing construction sites.
I can see condemning whistles and hollers, but stares and smiles too?
Apparently, you permit only looks in your authorized list of facial or auditory expressions, and not too friendly or appreciative looks at that.


How to Give a Party While Still in Custody
The 21st annual Fourth of July party for neighbors of the Bergin Hunt and Fish Social Club in Ozone Park, Queens, was held on schedule yesterday but the host was detained and could not make an appearance.
John Gotti, reputed to be the head of the Gambino organized-crime family, who has given the party each year, is in Federal custody in the Metropolitan Correctional Center in Manhattan awaiting trial on racketeering charges.


Stephen Raushenbush Dies at 95; Had Key Role in War on U-Boats
Stephen Raushenbush, who played a role in defeating the German U-boat campaign in the Atlantic during World War II, died yesterday at his home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 95 years old.
He died of natural causes, said his daughter, Stephanie.


18-Shot Killing Is Ruled by Jury As Self-Defense
All 18 bullets that a Chinatown businessman fired into a reputed gang member were fired in self-defense, jurors said yesterday after acquitting him of all charges.
The businessman, David Tse, had been found not guilty of murder on Wednesday, and yesterday he was cleared of attempted murder.


The Spoken Word
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"American Life in American Art," by Amy Winter.
Tomorrow and Sunday at 2 and 3:30 P.M.; Free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for the elderly; free for students with valid ID).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
"Looking at Modern Art: Photography," by Vivien Knussi, today at noon; "The Surrealist Drawing," by Sylvia Milgram, today at 1 P.M.; "Mean Streets," by Ms.
Knussi, today at 3 P.M.; "Henri Matisse," by Barbara Larson, tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "Ad Reinhardt," by Ms.
Larson, tomorrow at 3 P.M.; "The Sculpture Garden," by Gail Stavitsky, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "Seven Master Printmakers," by Ms.
Stavitsky, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free under age 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.


76ers Eye Shackleford
The Philadelphia 76ers have a $1.6 million spot open on their roster and they are looking to fill it with a much-needed center.
It could be 6-foot-10-inch CHARLES SHACKLEFORD , the former Net whose stock went up after he led his team, Phonola Caserta, to the championship of the Italian Professional League this past season.
The 76ers, who made room on their roster by releasing RICK MAHORN , have two problems: the Detroit Pistons and the Los Angeles Lakers, who are also pursuing Shackleford.


For Children
Iris and B. Gerald Cantor  Roof Garden Metropolitan Museum of Art Fifth Avenue at 82d Street Manhattan (212) 570-3932 Recommended for all ages Open through Oct. 27
If you're at the Metropolitan Museum and the weather is behaving itself, head up to the roof garden, which is reached by two elevators in the museum's southwest corner, near the Lila Acheson Wallace Wing.
Regrets about not having dragged the family to the beach will dissipate; although there are lots of bronzed bodies on the sand, there won't be any shaped by the inimitable talent of Rodin.
There are nine Rodins on this sunny deck, which is paved with granite and shaded by a lightly stained wood pergola.
What really stands out, though, are the solemn "Burghers of Calais," one of Rodin's famous monuments.
In 1347 the Burghers offered themselves as hostages to England's King Edward III after Calais had been besieged for almost a year, and their near-martyrdom is eerily apparent in their sackcloth robes and drawn faces as they carry the city's keys to the king. (They were eventually freed at the request of the king's wife, Queen Philippa.)


France Spurns Iranians Over Uranium Request
France has rejected an Iranian demand to obtain enriched uranium as part of a final settlement in a financial dispute between the two countries.
The dispute dates from 1979 when France suspended its nuclear cooperation with Iran under Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi.


Irving Barshop; Administrator, 76
Irving Barshop, an administrator for an agency of Jewish Philanthropies, died yesterday at Montefiore Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Barshop died of colon cancer, a spokesman for the family said.
From 1955 to 1978, when he retired, he was assistant director of the Federation Employment and Guidance Service, a division of the Federation of Jewish Philanthropies.
He was in charge of directing the organization's workshops for the handicapped.


A personal List Of Places That Cool
SUMMER afternoon.
Henry James was said to have called those two words the most beautiful in the English language.


Among Baseball's Ball Girls, Fielding Skills Take 2d Place
What Mets player has a .250 fielding average? (No, not the catcher Mackey Sasser.) As in all good sports trivia the answer is a trick one: the ball girl.
Which raises another question that has puzzled many a baseball fan, "Why can't the ball girls throw or catch?"
"We miss more than we catch," Cindy Polacek, 21 years old, a Mets ball girl from Flushing, Queens, cheerfully admitted.
Her close friend and colleague Mindy Feuerstein, 21, of East Northport, L.I., agreed.
"I'd say we miss about 75 percent."


California Tax Plan Loses, Returning State to Turmoil
California was thrown back into fiscal turmoil today after the Legislature failed to approve more taxes to balance the state budget in a chaotic session that ended minutes before a Wednesday midnight deadline.
But unlike Connecticut and Maine, California faces no immediate shutdown of services.
A spokesman for Gov.
Pete Wilson said the state had enough cash reserves to carry it until about July 15, the next payday for state employees.


After Tark the Tuna Come the Real Sharks
THIS is about Tark the Tuna.
"When he first got here he would tell people, 'Oh, this is such a great university.' He would embarrass me," said Dr.
Lois Tarkanian, the coach's wife.
"Even now he says it, and I say, 'Jerry, this is not a great university.' But that's all just a detail to him; in his heart he thought it was great. He wasn't going to analyze the courses or the majors or the degrees. And so what's happening now, it must hurt."


Peru Blames Guerrillas For at Least 14 Deaths
Maoist guerrillas of the Shining Path movement killed at least 14 people in the Andes in the last week, the police reported today.
Most recently, rebels on Monday killed six people traveling in a jeep belonging to an agrarian development project financed by the Canadian Government.
The attack occurred north of Lake Titicaca, 595 miles southeast of Lima.


Arrest in Denver Bank Killings
A retired police sergeant was arrested on Wednesday in the slayings of four unarmed security guards during a bank robbery in which an estimated $100,000 was taken.
The man, James William King, a 54-year-old part-time security guard at the bank until last fall, was arrested at his home near Golden, Police Chief Ari Zavaras said.
Today, Mr.
King was ordered held without bond.


Review/Film; 'Slacker,' a Collection Of Eccentrics and Lunacies
"Slacker" was shown as part of the recent New Directors/New Films Series.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 22, 1991.
The film opens today at the Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets.
The place is Austin, Tex. The time, morning, afternoon, night and morning again.


Martinezes Rescue Expos From Bog
The two Martinezes, Dennis and Dave, stopped Montreal's 11-game slide, the longest in the majors this season, as the Expos beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 4-3, tonight.
The Expos had lost eight in a row to Pittsburgh.
They won for only the second time in their last 14 games and the ninth time in 41 games against National League East teams.
The Pirates are 30-12 against the East.


Romanian Opposition Plans a Political Party
Romania's opposition Civic Alliance movement began a three-day congress today at which it will turn itself into a political party to challenge the governing National Salvation Front in the next elections.
"The Civic Alliance must have its own members of Parliament to take part in Romania's most important decisions," a co-leader of the group, Stelian Tanase, told the conference here.


Transportation on the High Road
"We have poured enough concrete," says Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
The New York Democrat deserves much credit for the innovative transportation bill the Senate adopted last month by a resounding 91 to 8.
After 35 years of focusing Federal aid on interstate highways, the Senate offers clear and welcome new directions.
President Bush calls the bill too costly, which it may be, and he still clings to old priorities; he advocates more for highways and less for mass transit.
The House hasn't acted yet, but seems to be headed along the Senate's sensible course -- except for a not-so-sensible hike in the gas tax.


Fleet/Norstar
The Fleet/Norstar Financial Group said it had reached an agreeement with the Justice Department to divest itself of six bank branches in Maine.
Four of the six were acquired in the company's takeover of the Maine National Bank unit of the Bank of New England Corporation in April.
The others are owned by the Fleet National Bank of Maine.


German Trade Outlook for '91
An influential German trade group has predicted that the nation's trade surplus, one of the main engines of the economic growth of the 1980's, would be cut in half in 1991.
The German Federation of Chambers of Commerce also said this week that Germany's current-account balance of payments would be roughly in balance after swinging into a deficit at the start of the year.


Man and Human in the Dawn of the West
To the Editor:
In "Etymology Favors 'Humankind' as Nonsexist" (letter, June 22), Louis Jay Herman is right in saying that in classical Latin "homo" most often means human being, but he is wrong in saying that the word acquired its masculine sense only later, in the Romance language derivatives.
The second, male meaning of homo came both before and after the classical period, and it was probably colloquial throughout, as shown by its use in a play by Plautus.


Guidepost; Sauce It, Then Sear It
With barbecue season here, it's time to think marinades.
With the right ones, you can play culinary geography.
Generally, two tablespoons of marinade are enough to coat, but not soak, a pound of food.
The liquid ingredients form the basis; add one or more seasonings to suit your own taste.
Marinating times differ: most fish needs half an hour to an hour at most; chicken calls for 1 to 2 hours, and meats, 1 to 24 hours.
Refrigerate any food that must be marinated for more than an hour, turning it at least once in the marinade.
A marinade must be boiled before it is re-used as sauce, to destroy any harmful bacteria.
These marinades can be used on meat, fish or poultry.
Italian Extra-virgin olive oil and balsamic or red-wine vinegar, plus garlic, salt, pepper, fresh rosemary and basil.
Optional: sun-dried tomatoes; olive paste.
Chinese Sesame oil, soy sauce and rice vinegar, plus grated ginger and garlic.
Optional: five-spice powder; hoisin sauce; hot chili oil; orange juice.
Indian Plain yogurt and lemon or lime juice, plus ground cumin or curry powder and minced fresh coriander.
Optional: grated ginger; fresh mint.
Greek Extra-virgin olive oil, red wine and lemon juice, plus garlic, thyme, oregano, mint and black pepper.
Optional: anchovy paste.
Thai Soy sauce, smooth peanut butter, sesame oil and rice vinegar, plus basil and chili peppers.
Optional: fermented fish sauce.
Southwestern Olive oil and lime juice, plus cumin and chili powder.
Optional: tomato paste; fresh coriander.


Nintendo Loses Court Case On Video-Game Enhancer
In a decision that could mark the first break in Nintendo's lock on the market for games and accessories associated with the company's video-game system, a Federal district judge here has ruled that an accessory made by another company does not infringe Nintendo's copyrights.
Nintendo said it would appeal the decision.
Lewis Galoob Toys Inc. said today that it had been told by Judge Fern Smith that the court had ruled in favor of Galoob in a copyright-infringement case brought by Nintendo of America Inc. regarding the Galoob product Game Genie.
A written decision will be issued late next week.


Reversal of Form: Gooden Finds Groove, Yanks Lose It
Just yesterday, the Yankees were the hottest team in the American League, taking confident aim at the Toronto Blue Jays.
After last night's 7-4 loss to Baltimore, they are a fourth-place team that has dropped two of its last eight games and owns a one-man crisis in its starting rotation.
Right-hander Tim Leary struggled again last night, was knocked around by Baltimore for five runs in four and a third innings, got jeered with gusto by the fans at Yankee Stadium, and could be demoted to the bullpen.


Bulgaria Says Pope May Visit
Bulgaria's Foreign Minister renewed an invitation today for Pope John Paul II to visit his country and said the pope was considering the trip.
The Foreign Minister, Viktor Vulkov, said Bulgaria would cooperate with continuing inquiries into the 1981 shooting of the pope.


Bridge
A twitch in time, it might be said, saves contracts.
A fractional hesitation by an opponent -- unlike those of one's partner -- is a legitimate source of information.
An example is the diagramed deal played at the St.
James Club in London.
The South cards were held by Derek Rimington, who has long been one of the leading British player-writers.
West twitched fractionally before passing the opening bid of one spade, and South placed him with values close to an opening bid.
The opening diamond lead was ruffed, and a low club was led.
West took his club king and persevered with diamonds.
South ruffed again, crossed to the club queen, and led a heart to the queen.
He was not surprised when this lost to the king.


M.T.A. Seeking Conductor Cuts For Some Lines
To save money, New York City subway officials want to dispense with conductors on some shuttle lines and operate them with just motormen.
Union officials say the move will jeopardize passenger safety and eliminate hundreds of jobs.
The issue arose last month in contract negotiations, when the Transit Authority proposed the "one person" shuttle operation for off-peak hours.
The officials said one-person operations in other cities like London, Rome, San Francisco and Philadelphia did not hav problems.


Carol Fox, Accountant, Marries in New Jersey
Carol Imelda Fox, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Fox of Milltown, N.J., was married there yesterday to Steven Charles Olson, a son of Harold J. Olson of Whiting, N.J., and Ruth Olson of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
David J. Pekola performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 30 years old, is a certified public accountant at Deloitte &amp; Touche in Parsippany, N.J.
She is a cum laude graduate of Boston College.
Her father, who is retired, was the assistant manager of production for The New York Times in Carlstadt, N.J.


FUGITIVE LEADER OF CULT ARRESTED
A cult leader who has been missing for more than two years after being charged with child abuse was arrested here today without incident on a variety of Federal charges, the United States Marshals Service said.
Tony Fernando Alamo, the 56-year-old leader of the Tony and Susan Alamo Christian Foundation, was tracked to a Tampa house after the authorities said they received tips prompted by coverage of his case on crime re-enactment television shows and news programs.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 6


Deutsche Bank Ousts Official
The Deutsche Bank A.G. today formally dismissed an official implicated in an insider-trading affair on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, but it denied that other officers were also involved.
The bank said the official, Manfred Mertens, its chief equity warrants dealer, had now been officially dismissed.
He was suspended last Monday when disclosures of the affair were made.


Miss Tanner Wed to Grant Greely
Mary Laura Tanner, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Mitchell M. Tanner of Newton, Mass., was married last evening at the Houghton Memorial Chapel at Wellesley College in Wellesley, Mass., to Grant Ives Greely, a son of Mary Ives Greely of Edgartown, Mass., and the late Rev.
John Alexander Greely.
The Rev.
Stephen V. Smith, an Episcopal minister, and the Rev.
John P. Culloty, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 29 years old, is an associate at the Boston law firm of Peabody &amp; Brown.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley and received a master's degree in French literature from Harvard University and a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is a retired dentist.


Warnings Reportedly Given
Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm that produced the report that led to the closing of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International group yesterday, had been passing on information about the problems at the bank for some time, according to two people familiar with the investigation who asked not to be identified.
But it was not until earlier this year that the Bank of England was satisfied that it had the evidence it needed to go ahead with a more detailed investigation under the country's banking law.
It is that investigation, which was also done by Price Waterhouse, that led to yesterday's closing of the two main components of the bank, with headquarters in Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands.


Brain-Damaged Woman at Center Of Lawsuit Over Life-Support Dies
A severely brain-damaged woman whose husband won a court order earlier this week to keep her on a respirator died Thursday night of natural causes, the hospital where she was being treated said today.
The woman, Helga Wanglie, 86 years old, had been in a vegetative state since May 1990, when a respiratory attack cut off oxygen to her brain.
The hospital, Hennepin County Medical Center, said the primary cause of death was multiple organ failure caused by infection, which was aggravated by earlier brain injury.


Prelude to Acceptance
South Africa has formed a unified, nonracial sports body that is virtually certain to win acceptance into international track and field competition next month, according to PRIMO NEBIOLO, the president of the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
He said in Rome yesterday that the new South African organization "is now in condition to ask this body to be reaccepted as normal members with 184 other countries."
The new group will be called the South African Amateur Athletics Association.
Previously, there were three separate amateur athletic bodies.
The I.A.A.F has linked South Africa's readmission to abolishing apartheid and creating a unified, nonracial national athletics governing body.


BLACKS IN DECLINE IN NORTHERN CITIES
Blacks are moving away from metropolitan areas in the industrial North and toward metropolitan areas of the South and West, census figures show.
The trend, which counters old migration patterns, was underscored by declines in the black populations of the Pittsburgh-Beaver Valley area, by 1.5 percent, and in the Chicago-Gary-Lake County area, by 0.6 percent.
Those were among many northern cities that were magnets for blacks escaping poverty and racial discrimination in the South in the 1950's and 1960's.


Fireworks Believed Cause of Blaze That Kills Three
A smoldering fire apparently caused by firecrackers killed three people in their Brooklyn home early yesterday morning after what fire officials described as one of the most raucous and dangerous Fourth of July's in memory.
The man, 57-year-old John Antonelli, his wife, Marie, 56, and his mother, Mary, 88, died as they tried to escape what neighbors said was a burst of flames.
Their normally quiet block in the Bay Ridge section had been the scene of illegal fireworks explosions all day, set off by neighbors and their guests.


About New York
So here we are mired in a recession at a time when doomsayers see the lights dimming on the Great White Way, and we run across an absolute novice -- a waiter, in fact -- starting his own theater company and being the producer of an avant-garde Russian drama.
All on the strength of little more than a nice smile and a Visa card in the name of Keith Gilroy.


Reaction From the Fed
The shutdown of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International yesterday set off a wave of closings around the world but the effect in the United States is not expected to be significant.
The Federal Reserve Board in Washington said the closing would not affect two banks in the United States that B.C.C.I. had controlling interests in: First American Bankshares, the largest bank holding company in Washington, and Independence Bank of Encino, Calif.
The Fed issued a statement that transactions between the American banks and B.C.C.I. had been suspended several months ago.
In addition, the two banks are separately capitalized and federally insured.


Tourist in Car Killed as She Chances Upon Chinatown Gunfight
It was a reunion that drew Rhona Lantin to the New York area, a chance to mix with old high school friends from the Philippines, trade memories, catch up on too many years apart.
It was also a chance to see the town, take in the theater, watch the fireworks explode over New York Harbor on a warm, beautiful night -- the best kind of things the area has to offer.
But a bullet ended that.
It just happened.
At 11:30 P.M.
Thursday, as Ms.
Lantin and friends were driving north on a Chinatown street, headed for a late-night snack after the mammoth fireworks display, members of a notorious Chinatown gang, the Ghost Shadows, began to fight, the police say.


Dean Apologizes for Plagiarizing Part of Boston U. Commencement Speech
The dean of Boston University's College of Communication has privately apologized to a PBS film critic for plagiarizing portions of an article by the critic in a commencement address in May.
But the dean, H. Joachim Maitre, has made no public statement about the incident, and it appears to be causing growing embarrassment for both Mr.
Maitre and Boston University.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page Monday about SVP, a French information and research company, omitted one of the two founders of the company's American affiliate, Find/ SVP Inc.
Kathleen S. Bingham, the affiliate's executive vice president, founded the company in 1969 with Andrew P. Garvin, its president.


Lebanese Army Finishes P.L.O. Ouster
Government troops took over the last positions held by Palestine Liberation Organization guerrillas near Sidon in southern Lebanon today, a day after the Palestinians agreed to give up those bases.
The army set up checkpoints near two big refugee districts in the area, about 25 miles south of the capital, where the Palestinians have relocated after abandoning their strongholds.


Zoos Face a Big Job in Preserving Species; Outlaw Rodeo Cruelty
To the Editor:
Surely, there are better ways than staging rodeos to "show black influence in winning the West." Your June 8 photo of the Black World Championship Rodeo performance in Battery Park City shows the bucking strap cinched around the horse's tender abdominal area.
That, and perhaps other common rodeo pre-performance abuses, like use of electric prods, is what is making him buck.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Norman Leads by 2


7 NATIONS CHARGE 'FRAUD' AND SEIZE A BANKING EMPIRE
Financial regulators in seven countries today seized control of a private banking empire rooted in the Middle East whose network operates in 69 countries and owns two American banks, including a large institution in Washington.
The seizure of Bank of Credit and Commerce International, whose assets of $20 billion were regulated chiefly here and in Europe, came today after what the Bank of England described as widespread fraud over a period of years.
"It is large, it is extensive and it's probably been going on for some time," Robin Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England, said when asked about the dimensions of the activities.


U.S. Agrees to Protect Minerals in Antarctic
The United States will end its isolated opposition to an international treaty imposing a 50-year ban on mineral exploitation of Antarctica, President Bush has announced.
Environmental advocates praised the Administration's decision to sign a protocol protecting the Antarctic environment, which had been approved by 38 other nations.
The action appears to have ended an increasingly heated confrontation between the White House, on the one hand, and Congressional leaders, pro-environment groups and foreign governments, on the other.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Regan Calls Fiscal Maneuver 'Laundering'
New York State Comptroller Edward V. Regan criticized Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Legislature today for using what he called "a sophisticated, albeit presumably legal, money laundering scheme" to help balance the state budget.
Mr.
Regan said the decision to have the state Thruway Authority sell $80 million in maintenance bonds and then give the money to the state for its own highway work was "the worst fiscal gimmick ever in this state."


INSIDE
Tourist Killed in Chinatown A 26-year-old Maryland woman who came to the New York area for a high school reunion was shot and killed while driving in Chinatown.
She was apparently caught in the crossfire of a Chinatown gang.
Page 23.


Woman Is Killed in Explosion Of Homemade Noisemaker
A woman was killed on Thursday by the explosion of a homemade pipe bomb that was intended as a Fourth of July noisemaker, the police said today.
The woman, Kim Murray, 29 years old, was struck by shrapnel at her house about 8:45 P.M., the authorities said.
She died at the scene.


Review/Opera; Amato Nods at Summer With 'Finta Giardiniera'
The brave little Amato Opera Theater, which has been mounting works grand as well as small with slender resources since 1948, has set itself another significant challenge: its first summer season.
The series, which will include a program of zarzuelas and Latin songs (July 13 and 14) and the premiere of Martin Kalmanoff's "Empty Bottle" (July 19 to 28), began on June 28 with a production of Mozart's early "Finta Giardiniera" (1775), celebrating the bicentenary of the composer's death in the company's typically enterprising fashion.
Not that "La Finta Giardiniera" ("The Phony Gardener") is a rarity hereabouts just now.
Earlier this year the Indiana University School of Music staged the work in the Juilliard Theater as part of the Mozart Bicentennial at Lincoln Center, and early last year the Theatre Royal de la Monnaie of Brussels brought its acclaimed production to the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Still, this is relatively fresh material of a kind that benefits from the Amato's intimate yet exuberant style.


George Bosque, 36; Stole $1.85 Million
George Bosque, a Brink's guard who took $1.85 million from an armored truck in 1980 and went on a nationwide spending spree, was found dead Monday, possibly from a drug overdose, the authorities said.
He was 36 years old.
White powder and narcotics paraphernalia were in Mr.
Bosque's apartment, where the body was found, Deputy Coroner Don Easterling said.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, has appointed 13 senior vice presidents.
They are David Adamson, European foreign exchange; Richard C. Aspinwall, economics group; Maria Beechey, merchant banking; Deborah L. Duncan, Western Hemisphere treasury; John J. Farrel, corporate operations and systems human resources; Richard C. Lowry, Continental Europe and trade and senior Chase officer for France, and Kathleen E. Marshall, structured finance.
Also appointed were Alexander Mintcheff, global bullion and commodity swaps; William J. Moran, deputy general auditor; Brian D. O'Neill, Brazil corporate finance; William E. Rosner, Europe human resources manager; Dominick J. Trapani, corporate and institutional services, and Georges Vergnion, Europe-Middle East private banking international. *
Corning Inc., Corning, N.Y., the glassmaker, named Peter Booth senior vice president of strategy and development and James M. Ramich president of its Corning Japan K.K. unit.


Patents; Camera Can Capture All Sides of a Scene
Imagine trying to take a panoramic picture from inside the Grand Canyon.
Most cameras, no matter how good or how wide their lenses, cannot capture more than one side of the scene at a time.
Now, a news photographer for The Los Angeles Times has patented a portable and comparatively inexpensive camera that spins around on its handle and shoots a scene from all sides in one long exposure.


Gisela Warburg Wyzanski; Leader in Zionist Activities, 79
Gisela Warburg Wyzanski, a leader in Zionist women's and youth activities for several decades, died yesterday at her home in Cambridge, Mass.
She was 79 years old.
She died of leukemia, her famlly said.


Frank H. Ilchuk, 83; Directed Folk Chorus
Frank H. Ilchuk, a choral conductor and music educator, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his wife, Grace Cohen Ilchuk, said.


Stake for KLM
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines said the European Commission had approved its taking a majority stake in Transavia Airlines, the national carrier.
KLM will have to give up its automatic right to several routes over three years and accept more competition in its charter operations, an official of the commission, the executive body of the 12-nation community, said.
KLM announced last month that it planned to double its stake in Transavia by buying Koninklijke Nedlloyd Groep N.V.'s remaining 40 percent stake in the airline.
The other 20 percent of Transavia's shares are owned by three Dutch financial institutions.


Bayside Auction for AIDS
Antiques, photography, designer fashions and celebrity collectibles will be offered for sale tomorrow in an auction at Bellport, L.I., organized by Stopping AIDS Altogether, a volunteer group that raises money for AIDS research and care.
The Sunday by the Bay sale will take place from 11:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. at Grey Dunes, 5 Cedar Bluff Road.
Among the offerings are works by Roy Lichtenstein, Robert Mapplethorpe, Annie Leibovitz, Andy Warhol and Cecil Beaton as well as a pair of Muhammad Ali's boxing gloves and one of Lou Reed's guitars.
A luncheon buffet, drinks and entertainment are included in the $75 admission ($125 for two).
Information: (516) 286-1020.


Ernest S. Meyers, 81, Counsel for R.I.A.A.
Ernest S. Meyers, general counsel of the Recording Industry Association of America, Inc. for more than 30 years, died on Thursday at the United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 81 years old and lived in Scarsdale.
Mr.
Meyers died of complications resulting from a stroke, a spokesman for the family said.


Bernard Waley-Cohen, Ex-London Mayor, 77
Sir Bernard Waley-Cohen, a businessman who assisted the development of modern Israel and served a term as Lord Mayor of London, died on Wednesday.
He was 77 years old.
He died at his home in the Somerset village of Simonsbath.
The family did not release the cause of death.


Almost 60 Trains Delayed
Almost 60 trains carrying 20,000 New Jersey commuters and 6,000 intercity passengers on the Amtrak Northeast Corridor Line ran into delays of up to two and a half hours yesterday after a locomotive caught on fire at 8 A.M. in Glendale, Md., and a passing train tore down power lines about 9 A.M. near New Brunswick, N.J.
The causes were being investigated, said spokesmen for Amtrak and N.J.
Transit, which uses the line in New Jersey.
The incidents appeared to be unrelated accidents.


Conflict in Yugoslavia; National Rivalries Cloud Dream of Yugoslav Unity
The Yugoslav national anthem begins with the plea "Listen, Slavs!" and ends with a curse on "the traitor to his land."
It is a song born of the pan-Slavic spirit of the last century and captures an intrinsic component of the idea of Yugoslavia: that Slavs, specifically southern Slavs like the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes that predominate in Yugoslavia, have a common cause and belong together.


Traffic Alert
U.S.O.
Street Fair: Seventh Avenue will be closed tomorrow from 34th to 42d Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Sports of The Times; How to Run With Bulls In Pamplona
He teaches American literature at Manhattan Community College and he's a co-owner of the River Run cafe in the TriBeCa area.
But for the 25th consecutive year, Joe Distler, a curly-haired 48-year-old bachelor, is an American in Pamplona, running with the bulls at the Fiesta di San Fermin, which begins tomorrow in the northern Spanish town.
No, not running with the Chicago Bulls on a basketball court.
Running alongside the real horns and real hooves of real bulls hurrying along narrow cobblestone streets to the Pamplona bullring.


Man and Human in the Dawn of the West
To the Editor:
Louis Jay Herman's defense of "humankind" as nonsexist (letter, June 22) calls for some comment.


Suspension Update
A two- or three-game suspension of University of Arkansas center OLIVER MILLER will begin with the Razorbacks' exhibition games, not the regular season, Coach NOLAN RICHARDSON said yesterday.
That means Miller could play in the Maui Classic in Hawaii on Nov. 25, when the Razorbacks open their regular season.
Arkansas has traditionally played a pair of exhibition games before beginning regular-season play, although no exhibition contests are on the schedule.
Richardson suspended Miller this week because of a recent dispute between Miller and another Arkansas student. (AP)


Corrections
An entry in the Financial Briefs listing in Business Day on Wednesday misstated the insurance status of the $28.5 million general-obligation bond issue by Morris County, N.J.
The issue, which is triple-A rated, is not insured.


FEMINISTS OPPOSE NOMINEE TO COURT
While black civil rights leaders debate whether to oppose the nomination of a conservative black appellate court judge to the Supreme Court, the nation's leading women's rights organization left no doubt of its position yesterday.
The group, the National Organization for Women, vowed an all-out effort to "stop the confirmation of Clarence Thomas and any other nominee who does not stand for the protection of the full Bill of Rights for women and for everyone else in this country."


Janet Kendall Is a Bride
Janet Louise Kendall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Kendall Jr. of Gladwyne, Pa., was married yesterday in Gladwyne to Joseph Jeffrey Lankin, the son of Eleanor Lankin of Hartford and the late Dr.
Joseph J. Lankin.
The Rev.
M.
Dean Evans performed the ceremony at St.
Christopher's Episcopal Church.
The bride, 29 years old, is an account manager with the Aetna Life Insurance Company in Parsippany, N.J.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
The bridegroom, 32, is a manager of quality assurance for CUNO Inc., a water purification company in Meriden, Conn.
He graduated from Drew University.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6
A private banking empire was seized by financial regulators in seven countries.
The Bank of Credit and Commerce, based in the Middle East with branches in 69 countries, is accused of widespread fraud.
Page 1


Unequal Burden New: York's Property Tax; Hodgepodge of Home Valuations Produces Disproportionate Taxes
A decadelong effort to improve New York City's notoriously inaccurate and unfair property-tax system has failed, largely because the city's assessors are not accurately measuring the market value of houses, a study by The New York Times shows.
The city's tax assessors make significant errors in estimating the value of nearly half the one- , two- and three-family houses in New York, the study found.
Those errors have undercut the city's attempt to correct a property-tax system that has historically imposed the heaviest burden on those least able to pay.


Rivals Chase LeMond Even Before Tour Starts
Steven Rooks knows what the critics are saying about Greg LeMond, shaking their heads in dismay as they point out his lack of victories this season.
"Not a very good year for Greg," Rooks judged in a major understatement about a rider who is 0 for '91.
Nevertheless, Rooks didn't hesitate when asked to choose a favorite for the Tour de France bicycle race, which begins here Saturday.


B.C.C.I.: Big Money and Mysteries
When financial regulators in Britain, the United States and five other nations swooped down on the Bank of Credit and Commerce International yesterday, they caught themselves a very big bank, but one largely unfamiliar to much of the banking world and to the public.
Its interests in 69 countries and assets of about $20 billion make it a large bank, though not one in the industry's top tier.
It would rank about 33d in the United States if all of its assets were based in this country.


Reversal of Form: Gooden Finds Groove, Yanks Lose It
If there no longer can be nonstop greatness, there can still be nights of grandeur, occasions when the fastball crashes with majesty and the curveball bends wildly as it nears the plate and breaks the will of the batters standing there.
Tonight was one of those nights, an evening when Dwight Gooden, a picture to pity for most of the last six weeks, was again a sight to behold.


Businessland Suitor Halted
Businessland Inc.'s bondholders have rejected a takeover offer from JWP Inc. possibly jeopardizing the acquisition.
JWP, a provider of utility services as well as a seller of computers, said it had extended its tender offer for Businessland, the struggling computer retailer, until the close of business next Friday.
The original deadline was on Wednesday.
When the $54 million takeover was announced a month ago, JWP, based in Purchase, N.Y., said the deal was contingent upon the tendering of 51 percent of the stock and 75 percent of the convertible subordinated debentures tendered.
While more than 51 percent of the stock has been tendered, only $4 million of the $44 million in debentures had been tendered by Wednesday.
A Businessland spokesman said JWP retained the option of increasing its offer or of trying to proceed with the merger.
He said JWP could not have completed the merger this week anyway because it was still waiting for an updated estimate of Businessland's net worth.


Pickens Drops Japan Suit
T.
Boone Pickens has withdrawn a lawsuit against the Koito Manufacturing Company that had contended that the Japanese maker of auto parts maintained an illegal business relationship with the Toyota Motor Corporation, a spokesman for the Texas oilman said today.
The decision was made when Mr.
Pickens said in April that he would sell his 26.4 percent stake in Koito and abandon his two-year fight for a seat on the company's board, said the spokesman, who asked not to be named.
Last month, Mr.
Pickens sold his stake to Kitaro Watanabe, the Japanese stock speculator from whom he bought the shares in 1989.


Import Quota Raised in Effort to Cut Peanut Price
Parents of children who are fond of peanut butter and jelly sandwiches received a little help with their grocery bills this afternoon when President Bush authorized a large increase in this year's peanut import quota.
Until now, makers of peanut products had been limited to importing 1.7 million pounds of peanuts in the 12-month period ending on July 31 - just seven peanuts for each American man, woman and child.
President Bush today raised that limit to 100 million pounds.


Blue Cross Offer To Great Republic
Blue Cross of California said it was negotiating to offer health insurance to 25,000 policyholders of the Great Republic Insurance Company, the troubled insurer that was seized by state regulators this week.
The California Insurance Commissioner, John Garamendi, said he was trying to place Great Republic's 6,800 life insurance policies with those of another insurer.
The health insurance policyholders of Great Republic, whose assets exceeded its liabilities by $454,000 when it was seized this week, will continue to receive full benefits and payments.
Life insurance policies will continue to pay full death benefits.


Workers Protesting Budget Delays Rally in Pennsylvania and Maine
Angered by the failure of state leaders to adopt budgets on time, workers in Pennsylvania and Maine held rallies at their state capitols yesterday to demand quick action.
In Pennsylvania, where workers did not receive their regular paychecks yesterday, more than 100 protesters stood on the stairway of the Capitol rotunda holding union banners, chanting "Paycheck! Paycheck!" and waving signs.


Beliefs
Imagine that a liberal Protestant denomination rewrote the Apostles' Creed, the ancient affirmation of basic Christian doctrines.
That sounds like a premise for a comedy routine, something "Saturday Night Live" might have a good time with.
There have long been jokes about upbeat preachers who substitute the Ten Suggestions for the Ten Commandments.
The theologian H. Richard Niebuhr once summed up liberal Christianity in similar fashion: "A God without wrath brought men without sin into a kingdom without judgment through the ministrations of a Christ without a cross."


To Curb China's Arms Trade
Despite pledges to curb sales of advanced arms, China now confirms it has begun delivering new missiles to Pakistan.
And it's about to ship others to Syria.
Understandably, the news fuels Congressional fervor to deny China trade privileges.
A Democratic-sponsored bill would cancel China's most-favored-nation trade status for making such sales.
But economic sanctions have failed to restrain Chinese arms merchants in the past.
A new strategy combining carrot and stick might be worth a try -- provided the Bush Administration is willing to curb its own arms sales.


Jessica Bard Married to Leslie D. Corwin
Jessica Ellen Bard, the daughter of Ida Mirsky of Deerfield Beach, Fla., and the late Lewis Mirsky, was married yesterday to Leslie David Corwin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin R. Corwin of Sands Point, L.I.
Rabbi Martin Rozenberg performed the ceremony at the home of the couple in Chappaqua, N.Y.
The bride, 42 years old, teaches in the Chappaqua public schools.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree in special education from Hunter College.


John M. Astrachan; Physician, 62
Dr.
John M. Astrachan, who had practices in obstetrics and gynecology and in psychiatry for many years, died in his sleep on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old.
He apparently died of a heart attack, his family said.


Drug Maker Assails an Article Critical of a Sedative's Safety
The Swiss drug concern F. Hoffmann-La Roche today rejected as false a report in The New York Times suggesting that a concentrated sedative marketed by the company is dangerous.
Hoffmann-La Roche accused the newspaper of spreading "incorrect allegations" about the sedative Versed in an article on Thursday.


Opera Arias in Free Series
Opera Mondays, an eight-week series of free lunchtime concerts presented by the New York City Opera, will begin Monday at the Austin J. Tobin Plaza of the World Trade Center.
The concerts will start at 12:15 P.M. and will be repeated at 1:15.
The opening program will be excerpts from Verdi's "Traviata," sung by Sheryl Woods and Martin Thompson.
Joan Gibbons and Michael Reese, Martha Thigpen and Antonio Barasorda, and Michaele Boucher and Robert Brubaker are some of the other singers scheduled.
The opera series is part of the center's Stars Under the Sun series, which offers free noontime entertainment on weekdays during the summer.


CHRONICLE
Following such artists as ANTONIO TAPIES and EDUARDO CHILLIDA, ESTEBAN VINCENTE received a Gold Medal for the Fine Arts from JUAN CARLOS, King of Spain, in a ceremony at the Prado on Wednesday.
Born in the province of Segovia, Mr.
Vincente, 88 years old, lives in New York and East Hampton, L.I., where he paints, and tends his garden.
A street and a square will be named for him in Spain, and he will design a garden for it.
"Always my mother had flowers, so in her memory I want to have a combination of her flowers," Mr.
Vincente said before he left for Spain.
"A combination of reddish blue, violet with very big leaves -- hydrangeas."


Doro Levi; Archeologist, 93
Doro Levi, an archeologist who worked with the United States in World War II to save Italian monuments from Allied bombardment, died here on Wednesday, his family announced today.
He was 93 years old and died of old age, the family said.
Mr.
Levi was born in Trieste and studied at the University of Florence and the Italian School of Archeology in Athens, of which he was director from 1947 to 1977.
From 1938 to 1945, Mr.
Levi was a member of the Institute for Advanced Studies in Princeton, N.J.


Justin McCarthy, 72, Businessman on L.I.
Justin V. McCarthy, a former Long Island businessman who was active in Brookhaven and Islip Townships, died on Wednesday at his home in Stuart, Fla.
He was 72 years old.
Mr. McCarthy died of cancer, his son, Christopher, said.


United Purchases Air Europe Assets
Air Europe Ltd., the defunct European carrier, said it had sold aircraft parts and engines to United Airlines, a unit of the UAL Corporation, for $34.5 million.
The court-appointed administrators for the defunct carrier, Tim Hayward and Phil Wallace of KPMG Peat Marwick McLintock in London, said the sale price was in line ith expectations.
The sale was part of an effort to raise another $:4.36 million, or about $7 million, by selling the remaining parts, they said.
Air Europe's total debts are estimated at $:370 million, or about $592 million, the administrators said.
So far, $:32 million, or about $51.2 million, of the debt had been sold.
The carrier, which had been Britain's second-largest after British Airways P.L.C., is part of the International Leisure Group P.L.C., which collapsed in March after being badly hurt by the Persian Gulf war's effect on tourism.


Patents; Hair Products Said To Guard Against Sun
Frances C. Gaskin, a clinical nurse who is now an entrepreneur, has patented an array of shampoos and hair conditioners that she said offered better protection from the sun's ultraviolet rays than existing products.
The key ingredient is melanin, the brownish-black pigment found in skin.
Ms.
Gaskin, who has previously patented melanin-based skin lotions, said melanin acts as a moisturizer that keeps both skin and hair from becoming bleached, dried and brittle.
The key to the new formulation is a method for dissolving synthetic melanin, which typically exists in granular form, so it can be put into hair products.
To break down the granules, Ms.
Gaskin developed a method using enzymes.


New Owner Replaces President of Dansk
By James E. Solomon has been appointed president of Dansk International Designs Ltd., which manufactures china, crystal, silverware and cutlery and was recently acquired by the Brown-Forman Corporation, where Mr.
Solomon is an executive.
In acquiring Dansk and its subsidiary Gorham Inc., which Mr.
Solomon will also oversee, Brown-Forman expanded the share of the market for fine china, crystal and silver it already held as parent of Lenox Inc.
Brown-Forman, a diversified consumer goods company, may be better known for getting Jack Daniels whisky and Korbel champagne on the table than elegant plates and goblets.


Lucien Kirsch Laporte; Cellist, 91
Lucien Kirsch Laporte, a Belgian-born cellist, died on Thursday at his home on Lopez Island in Puget Sound, Wash.
He was 91 years old.
He died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Corn and Soybeans Plunge; Weekend Rain Is Forecast
Prices of corn and soybean futures ended sharply lower yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after forecasts called for mostly wet weather in key growing regions.
Prices of wheat futures also plummeted.
Wheat futures settled 1 1/2 cents to 3 1/2 cents lower, with July delivery at $2.61 1/4 a bushel; corn was 2 1/2 cents to 5 cents lower, with the July contract at $2.31 a bushel; oats were 1/2 cent lower to 3/4 cent higher, with July at $1.11 3/4 a bushel, and soybeans were 3 1/4 cents to 7 3/4 cents lower, with July at $5.30 a bushel.
Trading remained relatively light as many investors took an extended holiday weekend.


Art Thefts Soar in Eastern Europe
The opening of Eastern Europe's borders after the collapse of Communism has produced an abrupt and alarming rise in the theft of artworks from the region.
In part, the looting is the work of local residents who sell the booty to bolster flagging incomes.
But the greater part appears to be the work of organized gangs who exploit recently liberalized travel regulations and loose security.


Bertelsmann Seeks Pohl
Bertelsmann A. G., the large media group, said it had offered Karl Otto Pohl, the outgoing president of the Bundesbank, a seat on its supervisory board.
Mr.
Pohl will not make his reponse public until he leaves the German central bank at the end of the month, Bertelsmann said.


A Test at B.B.B: Pay to Inquire, Pay to Complain
Looking for consumer advice that's free?
Well, starting Wednesday, don't call the Better Business Bureau of Metropolitan New York for it.
In a six-month experiment, the bureau is dropping its free inquiry service in favor of a "900" telephone number that will cost callers 85 cents a minute to ask for advice or make a complaint.
Should the experiment succeed in New York -- and later in other test areas -- all 180 local bureaus nationwide may start using "900" numbers as early as next summer, said Diane Ward, a spokeswoman for the National Council of Better Business Bureaus in Arlington, Va.


Phone Routing Failure Is Duplicated in a Lab
A small telephone equipment maker said yesterday that laboratory experiments had duplicated the kind of breakdown in its call routing software that has disrupted service around the country in recent days.
The company, the DSC Communications Corporation of Plano, Tex., said in a statement released after the stock market closed that investigators from the company as well as from the telephone industry were continuing in their efforts to analyze the problem.


Jobless Rate Up But Pay Is, Too, In Mixed Report
More signs of an incipient economic recovery emerged today even as the Government's first comprehensive report for June showed a decline in business payrolls and a rise of one-tenth of a point in the unemployment rate, to 7 percent.
The latest data, although mixed, sent a shudder through the bond market, pushing up interest rates as traders contemplated, among other things, a six-tenths of 1 percent increase in average hourly earnings that hinted at a stepped-up pace of inflation.  [ Page 33. ]


'Gold' Cards May Be Fool's Gold
The Federal Trade Commission is warning consumers about offers of gold or platinum credit cards from marketers not affiliated with major credit-card companies.
The agency also warns consumers about inflated promises of improved credit ratings associated with such cards.
While the gold or platinum cards may seem like general-purpose credit cards, they generally permit consumers to buy merchandise only from certain catalogues, the commission said.
And getting such a card rarely improves a customer's credit rating, the F.T.C. said, despite pitches to the contrary.
The commission advises consumers to be wary.


State Prime Minister Ousted in Pakistan In Election Dispute
The Prime Minister of Pakistan's semiautonomous Kashmir state, Mumtaz Hussain Rathore, was dismissed today, and the Government announced his arrest.
The central Government's Kashmir Affairs Minister, Mehtab Ahmed Khan, said Mr.
Rathore had been detained after a dispute over elections held last weekend for the state legislature.


Ray of Hope for Homeless Penetrates Meager Walls of Miami Shantytown
From the elevated expressways that lace this city, Miami seems all glitter.
But below the main ramp that leads downtown lies a shadowy shantytown, swirling with smoke and mosquitoes, where people like Andrew Johnson struggle to live in a city that has long refused to care adequately for its homeless.
"We're just trying to survive," said Mr.
Johnson, who calls himself A.J. and has initialled gold caps on his front teeth to prove it.
He said he got the teeth when times were good and when, as a Coast Guard veteran and long-haul truck driver, he was doing all right.


Zoos Face a Big Job in Preserving Species; Audubon's Global View
To the Editor:
In response to "Audubon Society Pursues an Identity Beyond Birds" (front page, June 9):


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Financial regulators in seven countries seized control of a private banking empire rooted in the Middle East whose network includes 69 countries and two American banks.
The seizure of Bank of Credit and Commerce Group, whose $20 billion in assets were regulated chiefly in Europe, came after what the Bank of England described as "widespread fraud" over a period of years.
None of the alleged fraud affects the American banks controlled by B.C.C.I.  [ Page 1. ]  When the financial regulators swooped down on the B.C.C.I., they caught a very big bank, but one largely unfamiliar to much of the banking world and its public.  [ 33. ]
The Economy


Mirrored Silhouette


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about expected earnings at the Security Pacific Corporation misstated Wells Fargo &amp; Company's estimate of second-quarter earnings.
Wells said that although it will increase loan-loss reserves substantially, it will show a profit of about $15 million for the quarter, not a loss.


SOME LEGISLATORS TO REMAIN IN BONN
The upper house of Germany's Parliament voted today to stay in Bonn despite the decision last month to move the lower house and most Government agencies to Berlin.
Bonn's Mayor, Hans Daniels, welcomed the 38-to-30 vote as "a sign of hope at a grave time for Bonn." But the legislators in the house, the less powerful of the Parliament's two chambers, also voted to reconsider its decision "in later years," meaning that it might ultimately move to Berlin after all.


De Havilland Cuts
The Boeing Company's de Havilland division, which is for sale, will lay off 350 of its 4,800 workers, a spokesman said.
More jobs will be cut in the near future, he said.
A European consortium wants to buy the Toronto-based division, which makes commuter planes, but last month the Canadian Government said Aerospatiale S.A. and Alenia S.p.A. were asking for too much Government investment in the deal.
"Initial notifications will go to 350 production employees over the next couple of weeks," said John Davy, a spokesman for de Havilland.
"Subsequently we will be looking throughout the company to reduce areas indirectly related to production."


Shift at Curtiss-Wright
The Curtiss-Wright Corporation said that Charles E. Ehlinger had resigned as president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Ehlinger, who is 62 years old, retired after 35 years with the Lyndhurst, N.J., manufacturing company.
His responsibilities have been assumed by Shirley D. Brinsfield, 67, the chairman and chief executive.
Neither Mr.
Ehlinger nor Mr.
Brinsfield was available for comment yesterday.
Mr.
Ehlinger had held many jobs at Curtiss-Wright, starting in its flight-systems division and serving in various executive vice president positions.
He became president in March 1990 after the death of T. Roland Berner, the chairman and chief executive whom Mr.
Brinsfield replaced.
Curtiss-Wright makes precision components and systems for the aerospace, industrial, flow-control and marine markets.


CHRONICLE
PRINCE CHARLES is playing polo again after being sidelined last month on his doctor's orders.
The Prince, 42 years old, was forced to take a break from polo after a degenerated spinal disk was diagnosed.
His team, Windsor Park, won his comeback match 14-10 Thursday at Smith's Lawn in Windsor Park, with the Prince scoring a goal.
Between chukkers, he lay on the field and rocked back and forth to stretch his back.


Creating the Well-Groomed Child
Clear a shelf in the bathroom -- Junior now has his own shampoo, after-bath splash and mouthwash, not to mention deodorant.
Once upon a time, the entire family shared a bottle of shampoo, brushed their teeth with the same toothpaste and argued over whofailed to replace the sliver of communal soap with a new bar.


Review/Dance; A Debut in Bolshoi's 'Mlada'
With its confused stage direction by Boris Pokrovsky and humdrum choreography by Andrei Petrov, the Bolshoi Opera production of Rimsky-Korsakov's "Mlada" turns a stirring musical legend into an elaborate mess.
Therefore, for a dance lover, Monday night's performance at the Metropolitan Opera House was interesting primarily for the New York debut of Svetlana Slavnaya as Mlada, a dancing ghost.
Although her skimming steps were beautiful and her extensions were high, this 1989 graduate of the Bolshoi Ballet School was especially notable for her elfin quality.
It would be fascinating to see her as one of the ethereal heroines of 19th-century Romantic ballet.


Admiral Makes Navy History
The Navy put its newest warship into service today, the $864 million destroyer Arleigh Burke, and for the first time in Navy history the man for whom a ship was named was on hand to see her commissioned.
The 89-year-old retired admiral, who graduated from the Naval Academy in 1923, was a World War II battle hero who rose to Chief of Naval Operations under President Dwight D. Eisenhower.


Patents; Anger Over Fee Rise
Independent inventors are irked by Bush Administration proposals to nearly double fees at the Patent and Trademark Office.
Individuals, small businesses and nonprofit organizations now pay fees only half as large as those for large companies.
The new proposal would eliminate that subsidy for issuance fees and maintenance fees over the life of the patent to keep it in force.
According to Intellectual Property Owners Inc., a trade association for inventors, fees for an individual inventor would surge to $6,365 from $3,340.
House and Senate subcommittees overseeing the Patent Office are expected to develop their own recommendations soon.


U.N. Skeptical of Iraq's Promise to Inspectors
President Saddam Hussein assured the United Nations in a letter today that he would comply with all the demands of inspection teams seeking to account for Iraq's nuclear-weapons potential.
But members of the Security Council, meeting to consider the letter and the report of a United Nations delegation that has just returned from Iraq, said they were not convinced of the Iraqi leader's sincerity.


Judge Authorizes All-Female 'Godot'
A judge ruled today that Samuel Beckett's play "Waiting for Godot" may be performed by a female cast, but said a letter of objection from the late playwright's representative must be read before each show.
Jerome Lindon, who is designated under French law to protect the integrity of Beckett's works, had tried to block the production of "Waiting for Godot" by the Brut de Beton theater company at the prestigious Avignon Festival.


MODERATES CHOSEN BY APARTHEID FOES
The African National Congress underscored its commitment to negotiations with the Government today by electing a new senior leadership that includes four elders with relatively moderate views and a dynamic young labor leader respected for his negotiating skills.
As expected, Nelson Mandela was elected unopposed as president, succeeding Oliver Tambo, who stepped into a newly created post as national chairman.


The Mail Goes Through, But a Thief Can't Get at It
Home mailboxes made of heavy metal with built-in locks are growing in popularity, in many cases in response to concern about theft, particularly among the elderly.
The letter carrier delivers the mail through an opening in the upper section of these boxes, known among their manufacturers as "security" mailboxes.


Corrections
An article yesterday and a short article on Tuesday, both about the New York State Legislature, misstated the sales tax rate for Westchester County.
The rate currently is 5 3/4 percent; the Legislature on Thursday authorized an increase to 6 3/4 percent.


Amid Chinatown's Bustle, Just a Hint of Fear
Chinatown needs tourists and tourists need Chinatown and yesterday the killing of a visitor from Maryland had not left much of a visible impression on the narrow streets that swell daily with shopkeepers and their customers.
On the surface, at least, everyone seemed unfazed.
Many shop owners and restaurateurs along Mulberry and Bayard Streets said they were too afraid to talk about the gangs and, in particular, discuss the Ghost Shadows, who dominate that section of the neighborhood and are believed to be responsible for the shooting.
But they acknowledged that violent gangs had become a part of daily life.


CHRONICLE
The world's two leading tenors will bring their talents to London this month.
PLACIDO DOMINGO celebrates the 20th anniversary of his debut with the Royal Opera in three performances, starting today, at Covent Garden.
Protests arose after the company announced that tickets for his "Tosca" performance would not be available.
Seats for two dates were taken by members and sponsors of the Royal Opera House Trust; one performance is a royal gala with seats costing up to $560.


GORBACHEV IS TOLD BY KOHL TO OFFER PROOF OF REFORMS
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany urged President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today to provide concrete assurances of political and economic reform when he approaches Western leaders for assistance later this month.
The Soviet President, for his part, pointed to the strife in Yugoslavia "as a lesson and a warning" that his commitment to a united and renewed Soviet Union was the only path.
Serving up a graphic illustration of the problem facing Mr.
Gorbachev, groups of Ukrainian nationalists waved protest banners at the airport and in Kiev, capital of the Soviet Ukraine.


M. Jay Meckler Dies; Ex-Prosecutor Was 86
M.
Jay Meckler, a retired lawyer who was active in government service in Brooklyn, died on Monday at his daughter's home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 86 years old and lived in Long Beach, L.I.
Mr. Meckler died of cancer, said his son-in-law, Jeffrey Harris.


Conflict in Yugoslavia; Quiet War Spills Blood Inside Croatian Borders
The shops are locked, the streets deserted.
At the hospital, nearly all the doctors and nurses have fled.
The police station, the bus station and even the museum commemorating a World War II massacre are pocked with bullet holes, the aftermath of a shootout last week that left two local policemen and two civilians dead.
While international attention has focused on the fighting in Slovenia, towns like this one in Croatia are the front lines for a less-publicized but increasingly lethal battle between the Croats and the Serbian minority within the republic's borders.


Strong Quake Kills 21 On Indonesian Islands
A strong earthquake struck at least two southeastern Indonesian islands on Thursday night, killing at least 21 people and injuring 135, an official said today.
The quake, measuring 6.2 on the Richter scale, shook the town of Kalabahi on Alor Island 1,200 miles east of Jakarta, said Supriyono, an official of the Meteorology and Geophysics Agency.


Observer; Lonely By the Campfire
Reader, I am talking with maybe unbecoming intimacy, this being the Fourth of July weekend.
In the newspaper business it is widely feared that almost nobody reads the paper on a Fourth of July weekend.
So I am talking the way I would if just the two of us were here.
Which is probable if you haven't already screamed "Enough!" and thrown your paper on the blazing Yule log.
Yes, yes, I know it isn't the Yule log that blazes on the Fourth of July; it's the sun.
But if everybody else is at the beach why be bound by dull conventions?


W.T.A. Sends a Sherlock To Resolve Seles Mystery
Jerry Smith, executive director of the Women's Tennis Association, plans to meet with Monica Seles in Florida early next week with the hope of resolving the mystery of Seles's withdrawal from Wimbledon three days before the start of the tournament.
In a telephone interview yesterday from London, Smith said the depth of his investigation into Seles's explanation that she suffered unspecified injuries in a minor accident "will depend on my conversation with Monica."


Patents; Birth Control Vaccine Seen For Animals
Contraceptives for cats?
Zonagen Inc., a small biotechnology company outside Houston, has patented what it contends is a permanent vaccine against pregnancy that can replace surgical sterilization in dogs, cats and even rabbits.
The purpose of the vaccine is to give pet owners a way to neuter their animals without resorting to the expensive, painful and sometimes dangerous process of removing reproductive organs.
According to the company, 12 million animals undergo surgical spaying each year at a total cost of $600 million.
The cost of the vaccine, Zonagen said, cannot yet be determined.


Free Speech in Vermont
To the Editor:
Free speech did indeed win out at Bennington College, as Elizabeth Coleman, its president, says (letter, June 25).
But she accuses me of a "rush to judge" whether it would in my June 15 Op-Ed article.


Riley on Ewing
How does PAT RILEY, the Knicks' new coach, view PATRICK EWING's attempt to become a free agent?
"Having been an ex-player and active in the Players Association, I absolutely believe a player should have the right to take care of his business when his time has come," Riley said yesterday from his home in Brentwood, Calif.
"That's what the settlement of the OSCAR ROBERTSON antitrust suit was all about.


Four Frames on America
To mark the Fourth of July weekend, the Op-Ed page asked several photographers to comment on the state of the nation by selecting one of their recent images and explaining its relevance.
The backgrounds of the photographers are diverse.
Donna Ferrato, who reported on the roles of female soldiers in the Persian Gulf war for Life magazine, has completed a book on violence against women by their mates.
Pedro Meyer, a Mexican, is depicting the culture and customs of the United States.
Duane Michals, who used models in his photograph, is known for his conceptual photo and text works.
Eli Reed is documenting a personal journey through black America. -- Fred Ritchin, author and photography editor


Public &amp; Private; No Bright Lines
From time to time a person comes along who represents an issue in a way that makes the issue loom large and feel personal.
Kimberly Bergalis has become such a person.
Ms.
Bergalis, who is 23, was infected with the AIDS virus by her dentist, in what has turned out to be a worst-case scenario; there have been reports that he worked without gloves, re-used equipment and kept quiet about his condition so he would not jeopardize the sale of his practice.
Frail, beautiful and bitter, Ms.
Bergalis's slow dying and her railing against it -- "You ruined my life and my family's," she wrote in a recriminatory letter to health officials -- has inspired public discussion about the risks and obligations of health service providers with the disease.


Quotation of the Day
"It is large, it is extensive and it's probably been going on for some time." -- Robin Leigh-Pemberton, Governor of the Bank of England, outlining fraud charges against the Bank of Credit and Commerce Group.  [ 1:6. ]


Stocks Mixed In Slow Day; Dow Off 2.23
Wall Street mostly took a holiday yesterday.
Stocks turned mixed and activity sank to the lowest level of the year as hundreds of traders stayed home for a long Fourth of July weekend.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell to 2,932.47, off 2.23 for the day but ahead 25.72 for the week.


Conflict in Yugoslavia; For a Price, Slovenes Are Offered Control Of All Border Posts
In an effort to bring about a full cease-fire, Yugoslavia's central Government said today that the breakaway republic of Slovenia could control the border posts that it set up after declaring independence last week, but only if Slovenia agreed to turn over customs revenues to the federal Government.
The offer was conveyed to the Slovenian leadership by Yugoslavia's collective presidency, which includes representatives of the nation's six republics and two autonomous provinces.
It is aimed at preventing new outbursts of the fighting that began last week when the army sent tanks to Slovenia to regain control of the republic's frontiers.


The Marlins? The Rockies? Get Used to It. It's Official.
The road that began six years, three commissioners and three league presidents ago finally reached Denver and Miami yesterday as the 26 major league club owners unanimously approved the cities as sites for the National League's 13th and 14th franchises.
Denver club officials, with league president Bill White in attendance, immediately identified their new team as the Colorado Rockies.
It's not an original name -- the New Jersey Devils had it when that National Hockey League franchise was in Denver -- but it's a popular one in the Rocky Mountains area.


Why a Council Member Refuses Public Money
To the Editor:
I object to your listing me on your dishonor roll of the New York City Council in "Strong City Council, Strong Smell" (editorial, June 2) because I refused to accept money from the Campaign Finance Board to run for office.
I refused to enroll and apply for city funds because:


Casinos, in Financial Straits, Testing 24-Hour Gambling
The casinos like to maintain an air of timelessness on their playing floors, so there are no clocks to intrude on a player's dreams.
Tony DeBaro did not notice that it was 2 minutes after 4 o'clock in the morning when he slid a $5 token into a slot machine and 52 just like it cascaded out.
It was a nice payback, $260, but Mr.
DeBaro, a truck mechanic from Edison who had already traded several thousand dollars back and forth over the course of a nine-hour stint at the Trump Castle casino hotel, did not regard it as exactly a historic event.


Federal Express in Pact To Buy Jets From Airbus
The Federal Express Corporation announced today that it would buy up to 75 wide-body cargo jets from Europe's Airbus Industrie consortium in a deal that could be worth as much as $6 billion.
The package-delivery company said the new planes, to be delivered at a rate of six per year, will have 40 percent greater capacity than the current Boeing 727s that dominate its 416-plane fleet.


Ms. Scott Weds Robert L. Lichter
Diane Scott, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Willard J. Scott of Baltimore, was married yesterday in Gustrow, Germany, to Dr.
Robert Louis Lichter, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Lichter of Newton, Mass.
The Rev.
Folker Hachtmann, a Lutheran minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at Gustrow Castle.
The bride, 34 years old, is to become the managing editor of the medical journal Cancer in September.
The journal is published by the American Cancer Society.
Ms.
Scott, a graduate of the University of Maryland, was a senior associate editor at the American Chemical Society in Washington.
Her father, who is retired, was an energy conservation engineer for the Baltimore Housing Authority.


Jobless Rate Down in Japan
Japan's unemployment rate fell slightly in May, but economists said signs existed that a chronic labor shortage was easing.
Japan's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 2 percent in May, matching the 10- year low recorded in January and February, the Government's Management and Coordination Agency said last week.


Trying to Undo the Glut On Mediterranean Coast
Along these Mediterranean shores, beauty and mild weather once drew royalty and inspired Goethe and F. Scott Fitzgerald.
That was a time when the blue and green vistas were rarely interrupted, and traveling here meant getting away from it all.
But as Europeans begin their annual summer trek to the seaside, with campers and supply trucks jostling for position and drowning out the seagulls, it is clear that Europe's growing prosperity has left a costly imprint.


Bond Prices Depressed By Job Data
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds plunged and interest rates soared yesterday as the fixed-income market reacted negatively to indications of growing economic strength in an otherwise mixed Government report on employment in June.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond fell more than three-quarters of a point, or close to $8 per $1,000 face value, pushing its yield up to almost 8.5 percent.


Boy Killed in Subway Fall
A boy was killed last night when he fell to the tracks of the Lexington Avenue subway line as he rode between cars, the transit police reported.
The boy, whose name was not immediately released but who was believed to be about 12 years old, was with three companions on a No. 4 express going north between the 116th and 125th Street stations at about 6:45 P.M. when he fell between the cars.
The three companions got off at 125th Street and rode a local back to 116th Street, looking in vain for their friend.
They then called the police, who found the boy lying between the tracks and the third rail, his right foot severed.
He was pronounced dead at the scene.


In Hartford, Incumbents Ponder Fates Amid Crisis
As the impasse over whether to impose an income tax dragged on today, Connecticut legislators had plenty of time to consider another big question: are they all doomed next year at the polls, or might the voters accept just a few sacrificial victims?
"All incumbents are damaged," said Richard Foley Jr., the state Republican Party chairman, who is also a state representative from the town of Oxford.
"No one can come out a winner -- it's a lose-lose situation all around," said Representative Jonathan Pelto, a Democrat from Storrs, who is also state political director of the Democratic party.


Investments In Mexico
German companies have pledged to invest about $3 billion in Mexico, primarily in the auto, petrochemicals and tourism industries, the Mexican Government said this week.
The office of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari said the investments were a direct result of the Mexican leader's tour of Europe, which includes a visit to Germany this week.


Editorial Notebook; Left, Right and Wrong
Communists have long called themselves the left and derided their opponents as reactionaries on the right.
But in the Soviet Union today, radical reformers resign from the Communist Party while party hacks throw up roadblocks to reform.
Just who's left on the left? Who's wrong on the right? Who are the true progressives?


Six Flags' Accord With Main Lender
The Six Flags Corporation said a loan arrangement with its primary lender, the Security Pacific National Bank, would make it less likely to seek bankruptcy court protection.
Under the pact, Six Flags has 18 months to raise more capital; in return, the company will pay a higher interest rate, $1 million in additional fees and follow an accelerated payment schedule.
The financing plan requires approval from nine other members of the company's banking group, which is scheduled to meet on July 15.
Six Flags, a unit of S.F.
Holdings, has $217 million in bank loans and $300 million in "junk bonds." It told the Securities and Exchange Commission in April that it might seek protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
The company lost $25.3 million last year on revenues of $431 million.


Europe Inquiry on Dumping
The European Community's executive body said today that it would investigate accusations that Far Eastern nations are dumping floppy disks and compact disk players on markets in the 12-nation community.
The inquiry will center on imports of 3.5-inch floppy computer disks from Japan, China and Taiwan, as well as on compact disk players from Japan and South Korea, the community's European Commission said.


Raymond E. Blust; Monsignor, 80
Msgr.
Raymond E. Blust, who taught at Cardinal Hayes High School in the Bronx for 30 years and who later was pastor of St.
Joseph's Church in Wurtsboro, N.Y., died on Monday at the Pope John Paul II residence for priests in Manhattan, where he lived.
He was 80 years old.
Monsignor Blust was trained for the priesthood at St.
Joseph's Seminary in Yonkers and spent his career in the New York archdiocese.
He retired in 1982.
There are no immediate survivors.


Stich and Becker Make It an All-German Final
They used their serves like daggers, trampled the dying grass on Wimbledon's Centre Court into a matted mess, and performed a duel under the scorching sun that required no fewer than three sudden-death tie breakers.
When it was over, unheralded Michael Stich of Germany had forcibly ejected defending champion Stefan Edberg from contention for a third title here and in the process had stripped him of his No. 1 world ranking.
The 22-year-old Stich, who has 84 aces so far in the tournament, including 8 today, clung to Edberg with the tenacity of a terrier to a pantleg, and his perseverance gained him a 4-6, 7-6, 7-6, 7-6 victory.


Savings Bank Chairman Hands Over Chief's Post
William F. Sinclair, the chairman of the Washington Federal Savings Bank, said yesterday that he had given up the post of chief executive to allow him to concentrate on drumming up much-needed capital for the Washington-based bank.
Mr.
Sinclair, 45, ceded the chief's position to Carroll E. Amos, 44, who had been the senior executive vice president and chief financial officer of the bank.
Mr.
Amos also becomes vice chairman.


BRIEFS
*
Bank of America, San Francisco, a unit of BankAmerica Corp., said it had purchased the assets and assumed certain liabilities of Securities, Annuities, and Insurance Services Inc., a unit of GNA Securities.
Terms were not disclosed. *
British Airways P.L.C. said it would offer American business travelers a reduced round-trip Concorde fare of $6,999 for travel to Heathrow Airport in London from both New York and Washington this month and next.


Waterloo Festival '91
A performance of Aaron Copland's "Lincoln Portrait" with the actor James Earl Jones narrating will open the 16th season of the Waterloo Music Festival at 8:30 tonight at Waterloo Village in Stanhope, N.J.
The concert, which will be conducted by Gerard Schwarz, will include the Liszt Concerto No. 1, with Sergei Edelmann as soloist.
Tickets are $20 for tent seats and $15 for general admission ($17 and $12.75 respectively for students and the elderly).
The performance is dedicated to the memory of Aaron Copland, who died in December at the age of 90.
Information: (201) 347-4700.


Survey of Teachers Bodes Ill for the Fall Term
In an informal survey of its members, the National Education Association has found that the number of teachers laid off rose in a majority of states in last year and that threatened cutbacks in health care benefits were termed one of the toughest bargaining issues facing teachers.
Highlights of the union's survey, conducted in the last two weeks of June, were made public today by the association's executive director, Don Cameron.


Delta Seeking Part of Pan Am
Delta Air Lines Inc. said yesterday that it had made a specific offer for parts of Pan American World Airways Inc., offering to buy a package including the Northeast shuttle, the carrier's trans-Atlantic routes and 45 planes.
Delta, one of the nation's strongest airlines, did not place a value on the offer but said it represented about a fifth of Pan Am's route system.
The deal could also preserve jobs for up to 6,000 Pan Am workers.


4 Children Shot and Hurt in 4 Hours Over Holiday
Four children were wounded by bullets in New York City in less than four hours on the Fourth of July, the police said.
Three of the children were struck by stray gunfire -- two while watching firework displays -- and the fourth was wounded when a gun in the hands of a friend accidentally discharged.


Videos That Can Help in the Hunt for a College
As prospective students get ready to visit college campuses, they and their parents often find that it can be an expensive and time-consuming process.
But an introduction to a college can be had for a fraction of the cost, courtesy of a videotape.
Some families use the tapes to weed out alternatives, choosing, say, five colleges to visit after viewing 10 videos.
Others, short of money or time, use them in place of campus visits.


Conflict in Yugoslavia; European Community Freezes Arms Sales and Aid
In a move to bolster its faltering mediation effort, the European Community today froze arms sales and financial aid to Yugoslavia and hinted at still stronger measures if the Yugoslav Army resumed its offensive against Slovenia and Croatia.
But the 12-nation community also agreed to dispatch three foreign ministers to Yugoslavia this weekend to help promote negotiations among the parties to the conflict.
It said it was responding to "a call for help" by Yugoslavia's Foreign Minister, Budimir Loncar.


Canada Jobless Rate Up
Canada's unemployment rate rose to 10.5 percent last month, as the number of full-time jobs dwindled, the Government said today.
The number of jobless rose by 40,000, to 1.4 million, Statistics Canada said.
The 10.5 percent unemployment rate is the same as in March.


Matsushita And Philips In Venture
Philips N.V. of the Netherlands, Europe's largest consumer electronics conglomerate, said today that it would join with Matsushita of Japan to introduce an audio cassette with the sound quality of a compact disk.
In a widely expected move, Philips said it would jointly license the technology for its digital compact cassette to record companies, blank-tape manufacturers and hardware makers with the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, the world's biggest consumer electronics company.


Review/Opera; New Cast As 'Mlada' Ends Run
By the Bolshoi Opera's final performance of Rimsky-Korsakov's "Mlada," on Tuesday evening at the Metropolitan Opera House, the cast had changed almost completely from the opening last week.
But the most crucial difference may have been in the pit: Aleksandr Lazarev, the Bolshoi's music director, had finally joined the tour in "Mlada" the evening before.
To a critic who had not heard the original "Mlada" but recalled all too well some distinctly inferior wind playing in the Bolshoi's "Yevgeny Onegin," the improvement was striking.
Rimsky, of course, was a master orchestrator, and the orchestra is to a considerable extent the star of this opera-ballet.
For the most part, the playing on Tuesday was magnificent.
The horns especially, who had struggled in "Onegin," handled the Wagnerian writing here with an aplomb this listener has yet to hear from the Metropolitan Opera's horns in comparable passages of "Das Rheingold."


Dollar Off in Quiet Trading After Unemployment Report
The dollar closed lower in quiet trading yesterday as dealers digested the latest Government report on jobs.
The Labor Department report showed unemployment in June climbing to 7.0 percent but also included indications of economic strength.
As such, it carried mixed implications for the dollar, and "after the numbers, the dollar was just sold out," said Joe Cambria, foreign exchange manager for Banque Paribas.


The Pianist Behind The Camera
While aspiring pianists vainly butt their heads against the walls of the artist management agencies along 57th Street, Christian Steiner has become a performer of notice by the most amiable and circuitous of routes: taking pictures.
He is the eminent photographer of musicians, a soft-spoken New Yorker whose depictions of Herbert von Karajan, Maria Callas, Birgit Nilsson, Mirella Freni and Placido Domingo have become powerful silent partners in the world of concerts and recordings.
At 5 P.M. on Sunday, however, Mr.
Steiner will accompany the soprano Jessye Norman in a recital at the Mount Lebanon Shaker Village, several hours north of New York City.
It is a benefit for a new summer series, the Tannery Pond Concerts.
With Christina Wirth and an active board, Mr.
Steiner plans the concerts, books the artists, designs the brochures and worries about new cushions to soften the stern Shaker benches on which his new clientele will sit.


Bird Ruins Vat of Toothpaste
A bird in the works ruined 180,000 pounds of toothpaste at Procter &amp; Gamble's Iowa City plant.
The remains of the bird were discovered last Friday in a vat of Gleem toothpaste when employees were doing a quality control check.
The system was flushed about 15 times to make sure all the feathers were gone.
Normal production has resumed.


Robert B. Fiske, 90, an Assistant At NATO and a Lawyer, Is Dead
Robert B. Fiske, a retired vice president of the American Cyanamid Company and a one-time assistant secretary general of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, died on Thursday in Essex, Conn.
He was 90 years old and had lived for many years in Lyme, Conn.
He died of respiratory failure while being taken from the Essex Meadows retirement home to a hospital, his family said.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.67
5.77
8.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.56
7.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.71
5.68
7.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.21
8.12
8.54
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.49
8.41
8.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.50
9.45
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.18
7.18
7.47
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Southeast Bank Shifts On U.S. Aid
The Southeast Banking Corporation said it had held talks with several parties about a merger or capital infusion that would include Federal assistance.
In a statement issued Wednesday, the ailing Miami-based bank also said it had reached an agreement that gives bank regulators tight control over significant spending or other transactions.


Sound Compromise on Public Toilets
Give Mayor Dinkins credit for down-to-earth statesmanship: only a few weeks ago, plans for a test of public toilets in New York City seemed mired in objections from groups representing the disabled.
A compromise approved by the Mayor now allows the project to advance.
There is universal agreement on the need.
European cities met the problem long ago with coin-operated sidewalk units connected to existing sewer mains.
A French company, JCDecaux , offered to provide such toilets for New York if the city would pay for installation.
JCDecaux would maintain the units and make money from 25-cent entrance fees and advertising posted on the walls.


St. John's Case Offers 2 Versions of Events
As she recalled it, the evening of March 1, 1990, a Thursday, began ordinarily enough: the St.
John's University student took target practice with another member of the school's rifle club and bantered with him and the coach about everything from the coach's shabby clothing to the other student's love life.
But when the evening ended about seven hours later, as the 22-year-old woman later testified, she had been "forced" to drink nearly three cups of a mixture of orange soda and vodka and had been disrobed, ogled, fondled, berated and sodomized by at least seven St.
John's students, including her acquaintance from the rifle club.
The debauchery began in a house near the Jamaica, Queens, campus; then she was transported, semi-conscious and disheveled, to a second house where a party was underway and the assault continued.


Robert U. Molloy, 89, Ex-Judge in New York
Robert U. Molloy, a former judge for the New York City Court of Special Sessions, died on Monday at a nursing home in Highland Ranch, Colo.
He was 89 years old and lived in Fort Lauderdale.
Fla.
Judge Molloy died of heart failure, a spokesman for the family said.


Officer Charged With Assault In Videotaped Texas Beating
A police officer who was videotaped while beating a handcuffed suspect was charged today with assault with a deadly weapon.
The officer, Edward James Parnell 3d, had been suspended from duty with pay after the beating on Wednesday.


Frictions Haunt Rights Hero of Past
He left his blood on the streets of Selma, Rock Hill and Montgomery for the landmark civil rights bills of the 1960's, and John Lewis believes the moral issues that resonated then must resonate again.
"It is a shame and a disgrace that, in 1991, we are still debating whether or not we should protect our fellow American citizens from discrimination," Mr.
Lewis, now a United States Representative from Atlanta, said last month as he called on the House to pass the latest civil rights bill.


2 Are Seized in Gandhi Case, Bringing Total Arrests to 10
Investigators into the assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi arrested two more Tamil militants today, an elderly man and a teen-age girl, the police said.
The arrests bring to 10 the number of suspects taken into custody in the suicide bombing attack that killed Mr.
Gandhi in May.
Three of the suspects are members of the Tamil ethnic group from Sri Lanka, and the rest are Indian Tamils.


Munsingwear in Chapter 11
Munsingwear Inc., a maker of men's and boys' clothing, has filed for creditor protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
Charles J. Campbell, the president, said the filing, made in Federal District Court here, was necessary to complete a corporate revamping.
He said an unofficial committee of unsecured creditors had agreed to the filing.


Coming to Stores Near You: New and Improved Labeling
From June 21 to July 2, the Food and Drug Administration churned out dozens of proposals intended to solve problems with food-ingredient labeling that have confounded the agency for as long as 25 years.
The food agency also proposed voluntary nutrition-labeling guidelines for fresh fish, fruits and vegetables, and is working on mandatory nutrition labeling for all packaged foods.


In New South, Old Crop Makes a Comeback
After the last farmers stopped growing it in the early 1970's, a lot of people never expected cotton to return to Cottonport.
But when Filmore Bordelon 3d resumed growing the crop that gave this town its name, he was taking part in a quiet revolution over the last few years that resonates with the enduring mythology of the South and irrevocable evidence of change.


Tax-Free Bond Funds Up in Quarter
The strength in the high-risk "junk bond" market in the last quarter spread into tax-free funds, with the high-yield municipal bond funds outperforming the general municipal bond funds for the three months ended June 30.
New figures released yesterday by the Lipper Analytical Services Corporation show that the quarter was positive for all categories of municipal bond funds.


ARMS SALE TO IRAN CHARGED IN JAPAN
The Japanese police raided the offices of a major aviation electronics company here today, charging that it secretly repaired American-designed missile-guidance systems for Iran during that country's war with Iraq.
Japan Aviation Electronics Industry Ltd., which is a close affiliate of the electronics giant NEC, admitted shipping illegal weapons parts that eventually reached Iran.
But a representative of the company insisted that its top executives "do not know yet how such an incident occurred" and that they were not aware of the dealings at the time.


Alice Rodgers Wed to Randall Graves
Alice Anne Lancaster Rodgers, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Beall Rodgers of Tenafly, N.J., was married there yesterday to Randall William Graves, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bouvier Graves of Waitsfield, Vt.
The Rev.
John P. Croneberger performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Atonement.
The bride, 32 years old and a graduate of Wellesley College, is completing studies for master's degree in history at the University of Vermont.
She is the director of studies at the Green Mountain Valley School in Waitsfield.
Her father is an attending surgeon at the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York and an associate clinical professor of surgery at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.


Tel Aviv Journal; A Family's Trials: First the System, Then the Scud
Tamra Sitchov, a recent Soviet immigrant, can't hold back convulsive tears as she describes her family's plight.
"I go around from place to place to place, and nobody wants to help us," the 65-year-old woman said.
"I'm tired, I'm tired. I'm so tired."
Her husband, Rubi, a 73-year-old shoemaker, muttered angrily as his wife wept.


Dutch Overturn Conviction Of Irishman in I.R.A. Killing
A Dutch appeals court today overturned the conviction of an Irish citizen and upheld the acquittal of three others accused of killing two Australians during a wave of attacks in Europe by the Irish Republican Army.
The court said there was no conclusive evidence to prove that Gerard Harte, 27 years old; Donna Maguire, 24; Sean Hick, 30, and Paul Hughes, 27, had been involved in killing two vacationing lawyers.


The Two Leading Ladies Are Ready for Rematch
Four weeks after their melodramatic duel down the homestretch, Meadow Star and Lite Light will stage their highly touted return match at Belmont Park today to determine which of the two prima donnas should reign as queen of the fillies.
They will meet in the Coaching Club American Oaks, the third race in the series of three that composes the Triple Crown for fillies, and they will find four other fillies on the track, including the undefeated Shared Interest.


Zoos Face a Big Job in Preserving Species
To the Editor:
In "Zoos May Entertain, but They Do Poorly at Preserving Species" (letter, June 16), Merritt Clifton, editor of Animals' Agenda magazine, charges zoos with keeping huge numbers of animals in reluctant and uncomfortable captivity, pushing such species as the mountain gorilla toward extinction, annihilating tribes of primates and flocks of birds to facilitate the capture of single zoo specimens and wiping out species to exhibit them.
Such accusations hurt the cause of wildlife conservation.


At P.S. 3, Roof Repairs Will Begin Imminently
To the Editor:
In "Kafka in the Classroom" (Op-Ed, June 8), Ann Banks presents a misleading view of the situation at Public School 3 in Manhattan.


Valenzuela Is Released
FERNANDO VALENZUELA, hit hard in two starts with California and sidelined by a heart problem, was placed on unconditional waivers yesterday by the Angels.
Valenzuela, 30 years old, will become a free agent for the second time this year if he is not claimed off waivers by Wednesday.
If he is not claimed, the Angels said, he will be invited to pitch for Edmonton, California's Triple-A farm team in the Pacific Coast League.


Your Money; Tax Rule Benefits Night Workers
For thousands of urban workers, commuting late at night will become less worrisome, thanks to a regulation the Internal Revenue Service put into effect this week.
When an employer pays for a taxi or car service to take employees to or from work because it would be unsafe to walk or take public transportation, employees will have to report only $1.50 a ride, not the actual value, as taxable income.


Anifowoshe Back Home
KID AKEEM ANIFOWOSHE, recovering from brain trauma sustained in his junior bantamweight title fight on June 15 against ROBERT QUIROGA, has checked out of Baptist Medical Center in San Antonio and returned to his home in Las Vegas, Nev.
Anifowoshe, who left against the advice of his doctor, collapsed after the announcement that Quiroga had won a unanimous decision.
Anifowoshe appeared tired and had to be helped from his hospital bed to a wheelchair.
His surgeon, Dr.
GERARDO ZAVALA, was upset over Anifowoshe's departure Thursday.
"I wanted him to stay at least until they found a doctor in Las Vegas," he said.


Fireworks Blamed in Fatal Fire in Brooklyn


Magazine Gives a Voice to Children
THE first issue of a new magazine includes a poem about shattered shells, a travel article on Hershey, Pa., and an account of Valentine's Day on another planet.
A drawing of Cinderella adorns the cover.
The magazine, Word Dance, is written by and for Connecticut youngsters.
Everything in it -- poetry, nonfiction, fiction and artwork -- was created by young people around the state.


Mutual Funds; Habits of Closed-End Bond Funds
An unhappy shareholder of two closed-end bond funds run by Putnam, a large mutual fund company, is attacking the management of the funds.
The holder, a retired Wall Street executive, contends the funds have failed to perform as promised and is presenting a paper at the funds' annual meeting this week to make his fellow shareholders aware of his complaints.
The shareholder, John S. de Graffenried, a former executive at Merrill Lynch, complains that the funds are trading at very low prices, have cut their dividends and charge excessive management fees.
In the fund industry, there is a saying that "shareholders vote with their feet," by selling their shares.
Not so Mr. de Graffenried, who wants to stay and fight.


Wedding Planned By Kitsy Evans
William L. Evans Jr. of Kansas City, Mo., and Mrs.
John F. Otto of Harbor Point, Mich., have announced the engagement of their daughter Katharine Anne Evans to Julian William Herbert Mann, the son of Walter H. Mann Jr. of Palm Beach, Fla., and Joyce Herbert Mann of New York.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Evans, who is 25 years old and is known as Kitsy, attended the University of Missouri.
She teaches horsemanship in Santa Barbara, Calif.
Her father is the senior vice president of B. C. Christopher, a securities firm in Kansas City.


HOW SHORT IS TOO SHORT?
Protropin, Genentech's recombinant human growth hormone, was developed for the treatment of a specific disorder -- insufficent growth-hormone production in children ("How Short Is Too Short?" by Barry Werth, June 16).
There are an estimated 20,000 such children in the United States.
Even today, almost six years after Food and Drug Administration approval of Protropin, some 40 percent of those children still have not been identified and treated.
Thus, the premise of your article -- that growth hormone was developed without an important indication -- is incorrect.
The challenge confronting the scientific community is to understand the cause of shortness in those children who do not lack growth hormone.
While some call these children normal, others believe that there is a biochemical cause of their statural deficit that may be treatable with growth hormone.
We at Genentech recognize the study of these children and their problems as part of our commitment to research on growth and growth disorders.
BARRY M. SHERMAN, M.D.
Vice President, Medical Affairs, Genentech
South San Francisco, Calif.


1 Rm, No Riv View (But What a Place to Perch)
"Birds don't need birdhouses, people do," Aarne Anton, a folk-art dealer from the SoHo section of Manhattan, was saying.
"People love to look out a window and see birds. And birdhouses are what brings them to their backyards."
During a recent interview at his American Primitive Gallery, at 596 Broadway, Mr.
Anton was surrounded by scores of birdhouses ready to be shipped to an exhibition, "American Birdhouses: If You Build It, They Will Come." It is to open at the San Francisco International Airport on Aug. 1 and remain through October.


Stephen Hitchner Jr. of Urban Institute Is Dead at Age 46
Stephen B. Hitchner Jr., public policy analyst and former senior vice president of the Urban Institute, died Thursday at the Washington Hospital Center.
He was 46 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.
He died of stomach cancer, said his wife, Valentine V. Craig.


Bad Relations?


MS. PLAYBOY
From now on, the fastest way to rise in a company will not be to marry the boss's daughter, but to be the boss's daughter ("Ms. Playboy," by Roger Cohen, June 9).
There is, however, some irony in the fact that this breakthrough has taken place in an enterprise like Playboy.
It is not that Playboy playmates are certified airheads.
Some of these women may be very bright.
It is, however, difficult to assess a person's intelligence from a nude photo, and I doubt that the average Playboy reader really cares.
Certainly, Christie Hefner is a bit disingenuous when she claims that she has "never thought women were demeaned by the magazine." If she really feels that way, why doesn't she pose for next month's centerfold herself and see how seriously her colleagues take her at the next business meeting.
ROBERT J. YAES
Lexington, Ky.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
Keeping Words Responsible
Vaclav Havel, the President of Czechoslovakia, reminded a Western audience in 1989 that any struggle for freedom and dignity must begin with the effort to reclaim and redeem the language, restoring true meanings to words corrupted by abusive regimes.
The speech is in his "Open Letters: Selected Writings 1965-1990" (Knopf).


Technology; Push 'M' for Mayo, Sales Pitch Included
When they enter the Pathmark supermarket here, shoppers can pick up computerized grocery carts that display advertisements and other information while they push the carts along.
Infrared triggers on the ceiling above the entrance to each aisle, working like television remote controls, tell the small computers on the carts to display programs about products as the shopping carts near them.


Streetscapes: Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church; Country Ambiance In a Big-City Setting
WHEN it was completed in 1894 for Fourth Presbyterian Church, it had the air of a little country sanctuary in a hilltop hamlet.
Then, gradually, its site at the southwest corner of 91st Street and West End Avenue was enclosed by town houses and tall apartment buildings.
And now it is in the middle of a big city fund campaign.
Since 1952, the church has been home to Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church.
It is trying to raise $2.5 million to stabilize and replan the building, to restore the interior and to remodel 15,000 square feet of largely unused space to produce income.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SHAKESPEARE IN A TENT
Shakespeare's "Romeo and Juliet" will be staged at Boscobel by the resident Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival.
The company of young professionals, founded in 1987 by Melissa Stern and Terrence O'Brien, and the refreshing simplicity of their productions have won a faithful following and critical approval.


Elizabeth Kiebitz Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Kiebitz of Huntington Bay, L.I., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Elizabeth Anne Kiebitz, and James Joseph DeLuca, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
James T. DeLuca of Forest Hills, Queens.
Miss Kiebitz is 29 years old and a graduate of the University of New England.
She is the showroom manager at Devon Services, an antiques and fabric shop at the Boston Design Center in Boston.
Her father is the director of business planning at the Grumman Corporation in Bethpage, L.I.
Her mother, Cindy W. Kiebitz, is the executive director of the Huntington (L.I.) Arts Council and was until recently the chairwoman of the National Assembly of Local Arts Agencies in Washington.


Editors' Note
On June 23 the Book Review published a review of "Silent Coup: The Removal of a President" by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin.
The book contends that the resignation of President Richard M. Nixon in 1974 was a result of manipulations by two figures in the Nixon White House, John Dean and Alexander M. Haig.
The review was written by Stephen E. Ambrose, a Nixon biographer.
In January 1989 Mr.
Ambrose had written Mr.
Colodny, asking whether he might see or discuss the findings and conclusions of the authors of "Silent Coup," and offering to share his own.
Mr.
Colodny declined.
The Times's policy is to inquire about personal or professional contact that prospective reviewers might have had with the authors of books scheduled for review.
In this case that policy was not followed, and Mr.
Ambrose was not made aware of it.
If the editors had known of Mr.
Ambrose's letter and Mr.
Colodny's response, the book would have been assigned to a different reviewer.


YUGOSLAVIA TENSE AS ITS PEACE TALKS REACH STALEMATE
Talks aimed at averting confrontation between the Yugoslav national Government and the republic of Slovenia broke down today after the independence-minded Slovenes rebuffed an ultimatum to relinquish international border posts by Sunday.
Brinkmanship, bellicose language and diplomatic impasse raised tensions elsewhere in the country as the talks were interrupted in Ljubjlana, the Slovenian capital.
But a cease-fire between the national army and Slovenia's militia generally held.


Helping Teen-Agers Be Health Advisers
ON a steamy afternoon about 20 teen-agers, in clusters of three and four, rush into a mirrored orange-and-brown carpeted room aiming for the potato chips and soda on a table against the back wall.
With infectious adolescent energy, they chatter animatedly about clothes, parents and the latest school gossip.
Then a slim young woman in a colorful pants suit, who could be mistaken for one of the teen-agers, steps into the center of the circle and asks the group, "Who should pay for dates?"


The Life Left Behind
BY HER OWN HAND
Memoirs of a Suicide's Daughter. By Signe Hammer. 200 pp. New York: Soho Press. $18.95.


Eyesore No More
To the Editor:
I noted with great interest your article on May 19 headed "An Eyesore No More" about the renovation of the City Federation Hotel on West 22d Street.


Don't Trivialize The Original
To the Editor:
Paul Goldberger's position vis-a-vis the proposed addition to the Salk Institute in La Jolla was very to the point and brave  [ "Wanted: A Little Less Space," June 23 ] .
Brave in the sense that it is difficult to ask Jonas Salk, who participated in the creation of one great work of architecture, to many years later do it again.
I am sure that he needs the new addition for his work, and I am sure that he thinks he is doing the right thing.
So it be might be unfair to throw dirt in his face and make life more difficult for him.
However, he should know, as Mr.
Goldberger pointed out and many of us architects believe, that the architects who are clearly in debt to and most respectful of Lou Kahn are in fact loving one of Kahn's important works to death.


Ellen Shulman Engaged to Wed Andrew Judson
Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Shulman of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ellen Deborah Shulman to Andrew Lowell Judson, a son of Betty Judson, also of Scarsdale, and the late Morris Judson.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Shulman, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and is studying for an M.B.A. at Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in the firm of Bennett Kielson Storch &amp; Kremer, certified public accountants in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Her mother, Louise Shulman, is an assistant manager at Citibank in Eastchester, N.Y.


Landmarking
To the Editor:
Your article on May 26 entitled "The 'Unmaking' of a Landmark' unintentionally, I think, points out the absolute inconsistency and inappropriateness in which the Landmarks Preservation Commission and the "preservation community" approach the issue of "landmarking."


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMPS
These reports on the National Football League training camps and on the questions surrounding the 28 teams as they head into the 1991 season were prepared by Timothy W. Smith.
A.F.C.
EAST  BUFFALO (13-3 last year)
Camp opens July 14 for both rookies and veterans in Fredonia, N.Y.
The defensive muscle along the front seven will be a big question.
The Giants held the ball for nearly 41 minutes during the Super Bowl.
Unfortunately, the Bills have only one Bruce Smith.
They're hoping the acquisition of defensive end Reggie Rogers and nose tackle Odell Haggins can give them some additional strength up front.
MIAMI (12-4)
July 11 for rookies and veterans at St. Thomas University in Miami.
Last season, a balanced rushing and passing attack, heavy on the run, put the Fish back in the swim of things for the first time since 1985.
Can quarterback Dan Marino settle into a diminished role again for a run at the playoffs this year?
INDIANAPOLIS (7-9)
July 11 for rookies and July 18 for veterans at Anderson University in Anderson, Ind.
Quarterback Jeff George earned his stripes during the latter half of last season, after some early season questions about his toughness.
He's on the rise.
Eric Dickerson is coming off the worst season of his career.
Is he ready to move on?
JETS (6-10)
July 16 for rookies and veterans at Hofstra University in Hempstead, L.I.
The Jets spent the off season beefing up the offensive line.
They have a solid receiving corps and good running backs.
Now, Coach Bruce Coslet needs a quarterback.
Is Browning Nagle that man?
He'll probably get a long look.
NEW ENGLAND (1-15)
July 11 for rookies and July 18 for veterans at Bryant College in Smithfield, R.I.
The Patriots have a new front office and new coach and staff.
Unfortunately, they have the same team.
Tom Hodson and Hugh Millen will battle for the starting quarterback job now that Marc Wilson and Steve Grogan have retired.
A.F.C.
CENTRAL  CINCINNATI (9-7)
July 18 for rookies and veterans at Wilmington College in Wilmington, Ohio.
Midway through last season, quarterback Boomer Esiason started wondering what happened to his team's passing game.
If fullback Ickey Woods, who was nursing a 1989 knee injury last season, makes it all the way back, Esiason might as well abandon the search.
Linebacker James Francis is a monster on a weak defense, but will be looking for help from rookie linebacker Alfred Williams.
HOUSTON (9-7)
July 15 for rookies and July 18 for veterans at Trinity University in San Antonio.
Quarterback Warren Moon seems to have recovered from a dislocated right thumb he suffered late last season.
But how much any lingering discomfort affects his passing is another issue.
Moon, 34, is coming off an otherworldly 1990 season in which he led the league in completions (362), attempts (584), yards (4,689) and touchdowns (33).
PITTSBURGH (9-7)
July 10 for rookies and veterans at St. Vincent College in Latrobe, Pa.
Receiver Louis Lipps, 28, seems to have lost some of his edge, so the Steelers will be looking to improve their receiving corps.
The emergence of tight end Eric Green takes some of the pressure off.
CLEVELAND (3-13)
July 14 for rookies and veterans at Lakeland Community College in Mentor, Ohio.
Name it, Cleveland needs it.
The offensive line needs an extensive overhaul.
Elbow and shoulder injuries, not to mention incessant pounding, have taken a heavy toll on quarterback Bernie Kosar in the last two years.
The Browns don't have a choice but to start Kosar.
The backup at this point is Todd Philcox, who spent two years on the Bengals' development squad.
A.F.C.
WEST  LOS ANGELES RAIDERS (12-4)
July 7 for rookies and July 12 for veterans at Radisson Hotel in Oxnard, Calif.
Former Niners Roger Craig and Ronnie Lott have journeyed south to join the Raiders.
Can they bring enough of San Francisco's magic with them?
KANSAS CITY (11-5)
July 17 for rookies and veterans at University of Wisconsin-River Falls.
The Chiefs already had a full house at running back, with heavyweights Christian Okoye (260 pounds) and Barry Word (240).
But now they've invited more guests, taking Troy Stradford and Richard Bell in Plan B and drafting Harvey Williams of L.S.U. in the first round.
This is going to be interesting.
SEATTLE (9-7)
July 19 for rookies and veterans in Kirkland, Wash.
Quarterback Dan McGwire, the Seahawks' first-round pick, has an excellent opportunity to move into the backup spot ahead of Kelly Stouffer.
Starter Dave Krieg is 32.
SAN DIEGO (6-10)
July 15 for rookies and July 17 for veterans at University of California-San Diego in La Jolla, Calif.
After successive 6-10 seasons, Coach Dan Henning might be on thin ice heading into the third year of a five-year deal.
Part of his problem is that he hasn't had a decent quarterback to work with.
Billy Joe Tolliver and John Friesz will duel for the starting job.
DENVER (5-11)
July 12 for rookies and veterans at Northern Colorado University in Greeley, Colo.
The Broncos have tried everything from martial arts to running with small parachutes on their backs in an early effort to regroup from their 5-11 collapse last season.
The return of left end Alphonso Carreker and cornerback Tyrone Braxton, back from season-ending knee injuries last year, should help.
N.F.C.
EAST  GIANTS (13-3)
July 15 for rookies and veterans at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Madison, N.J.
Rookie Ed McCaffrey might fill the bill for a third receiver to complement Mark Ingram and Stephen Baker, although his lack of speed could be a concern.
Phil Simms or Jeff Hostetler at quarterback is the big question here.
PHILADELPHIA (10-6)
July 15 for rookies and veterans at West Chester University in West Chester, Pa.
Bud Carson, the Eagles' new defensive coordinator, will work on installing an aggressive 4-3 defense and dismantling the 46 style of former coach Buddy Ryan.
WASHINGTON (10-6)
July 14 for rookies and July 21 for veterans at Dickinson College in Carlisle, Pa.
Has Gerald Riggs, 30, succumbed to age and the punishment that comes with being the lone back in a one-back formation?
It doesn't look like Earnest Byner, who rushed for 1,219 yards last year, will move aside so Riggs can answer that question.
DALLAS (7-9)
July 14 for rookies and veterans at St. Edward's University in Austin, Tex.
The Cowboys wheeled and dealed and Coach Jimmy Johnson said he expects 8 to 10 draft picks to make the team.
The ones to watch are defensive end Russell Maryland, the No. 1 pick in the draft, and linebacker Dixon Edwards, the second-round pick.
PHOENIX (5-11)
July 16 for rookies and July 21 for veterans at Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff.
The Cardinals will try a new two-running-back system to get Johnny Johnson and Anthony Thompson on the field together.
But all eyes will be on Cards' first-round pick Eric Swann, the defensive end with no college experience.
N.F.C.
CENTRAL  CHICAGO (11-5)
July 16 for rookies and veterans at the University of Wisconsin-Platteville.
Quarterback Mike Tomczak, in and out of Coach Mike Ditka's doghouse during his tenure in Chicago, has gone to Green Bay via Plan B. This clears the way for Jim Harbaugh, who will be looking over his shoulder at backup Peter Tom Willis after every bad pass.
TAMPA BAY (6-10)
July 19 for rookies and veterans at University of Tampa.
The Bucs have a new defensive coordinator, Floyd Peters, who had Chris Doleman, Keith Millard and Joey Browner to work with for four seasons with the Vikings.
Peters will try to convert Tampa Bay into a 4-3 defensive team without Doleman, Millard and Browner.
It should be a fun year for Peters.
DETROIT (6-10)
July 14 for rookies and veterans at Pontiac Silverdome in Pontiac, Mich.
Are the Lions ready to hand the controls over to Andre Ware, their first-round pick last year?
Or will quarterback Rodney Peete, a fifth-round choice in 1989 who has done everything the Lions have asked, continue to confound the skeptics?
GREEN BAY (6-10)
July 15 for rookies and veterans at St. Norbert College in West De Pere, Wis.
Quarterback Don Majkowski is coming back from December rotator cuff surgery.
Mike Tomczak will be ready to step in if Majkowski falters.
MINNESOTA (6-10)
July 22 for rookies and veterans at Mankato State in Mankato, Minn.
If there is a problem of having too much talent, then the Vikings have suffered through it for two seasons.
The team has decided to work with a one-back system featuring Herschel Walker, who would also be split out of the set as a receiver.
That's a start.
N.F.C.
WEST  SAN FRANCISCO (14-2)
July 10 for rookies and July 13 for veterans at Sierra Community College in Rocklin, Calif.
The 49ers kept winning last year despite the fact that they weren't a very good rushing team.
Roger Craig has gone to the L.A.
Raiders through Plan B, leaving a scramble for a dominant replacement.
Dexter Carter, a 5-7, 170-pound back with breakaway speed, will battle Keith Henderson, the prototypical N.F.L. back at 6-1, 220 pounds, for the starting job.
NEW ORLEANS (8-8)
July 14 for rookies and July 17 for veterans at University of Wisconsin-La Crosse.
Quarterback Bobby Hebert, who sat out all of last season in a contract dispute, has signed and is ready to carry the Saints where Steve Walsh couldn't take them last year: into the playoffs.
The weighty issue of how big fullback Craig (Ironhead) Heyward, who typically weighs over 260 pounds, should be to remain effective will be played out for the fourth season.
LOS ANGELES RAMS (5-11)
July 10 for rookies and July 19 for veterans at University of California-Irvine.
Running back Cleveland Gary appears to be the all-around running back that the Rams need.
He's a good runner and a fine receiver.
But he has the propensity to fumble (12 last season).
He'll be working on holding on to the ball more this year.
ATLANTA (5-11)
July 18 for rookies and veterans in Suwanee, Ga.
June Jones, who worked with Jerry Glanville in Houston, has left Detroit and joined Glanville in Atlanta in an effort to put more spark into the Falcons' Red Gun offense.
Unfortunately, Andre Rison, a brillant young receiver, is the only pass catcher the Falcons have who fits into the run-and-shoot style of offense.


Peru's President Is Trying to Tame a Maelstrom of Inflation and Poverty
When Alberto Fujimori swept to an upset victory last year as President of Peru, businessmen, politicians and diplomats wondered how this political novice, the son of Japanese immigrants, would go about fixing Peru's broken economy and torn social fabric.
Under his precedessor, Alan Garcia, inflation had run uncontrolled over a period of five years.
Peru had become an outcast among lenders because of Mr.
Garcia's refusal to pay interest on the nation's foreign debt.
And the rising violence of subversive groups and drug traffickers was producing a seemingly endless death count.


RECORD BRIEF
Tough Young Tenors: 'Alone Together'
Island 422-848-767-2; CD and cassette.


Sports People: TENNIS; Keeper of the Grass Is Leaving Wimbledon
After 10 years as Wimbledon's groundskeeper, JIM THORN is retiring and going off to play his favorite sport.
No, not tennis.
'I don't think I'm a tennis fan," he said. "I'm a golf addict."


Baseball; They Built a Dome, and the All-Stars Will Come
When major league baseball held its annual All-Star Game last season, the site was Wrigley Field in Chicago, a ball park built in 1914 near the shore of Lake Michigan.
Wrigley is a modest edifice of red brick, green ivy and natural grass under blue sky for most games.
Some fans watch free of charge from windows of apartment buildings beyond the outfield walls.
When this season's interleague revue is staged Tuesday, the site will be Toronto's Skydome, a Canadian megastadium completed in 1989 near the shore of Lake Ontario.
The Skydome is a testament to civic monumentalism, with gray concrete, blue plastic and a huge TV screen in center field.
Amid several restaurants that overlook the artificial field is a built-in hotel below a retractable dome, which is open for most games.


Prosperity Born of Pain
It's a few days before the traditional summer break, and just about every Chilean with a savings account is packing for a long holiday on the Pacific beaches.
Hyperinflation and recession, self-doubt and pessimism are worries for the rest of Latin America.
In Chile, opinion polls register confidence, optimism, even a touch of smugness.
An economic miracle has been under way here for some time.
In five of the last six years, the gross national product surged by at least 5 percent, and will probably climb faster in 1991.
There is no debt crisis.
Foreign investment is pouring in at an annual rate of $1 billion, and middle-class income is rising.
Salaries have lagged among the poor, but unemployment rates are near historic lows.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Larchmont, N.Y. 455,000
55 Chestnut Avenue
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 65-year-old colonial; porch, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, sun room, playroom; taxes $9,009.
Mamaroneck, N.Y. 370,000
930 Protano Lane
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, screened porch, dormitory room, family room; taxes $11,125.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 510,000
61 Franklin Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; 3 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, breakfast room, family room, playroom; taxes $12,498.
Branford, Conn. 168,250
28 Woodvale Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old split level; living room with vaulted ceiling, formal dining room, needs renovation; taxes $1,601.
Chester, Conn. 133,285
26 Old Depot Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old ranch; dining room with sliders to deck, walk to town, 0.5acre; taxes $1,881.
Westbrook, Conn. 119,000
4 Sachem Road
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old, two-story summer cottage; enclosed porch, 1,300 square feet of living area; taxes $1,291.
OTHER AREAS Northport, L.I. 170,000
327 Woodbine Avenue  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 100-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.
St.
James, L.I. 230,000
109 Hobson Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 0.75 acres, 2-car garage; taxes $6,700.
Jackson, N.J. 86,900
12 May Boulevard  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting, screened porch; taxes $2,555.


Anti-Abortion Demonstrators Arrested at Clinic


Live and Lively From Lincoln Center
There are no runways at the American Crafts Festival on the plaza at Lincoln Center, but fashion is nonetheless made at this annual bazaar.
Artisans turn out apparel and jewelry that picks up on street trends quickly.
Their limited-edition hand-painted, hand-tooled, hand-woven or hand-knit apparel and accessories are coveted by wholesalers.
Buyers from department stores like Bendel's and Barneys and from chic specialty stores scout here for unique items and feature the designers in their stores.
They rub elbows with the die-hard curious checking out the white leather wedding dresses and the painted sneakers.


Howard Nemerov, Poet Laureate and Pulitzer Recipient, Dies at 71
Howard Nemerov, the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet and former poet laureate of the United States, died late Friday at his house in University City, a suburb of St.
Louis.
He was 71 years old.
Mr.
Nemerov died of cancer of the esophagus, said M. Fredric Volkmann, vice chancellor for Public Affairs of Washington University in St.
Louis.
Mr.
Nemerov had taught at the university from 1969 to 1990.


Don Juan in Purgatory


Cutting Mustard In the Bleachers
"BLEACHER BUMS," at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst through July 20, is a delightful gem, a diamond to be exact, of a play about baseball and about baseball as a metaphor for that hope that springs eternal in the human breast.
The play was constructed in a collaborative effort by the Organic Theater Company of Chicago, and it concerns the legendary loyal fans of the Chicago Cubs who would turn up in the right-field bleachers season after losing season.


Q and A
Flying as a Courier
Q.
I am interested in traveling as an air courier.
How can I contact companies that use couriers? -- J. J. Rodriguez, Astoria, Queens


Village Band


In the Nation; For Whom the Bell Tolls
Are you a reasonable, law-abiding person?
If so, what would you do if you were an innocent passenger on a bus stopped by the police on some remote highway or back street, and armed officers began to search all those aboard?
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor has no doubt that you would not hesitate to "terminate the encounter" -- that is, to tell the cops they had no right and no reason to search your person, so you won't submit.


Folk Songs and Dances Highlight Festival
IN summertime the listening tends to be lighter, which accounts for the proliferation of folk and international music events this week.
The most adventuresome is the International Performing Arts Festival 1991, with eight free concerts celebrating the cultures of Ireland, Tibet, Puerto Rico and other places, scheduled on the next two Thursdays on the lawn of the Old State House in Hartford.
"For a growing number of the state's residents these are the songs and dances of home," said the festival's founder, Tim Wolf.
"We're able to present world-class groups who reflect the area's diversity as well as cultures that are new to our audience."


Ms. Korn to Wed S. A. Nachmanoff
The engagement of Denise Korn, a graphic designer at Corporate Graphics Inc., and Steven Ari Nachmanoff, an associate at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, both in New York, has been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Marcel Korn of Boston.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Korn, 26 years old, graduated from Cornell University.
Her father, an orthodontist, is an associate clinical professor at the Tufts University School of Dental Medicine.


How MTV Plays Around the World
Asia  Will Iraq Rock And Singapore Swing?


On the Move


A Look at the City; Holiday Haranguers
The other night my wife and I went to see "The Will Rogers Follies," a tedious Broadway musical about the great comedian's life.
After the umpteenth playing of "Never Met a Man I Didn't Like," after the dog act and a leggy chorus line led by an unhappily bare-breasted young lady, Will's life came to the confluence of the Ziegfeld Follies and the Great Depression.
Will noted the irony and expressed abundant sympathy for the millions of unemployed and starving, before the chorus line reappeared.
The plumpish woman sitting behind us took umbrage at the sermon.


Presidential Libraries: Curious Shrines
The Richard Nixon Library in Orange County, Calif., was opened to the public last July.
The building, a one-story structure that resembles a Spanish-style hacienda, has not received much attention in the architectural press.
This may be due to its design, which, like that of most Presidential libraries, is conservative rather than pace-setting, or it may be an indication that although Mr.
Nixon may be back, a pall of untouchability still hangs over the man.
Or maybe the inauguration of yet another Presidential library is no longer newsworthy -- after all, if one includes the Reagan Library, which is scheduled to open later this year, there will have been six of these buildings erected in the last 20 years.
A Presidential library, despite combining the practical purposes of archive and museum, is chiefly a shrine.
But a curious sort of shrine, for it's conceived and built by its subject.
This unusual practice was begun by Franklin D. Roosevelt. (Technically, the first Presidential library was that of Rutherford B. Hayes, but it was built 23 years after his death, and remains in private hands.) It was Roosevelt's idea that his Presidential papers should be housed in a special library that he would build himself on the grounds of the family estate at Hyde Park, N.Y., and that he would then present to the nation to be operated by the National Archives.


Sports People: PRO FOOTBALL; Former Irish Star Cut
TONY RICE, who missed the start of training camp with the Saskatchewan Roughriders of the Canadian Football League to spend time with his family, will have a lot more time to spend at home.
He was released by the team Friday.
Rice, the former Notre Dame quarterback, fell behind the rest of the players when he missed 10 days of camp.


Abby P. Warner, Manager, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Brainard Henry Warner 3d of Chevy Chase, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Abby Parker Warner to Thomas Lawrence Macy, a son of Mrs.
John W. Macy Jr. and the late Mr.
Macy of McLean, Va.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Warner, 34 years old, is a senior advertising manager for MCI Communications in Tysons Corner, Va.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is a lawyer in Washington.


On Our Own on the Riviera
FOR years, we'd been speeding along the highway at the end of French vacations, watching wistfully as the alluring brown signs flashed by pointing the way to ruins and chateaus we hadn't had time to visit.
We'd arrive at two-star restaurants the day after the chef lost one, and turn up in towns when the jazz concert was over and the son et lumiere silenced and darkened.
Trammeled by airline schedules and bound by hotel reservations, we considered ourselves lucky to enjoy two-thirds of the attractions that had lured us to a district in the first place.
By the time we came home, we'd each know five synonyms for complet, termine and ferme.
To avert this post-Gallic tristesse, on our most recent summer visit my husband and I tried what Europeans have always done.
We rented a villa in the South of France -- two and a half miles from Cannes -- for an extended stay, guaranteeing that we'd be in the neighborhood yesterday and tomorrow -- before the major altarpiece went to the restorers, when the scaffolding was finally removed from the tower, after the great young chef had regained his star or, at least, his equanimity.


Travel Advisory; Midnight Sun Golf Course
A new golf course that can be played 24 hours a day in the height of summer is opening in August on the border between Sweden and Finland.
The Green Zone course, said to be the northernmost 18-hole course in the world, is near the Arctic Circle in the land of the midnight sun, which makes around-the-clock golf possible in July and August.
Nine of the holes are in Finland, nine in Sweden, and golfers playing the course will cross the border several times, with no passport or customs formalities.
The par-72 course is 6,853 yards long.
Finnair offers packages to the course.
More information: Finnish Tourist Board, (212) 949-2333.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending June 22 MANHATTAN Chelsea 255,000
29 West 15th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, 10-ft. ceilings, exposed-brick walls, 3 exposures, top floor; maintenance $615, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group-Eychner Associates)  Upper East Side 775,000
521 Park Avenue (61st St.)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar condo; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, library, 2 fireplaces; common charge $1,228, taxes $10,596 (Broker: William B. May)  Upper East Side 2.9 million
164 East 70th Street  6-bedroom, 6-bath, single-family, 5-story town house; dining room, library, exercise room, 2 marble baths, 5 fireplaces, 2 roof decks, 19.9- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $16,802 (Broker: Sotheby's International Realty)  Upper West Side 210,000
257 Central Park West (86th St.)  (Orwell House)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 980-sq.-ft. co-op in a renovated prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, gallery, windowed kitchen; maintenance $878, 66% tax-deductible (Broker: Kuznuk Realty)  Upper West Side 487,500
771 West End Avenue (97th St.)  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,995-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, remodeled kitchen, 2 exposures; maintenance $952, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: Wendy Walters &amp; Associates)  BRONX  Baychester 160,000
1431 East 233d Street  2-family, detached, frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $979 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  Grand Concourse Area 21,000
3131 Grand Concourse  500-sq.-ft. postwar studio-co-op; 24-hr. doorman, separate dressing area; maintenance $315, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill 290,000
174 Pacific Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,650-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, exposed-brick walls, 18-ft. ceilings, fireplace, parking space; maintenance $544, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Harbor View Realty)  Ditmas Park 225,000
477 East 16th Street  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; breakfast room, fireplace, enclosed porch, landmark district, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,764 (Broker: Wilke Real Estate)  Prospect Park South 186,000
86 Argyle Road  8-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, stucco house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 3,000-sq.-ft. of office space on the ground floor; 55- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,400 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  QUEENS  Briarwood 45,000
84-01 Main Street  (Eden Rock)  500-sq.-ft. studio-co-op in a postwar building; 24-hr. doorman, separate dressing area; maintenance $228, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Century 21/Elms Realty)  College Point 175,000
9-34 College Point Blvd.  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached colonial, dining rooom, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2-car garage, 34- by 87-ft. lot; taxes $885 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  STATEN ISLAND  Castleton Corners 140,000
160 Slosson Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, den, 1-car garage, 40- by 135-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  Oakwood 160,000
524 Lynn Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)


Miss Nusbaum Plans to Marry
The engagement of Lisa Beth Nusbaum, the national director of graduate programs for Stanley H. Kaplan Education Centers, the test-coaching service, to Ronald Mark Dickerman, a vice president at Smith Barney, Harris Upham, both in New York, has been announced by her parents, Ronni D. Nusbaum of Hollywood, Fla., and Jack H. Nusbaum of New York.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Nusbaum, 27 years old, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University, as does her fiance.
Her father is a senior partner and co-chairman of the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.
Her stepmother, Margie Goldsmith Nusbaum, is the founding president of MG Productions, a New York video-production company.


How MTV Plays Around the World
Japan Sayonara, MTV


The Battle (Zap! Click!) of the Sexes
Fraternity brothers at Cornell call it "the driver." A Washington lawyer calls it "the zapper"; a New Yorker calls it "the clicker." Others say "the remote" or "the thing-ie." They all mean the same little black box that, having transformed television, now threatens male-female relations.
With broadcast television, people used remote controls mostly to zap commercials.
With the spread of cable, and its 36 or 70 or 150 channels, the luxury has become a necessity.
Now the remote is to TV what page-flipping is to magazines.


The Forger and the Fuhrer
THE HITLER DIARIES
Fakes That Fooled the World.
By Charles Hamilton.
Illustrated. 211 pp.
Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky.


Travel Advisory; A New Hotel In Beverly Hills
The Peninsula Beverly Hills, the first hotel to be built in the city limits of Beverly Hills for more than 20 years, is scheduled to open Aug. 8.
The hotel, at Wilshire and Santa Monica boulevards, is 12 miles from Los Angeles International Airport and within walking distance of Rodeo Drive.
It consists of 200 rooms, including 32 suites in the main building and 16 suites in two-story villas set in gardens.
Every room will have a safe and two telephones (one in the bathroom) with two lines and speaker, plus hookups for fax and computer modem.
All suites will have fax machines and compact disk players.
The roof garden includes a 60-foot lap pool and 12 cabanas each with telephone.
There will be two restaurants, the Belvedere, with indoor and outdoor seating, and the Peninsula, serving light meals.
Daily room rates will be $265 to $295, and suites, $340 to $2,500.
Peninsula Beverly Hills, 9882 Santa Monica Boulevard, Beverly Hills, Calif. 90212; (800) 462-7899.


Miss Jacobson, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward T. Jacobson of Shohola, Pa., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Dawn-Marie Jacobson, and James Patrick Lynch, the son of Bonnie Buggee of South Salem, N.Y., and Thomas D. Lynch of Old Greenwich, Conn.
Miss Jacobson, 23 years old, is a student at Orange County Community College in Middletown, N.Y.
Her father, a retired branch manager for the International Business Machines Corporation,and her mother, Dolores Jacobson, founded and run the Buck and Beaver summer camp for children in Shohola.


The World; Why La Dolce Vita Is Easy for Europeans . . .
HOW is it that Europeans sit around all day drinking coffee, spend long evenings over dinner, dress elegantly, get up late, take long vacations, drive new cars -- and they can still afford the exorbitant prices charged for everything from Stockholm to Seville?
Why, in short, do Europeans seem to live so much better than Americans?


Corrections
The Cultivated Gardener column on June 16 misstated the availability of Neem oil, a Japanese- beetle control.
A corrective note appears with the column today on page 34.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SACRIFICE  By Andrew Vachss. Knopf, $20.


In Yonkers, Potential for Change Raises New Hope
EACH year in Yonkers, residents long familiar with a host of seemingly intransigent problems look to their elected officials for solutions, or at least improvements.
But this year, many feel, could be the year of change.
Officeholders, civic leaders and others interested or involved in the city's future see a new political profile emerging from the November elections, opening the way for possible changes in how the city looks at its problems, and how it deals with them.


FURTHER ADVENTURES AT CITY OPERA
An old love will be rekindled and tested once more when the New York City Opera opens the second season of the Christopher Keene era on Tuesday evening.
Stephen Sondheim's 1973 Broadway hit, "A Little Night Music," will be performed in the Harold Prince production, starring Sally Ann Howes and George Lee Andrews.
Other operas to be presented this week are Puccini's "Tosca" (Thursday evening) and "Turandot" (Friday evening) and Bizet's "Pecheurs de Perles" (Saturday afternoon).
Mr.
Keene drew wide acclaim last season for a number of bold administrative strokes, though much of the programming had already been determined by his predecessor as general director, Beverly Sills.
This year, Mr.
Keene has shown a continuing taste for innovation and rethinking -- even to the extent of considering whether the company should move out of Lincoln Center.


Another Look at 'Skin of Our Teeth'
GREETINGS, once again, from 216 Cedar Street in Excelsior, N.J., the home of a "typical American family" headed by George Antrobus (Greek for man), who invented the wheel and is working on the alphabet and the multiplication table.
His long-suffering wife of 5,000 years, Mrs.
Antrobus, invented the apron.
The hostile, stone-carrying son they raised is Cain, even though his name is Henry.
And the exasperated maid, Sabina Fairweather, vamps Mr.
Antrobus, predicts the end of the world and utters protestations like: "I hate this play. I don't understand a single word of it."


The Best Little Bank in America
From the troubled landscape of American banking, burdened with bad loans and falling profits, a new elite is emerging.
A group of surprisingly vigorous banks, little-known outside their multistate bailiwicks, these so-called superregional banks are seen as the likely winners in the Darwinian winnowing that is now underway in the industry.
They could eclipse the money-center banks like Citicorp and Chase Manhattan as the new powers of American banking.
When industry experts look for the best-run bank among these regional powerhouses, and perhaps the best bank in America, they usually end up here in Columbus at the 24-story mirrored-glass headquarters of the Banc One Corporation.
Banc One has combined conservative lending, innovative technology, remarkable customer service and an uncanny ability to smoothly absorb a steady stream of acquired banks.
Today, it is the nation's 22d-largest bank, but it ranks first in several key measures of financial performance like return on assets.


J. E. Feins Weds Amy P. Matthews
Amy Procter Matthews and Jonathan Edward Feins were married yesterday at his parents' home in New London, N.H.
Jyl Bradley, a Justice of the Peace, officiated.
Mrs.
Feins, 30 years old, graduated cum laude from Claremont McKenna College.
She received a master's degree in American studies from the College of William and Mary in Virginia and a master's in health-services administration from George Washington University.
She is the vice president and chief operating officer of ProClaim, a billing service for physicians in New London.
Her husband founded and heads the company.


Quotation of the Day
"We just can't come down on the local politicians -- the governors and the mayors -- because it's happening in too many places. What we need at this point is Federal funds." --James A. Thompson, a New Haven Parks Department upervisor, on Connecticut's budget problems.  [ 17:1. ]


The Bad Boy Makes Good
In the controversial female buddy picture "Thelma and Louise," Brad Pitt is J. D., the scene-stealing irresistible bad boy who teaches Louise (Geena Davis) a thing or two about sex and crime, then proceeds to rob and ditch her.
Mr.
Pitt, who earned enthusiastic reviews for his performance, says: "I don't think the movie has some big moral the way a lot of people are making out, and I don't find it controversial." He says he just sees it as a slap in the face "for us guys -- and we deserve it."


Baseball; Dykstra, Not Yet 100 Percent, Is on His Way Back
Lenny Dykstra takes batting practice, plays long-toss catch in the outfield with his coach, Larry Bowa, and then reports the usual assortment of aches and pains.
Simple, it seems, but ever so important to both Dykstra and the Philadelphia Phillies, the team that has wished him back into center field and in their offense since the day two months ago when Dykstra, his Mercedes and his career went careening into a tree in suburban Philadelphia.


Data Bank/July 7, 1991
Emplyoment
June
May
April
In thousands
116,884
116,591
117,398
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
8,745 (7.0)
8,640 (6.9)
8,274 (6.6)
Economic Activity
Purchasing Managers' Index
50.9
45.4
42.1
Construction Spending
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
--0.9
1.2
--2.0
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
2.9
2.1
--2.1
New-Home Sales
Monthly percent change
--3.3
--0.2
0.61
3-Month Treasury Bills
July 5
June 28
June 21
Yield in percent
5.58
5.55
5.58
Coal Production
June 21
June 14
June 7
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
19,481
19,686
19,097


Chess
If you ask a player what his best game in a tournament was, you will usually be told about a one-sided walloping of the opponent, studded with imaginative tactics and explosive gyrations of the pieces.
By and large, the player is going to show you what he can do do under optimum conditions.
But every once in a while, you will get a player who prizes the struggle for its own sake, who judges that his best game was the one that was hardest to play.
That is the kind of game that Larry Christiansen gave as his favorite performance.


The Region; The Litter That Looks Like Money
SCATTERED on a sidewalk, they look like real dollar bills, with serial numbers, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady's signature and, on the other side, a famous-looking building.
But the denomination is odd -- sometimes $25 or $69 -- and the famous-looking building is not the White House or the Capitol, but something identified as the World Sex Academy.
Dollar-size advertisements for dial-a-porn services in New York City have proliferated like the dial-a-porn services themselves.
Dumped on sidewalks by the hundreds, like loot from a bungled bank heist, the folded dirty dollars look realistic enough at first glance to make someone pause and pick them up, only to discover the X-rated handbill inside.
"It's a new form of pollution," said Steven M. Polan, the New York City Sanitation Commissioner.
"We don't have the ability to handle the traditional forms as it is."


Air Travel
To the Editor: Last August my husband and I flew to London on Air- India on a low fare.
The morning of our flight home, we called to reconfirm our seats and were told that we were listed on standby, even though we had reserved seats.
The Air-India employee told us the situation would be straightened out at the airport.
When we arrived, we were directed to the information line where a single reservationist was handling about 30 other people who had also been bumped.
When it was our turn, she said, "Your tickets have been tampered with. Come back tomorrow." The tickets had not been touched since they were issued by Maharaja Travels in New York, and we had used them without difficulty on the flight over.
But she refused to validate our tickets for passage on another airline with the Air-India stamp.
This stamp is the guarantee that the airline will reimburse another carrier that honors the tickets.


Jean Elizabeth Poor Lynch to Wed Ordway Partridge Burden in October
Mr. and Mrs.
George R. Poor of Marblehead, Mass., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Jean Elizabeth Poor Lynch and Ordway Partridge Burden, a son of Margaret L. Burden of New York and the late William A. M. Burden.
Ms.
Lynch attended Wheaton College, Boston University and the Harvard Graduate School of Design.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is a yachtsman; her mother, Gladys Poor, a watercolorist.


Headliners; Free Speech
In defending his conservative principles, J. Joachim Maitre, the dean of Boston University's College of Communication, has rarely seemed at a loss for words.
In recent years, Dr.
Maitre, who escaped from East Berlin in 1953, has defended himself against complaints that he crossed the line between journalism and propaganda by directing a university project, financed by the Government, to teach journalism skills to Afghan refugees so they could report on the war in Afghanistan.
In a commencement address in May he attacked the decline of morality in American culture.
But last week he apologized after it was revealed that he had taken the theme of the speech and about 15 of its paragraphs from an article by Michael Medved, a film critic for the Public Broadcasting System.
"All is forgiven," said Mr.
Medved, who described Mr.
Maitre as "extremely amusing" and "a charming gentleman." "He said it was a blackout, a lapse on his part and that he was appalled that it occurred."


Men's Style; Soft Touch
As a film producer and director, John Pepper is used to a frenetic schedule.
"So I dress in a way that keeps my life simple," he says.
In the past year alone, Pepper's projects -- he is a producer of "The Plague," an English-French-Argentinian film, and a co-writer of "Marco," an unconventional love story -- have taken him from New York to Cannes to Buenos Aires.
He keeps his wardrobe stocked with versatile khaki pants, breezy linen shirts and the occasional item in suede, a material he finds will adapt to almost any setting.
Suede jackets and jeans have an easygoing look that suits the style Pepper adopted when he married Jaci Judelson, a documentary film maker and freelance producer.
At Judelson's urging, Pepper, who was raised in Rome and spent much of his life shuttling from one European capital to another, began dressing more casually when he moved to New York -- a sartorial shift that Judelson laughingly calls "my husband's Americanization."


Ms. Dahl Weds Michael Bianchi
Kristin Louise Dahl, a manager of community health education in Bridgeport, Conn., and Michael Carl Bianchi, a property manager in Guilford, Conn., were married yesterday at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass.
The Rev.
Arnold F. Westwood, a Unitarian minister, performed the nondenominational service in Abbey Chapel.
The bride is 32 years old and is keeping her name.
A graduate of Williams College, she has a master's in public health from the University of Michigan and works for the Connecticut Center for Health Promotion at St.
Vincent's Medical Center.
Ms.
Dahl is a daughter of Marilyn Dahl Krumhansl of Amherst, Mass., and the late Dr.
Lewis K. Dahl.
Her stepfather, James A. Krumhansl, is a physics professor emeritus at Cornell University.


James Pie, Parochial-School Advocate, Dies at 69
James L. J. Pie, an advocate of state funds for private and parochial schools and a lawyer who wrote legislation that created the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transit Authority, died on June 30 at his home in Philadelphia.
He was 69 years old.
He died of heart failure said his wife, Mary.


Style Makers; Howard Davis, Shoe Designer
Howard Davis describes a "switch-hitter" as a woman who dresses up for work but wears sneakers and carries her dress shoes in a bag.
Mr.
Davis, a shoe designer, intends to change her habit.
For the switch-hitter he has designed the Slingshot, a shoe that is comfortable yet attractive enough to be worn all day.
The front and heel are separate units made of rubber and a padded synthetic filler, held together by by a heavy elastic shake.
The outer sole expands while the wearer walks or stands and contracts when the foot is raised.


Mourning Becomes Vera
CABIN FEVER
By Elizabeth Jolley. 238 pp. New York: Harper Perennial.


Fruit Desserts: Making Use of Freshness
Peaches, plums, and apricots: these are the fruits that in winter make a better subject for a still-life study than for eating.
Sink your teeth into a gorgeous-looking apricot that has been wrapped in tissue paper and imported at great expense from afar, and it has the texture of mashed potato.
But now, at last, peaches and apricots are ripe and fragrant; plums are full of flavor and ready for baking in beautiful tarts.
Fruit desserts will be only as good as the fruit used in them.
If it is overripe, it will turn mushy.
If under ripe, it will not have much taste.
The best way to judge any piece of fruit is to smell it.
It should have a pronounced fragrance.
As summer progresses, the best fruit shows up at farmers' markets or roadside stands where locally grown produce is sold.
This means that fruit is picked ripe, since it does not have to survive a long journey.


Vinca Climbs on the Botanical Hit Parade
VINCAS are moving up in the gardener's popularity poll.
This annual flower is gradually pushing out impatiens as a favored garden plant for a show in summer and for good reason.
It grows in full sun or partial shade.
It has few problems, if any.
And it thrives in poor soil and needs little extra watering.
The plant is handsome, too, with shiny leaves and an overall perky look.
The only negative is that vinca is a tropical species, and it does not flower well or thrive when nightime temperatures are cool, below 60 degrees or so.
It is also one of the first plants to be felled by frost in the fall.


Political Talk
One Big Happy Family
At a time when most legislative posts from the Federal to the local level have seemingly become the permanent possessions of incumbents, the expansion of the City Council to 51 members from 35 provides an opportunity not only for more minority representation but also for relatives of prominent politicians, past and present, and other political celebrities.


Miss Van Ingen Plans to Marry
Herbert Pratt Van Ingen of New York and Mrs.
Evan Daniel Jennings 2d of Pittsburgh have announced the engagement of their daughter Harriet Pratt Van Ingen to Howard McClintic Love Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Love of Pittsburgh.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Van Ingen, 24 years old, graduated from Lake Forest College.
She is a publicity associate at Lynn Goldberg Communications and her father is a consultant with Continental-American Travel, both in New York.


CORRECTION
The Wall Street column last Sunday misstated several prices for two new offerings underwritten by Stratton Oakmont.
IPS Health Care went public at $8 a unit, consisting of two shares of common stock and one warrant; the units rose to $24 and closed on June 28 at $16.
Ropak Laboratories came to market at $4.50 a unit, consisting of one common share and a warrant; the units rose to $16.75 and closed on June 28 at $8.50.


With Rising Urgency, Next Head of Feminist Group Presses Agenda
While Molly Yard, the fiery head of the National Organization for Women, recuperates from a stroke, her duties at the organization's 25th annual convention in Manhattan this weekend have been assumed by a longtime feminist with a little less boom in her voice and a lot less name recognition.
But Patricia Ireland says that will change.


'White Dog' Is Set Loose at Last
When it opens a four-week retrospective of 27 films by Sam Fuller on Friday at Film Forum 2, the controversial 1982 drama "White Dog" will be receiving its New York premiere.
Based on the Romain Gary novel of the same title, the film tells the story of a young actress, Julie (Kristy McNichol), who adopts a stray German shepherd, only to discover that it is a "white dog" -- a dog trained to attack black people.
Seeking help, she turns to Keys (Paul Winfield), a black animal trainer and anthropologist who tries to retrain the dog.
Since Mr.
Fuller's first hit, "The Steel Helmet" (1951), which focuses on the hatred of white American soldiers toward a Japanese-American and a black soldier, anti-racism has been a recurrent theme in his films.
Although "White Dog" involves another clear anti-racist message and its central black character, Keys, is a person of exemplary values and achievements, the production was under the scrutiny of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
The organization assigned a representative to the set.


Eastern Germans Reach Out
Eastern Germany officially dedicated a modern digital telephone network today, replacing the 1920's system that was overloaded by calls to the West after the collapse of Communist rule in 1989.
The network is part of a $30 billion program to modernize telecommunications by 1997.
Phone links between eastern and western Germany, eastern and western Berlin and from eastern Germany abroad have been swift and clear since the network was switched on Tuesday.


Noting With Pleasure
To the Editor:
It may reveal something about the present state of fashionable taste that two of the quotations in the May 26 Noted With Pleasure column depend for their interest on their own ability to note with pleasure other quotations.
The Philip Callow selection is interesting for the quotation from Leopardi, and the Joseph Epstein for the quotations from Chekhov and T. S. Eliot.
Mr.
Epstein's pride in his quotations is particularly revealing.
By using quotation to align himself "with that smallest of minority groups, the party of good sense," Mr.
Epstein identifies himself as a member of that self-selected majority of people who conceive of themselves as having the rare good sense to recognize good sense.
Such a stance is a popular and hallowed social strategy.
Apt quotation allows a member of the fashionably dominant group to participate without effort in the esthetically delicious paradox of courageously declaring, like the fop in a Restoration comedy, "What is in fashion just now does not much interest me." JOHN HUNTINGTON  Chicago


Miss Harrison Plans to Wed J. R. Lilly Jr. in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar Harrison 2d of Rye Brook, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sharon Lou Harrison to John Richard Lilly Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lilly of Riverside, Conn.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Harrison, 27 years old, is a research analyst at First Boston in New York.
She graduated from Rosemont College in Rosemont, Pa.
Her father is the New York area advertising manager for Natural History Magazine.


Fruit Desserts: Making Use of Freshness
Peaches, plums, and apricots: these are the fruits that in winter make a better subject for a still-life study than for eating.
Sink your teeth into a gorgeous-looking apricot that has been wrapped in tissue paper and imported at great expense from afar, and it has the texture of mashed potato.
But now, at last, peaches and apricots are ripe and fragrant; plums are full of flavor and ready for baking in beautiful tarts.
Fruit desserts will be only as good as the fruit used in them.
If it is overripe, it will turn mushy.
If under ripe, it will not have much taste.
The best way to judge any piece of fruit is to smell it.
It should have a pronounced fragrance.
As summer progresses, the best fruit shows up at farmers' markets or roadside stands where locally grown produce is sold.
This means that fruit is picked ripe, since it does not have to survive a long journey.


RECORD BRIEFS
Mozart: 'Cosi Fan Tutte'
Soloists; London Philharmonic conducted by Georg Solti. London 430 101-2; three CD's.


THE NATION: Symbolic Justice; Capturing an Era's Racial Conflicts And Ironies
A PRESIDENT'S choice for the Supreme Court often captures a political moment; it did 24 years ago with the selection of Justice Thurgood Marshall, and again last week with the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to replace him.
Both acts spoke volumes on the state of race and politics.
Last week, liberals and civil rights advocates looked back on the Marshall nomination with some poignance; it came in a tumultuous time, but the movement was riding a powerful national consensus that it was wrong for anyone to be denied the right to vote, the right to use public facilities, or equality of opportunity simply because of race.
This consensus was codified in the civil rights and voting rights acts of 1964 and 1965.


New Sign at a Familiar Locale in Westport
WHEN Dameon's in Westport closed its doors last year, many loyal patrons felt bereft.
They and others should be happy to learn that the chef-owner, George Llorens, has simply moved to the center of town and is in the restaurant business once again.
Mr.
Llorens has hung a new sign, Le Paradis, outside a familiar locale (the former Il Villano), a free-standing building in a spot that has swallowed several restaurants through the years, although it is handy, on a side street just steps from Main Street.
A municipal lot just across the street from the restaurant makes parking easy.


Janine R. Siegel Plans to Marry
The engagement of Janine Ruth Siegel, an account executive at Ralph Lauren Womenswear, to Laurence Craig Rosenblum, the national sales manager for Zena Jeans, both in New York, has been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Lloyd Siegel of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Siegel, 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College.
Her father is a physician in Manhattan.
Her mother, Roslyn Siegel, is an acquisitions editor at Consumer Reports Books.
Mr.
Rosenblum, 30, graduated from the University of Wisconsin.
He is a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Rosenblum of White Plains.
His father was a clothing manufacturer.


Making a Difference; A New Home For a Creative Executive
The joke on Madison Avenue last week was that President Bush could not nominate anyone to the Supreme Court until Gordon Bowen had made up his mind.
For two weeks, the advertising community was fascinated by the 40-year-old creative executive's public quandary: to stay at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, where he was a senior vice president and executive creative director, or to leave for important creative posts with McCann-Erickson.
Mr.
Bowen finally announced on Monday that he would leave.
"I feel good about it," he said, "amid all the angst over the past weeks."


Dr. Eva Marie Carey Wed To Ronald Howard Dailey
Dr.
Eva Marie Carey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Carey of Westport, Conn., was married at the Log Cabin Church in Anchorage, yesterday to Ronald Howard Dailey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Waldon M. Dailey of Camas, Wash.
Art Eash, the groom's best friend, and Sister Marilee Murphy, a Roman Catholic nun, performed the civil ceremony.
Dr.
Carey, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, is an emergency-room physician at Providence Hospital in Anchorage.
Mr.
Dailey, 38, is the president of Loftus &amp; Dailey of Anchorage and Fairbanks, an engineering concern.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.


Baseball; Fernandez, Moving Up, Looks Over Shoulder
For Sid Fernandez, the mental snapshots, some embarrassing, some goofy, some heart-warming, are all still vivid in his mind's eye.
The left-handed pitcher for the Mets can still see himself in a hotel room in West Palm Beach, Fla., patiently awaiting the luggage he assumed was being delivered from the airport, only to realize at last that even the smaller luxuries afforded major leaguers didn't apply in the minors.


Making a Difference; Still Growing After 53 Years
Though he is 76 years old, William Dillard is still orchestrating the expansion of Dillard Department Stores, the company that he founded 53 years ago in Nashville.
Late in June, the Little Rock, Ark., chain of almost 200 stores, acquired seven stores in western Florida from Maison Blanche Department Stores, a venerable Southern chain.
Since 1987, Dillard has bought 53 stores from other chains.
The soft-spoken Mr.
Dillard likes to buy sites cheaply.
In fact, perhaps because its beginnings were so humble, Dillard occasionally likes to remind observers of its bargaining ability.
In its 1991 annual report, the company says of the 1990 purchase of 23 J. B. Ivey stores in the Carolinas and Florida from B.A.T.
Industries: "Whereas other B.A.T. subsidiaries have been sold for prices as much as 1.25 times the seller's annual sales, Dillard's acquired Ivey's for a price that was only one-third of Ivey's annual sales."


Sunday Menu; Moroccan-Style Turkey
Fast and fresh is hardly the exclusive property of this column.
Lou Seibert Pappas has been writing about food for years at The Peninsula Times Tribune in Palo Alto, Calif., and is the author of 18 cookbooks.
Her latest, "The Working Cook" (Betterway Publications Inc., White Hall, Va., $14.95) is the inspiration for this Moroccan-style tagine.


U.S. Rider Makes Debut As Competitor, Not Fan
Still wearing the aerodynamic helmet that he used in the prologue, Mike Carter smiled broadly this afternoon and remembered the days in Colorado when he was a Tour de France fan, not a Tour de France rider.
"I used to walk into bicycle shops and just ooh and ah and goggle at posters of the Tour de France," he said.
And now he was rider No. 75 and had just posted a time of 6 minutes 44 seconds in his first Tour.


2 Slovenes, Bedfellows In Rebellion
A well-groomed Communist Party leader gone renegade and a military whiz kid and political prisoner gone establishment are the most visible leaders of Slovenia's march out of Yugoslavia, and they are odd bedfellows.
Milan Kucan, Slovenia's soft-spoken President, and Janez Jansa, its flamboyant Defense Minister, could not, in style at least, differ more.


Telling the Story of Ethiopian Jews
AMONG those greeting Ethiopian Jews at Ben Gurion International Airport in Israel last month was a woman from Scarsdale, Susan K. Stern.
Mrs.
Stern, the new chairwoman of the Women's Young Leadership Cabinet of the United Jewish Appeal, had been sent by the organization to witness Operation Solomon, the two-day emergency airlift of 14,000 Ethiopian Jews to Tel Aviv.
Within hours of returning home, even before catching up on the sleep she lost while aiding a stream of bewildered refugees, Mrs.
Stern began telling the story of what she had seen.
Storytelling is her job, an almost sacred responsibility, she said.


Traffic, the Great Inhibitor
To the Sports Editor:
Kate O'Hern can quit wondering why attendance wasn't higher at the national track and field championships at Downing Stadium on Randalls Island ("Track and Field Need Not Be So Obscure," The Times, June 23).
She breezes right over the answer herself: "The stadium is easily accessible by car. . . ."


September Bridal for Miss Goldsmith
September wedding plans for Daphne Amanda Goldsmith and James Patrick Kennedy 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Kennedy of Columbus, Ohio, have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard M. Goldsmith 3d of Rumson, N.J.
Miss Goldsmith, 25 years old, graduated from Villanova University and is studying for a master's degree in public administration at New York University.
Her father is the managing director of the Updata Group, an investment banking firm in Holmdel, N.J.
Her mother, Nadine D. Goldsmith, is the chief executive of Goldsmith, Rabstein &amp; Associates, an advertising agency in Holmdel.


On Language; There's No Wearware
Let the speaker beware: The combining form
-ware
is everyware.
According to Howard Gardner, a professor of education at Harvard, a new use of the ubiquitous
-ware
popped up in connection with a recent meeting of the Cognitive Science Society that concentrated on artificial intelligence.
Gary Lynch, a neurobiologist investigating the mysteries of memory, I forget at what school, recalled he felt completely out of place at the conference, "a student of
wetware
among the computer hackers."


Beauty; That Peeling Feeling
Of course I do it," says David Hellerstein, the physician in charge of psychiatric outpatient services at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan. "Ask my wife.
It
really
annoys her.
And besides, it's normal phylogenetic behavior." He's talking about the odd propensity most of us have for picking at and peeling things: the label of a sweating beer bottle sweetly loosened by condensation; the glinting stratum of red polish on a thumbnail; the solid layer of rubber cement painted on the palm of your hand for the sole purpose of peeling off the gummy bits; sheets of skin on a sunburned shoulder.
It's a relatively benign neurosis that takes its cues from a kind of genetic coding for grooming behavior.
"We're like chimps or cats," says Hellerstein.
"There's a certain inborn tendency toward peeling as an adaptive thing, stemming from the genetic makeup that's the impetus to pick and clean and groom. Like most repetitive behaviors, it's also anxiety-relieving: minor behaviors that relieve anxiety are rewarded, so the behavior becomes fixed. Anyway, I don't peel the whole label off the beer bottle. I start with the corner and then my wife says
stop
."


Bridge
The Bermuda Bowl, the world team championship contested in odd-numbered years by winners of regional contests around the world, has not been won by a European squad since the Italian Blue Team had a 19-year run through 1975.
But that streak may be end in October when the Bermuda Bowl is played in Yokohama, Japan, with an enlarged format.
There will be 16 teams, and four of them were determined by the European Championships that ended nine days ago in Killarney, Ireland.
The British took the title for the first time in 28 years.


Kimberlee Scott to Wed Charles Cory
The engagement of Kimberlee Jae Scott to Charles Robinson Cory, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Cory of McLean, Va., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Philip H. Scott of Arcadia, Calif.
An October wedding is planned.
The prospective bride, 25 years old, is an associate in the advisory and financial division in the New York office of S. G. Warburg &amp; Company, investment bankers in London.
She is a summa cum laude graduate of Southern Methodist University and a member of Phi Beta Kappa with bachelor's degrees in political science and finance.
Her father is the president of Becherer Buick in Arcadia.
Her mother, JoAnne Scott, is the Arcadia editor of The Sierra Madre (Calif.) News.


Headliners; Settling Down
Last month the word on the street was that Donald had jilted Marla for Carla and was abandoning serial monogamy to play the field for a while.
"It's too soon to settle down with one woman," an assistant to Donald Trump said at the time, "particularly since he's focusing on his financial difficulties of the past year." Mr.
Trump was even quoted as saying that because of the AIDS scare, his dates would all have to be tested at his doctor's office.
But last week Mr.
Trump asked Marla Maples for her hand in marriage (its ring finger will be bedecked with an eight-carat diamond).
He proposed Tuesday at the home of Frank and Kathie Lee Gifford, where Marla was staying for a few days, and Ms.
Gifford announced it the next day on her television show, "Live With Regis &amp; Kathie Lee." And as for Carla Bruni, an Italian model who also keeps company with Mick Jagger?
"Carla's a friend and she's a very good girl," Mr.
Trump said, "but those stories were blown totally out of proportion."


Thump on Porch: Milkman Returns
GONE are the scratched quart bottles with the smooth wide mouths covered with crimped paper caps.
Gone, too, are the early morning serenades of glass jingling in metal baskets, the noisy doorstep exchange of full bottles for empty ones and the gentle slam of the milkbox lid.
Gone are the days 30 or 40 years ago when most of the milk drunk in New Jersey was delivered to front porches rather than to refrigerated chrome cases in corner convenience stores and supermarkets.


Headliners; Jump Ball
Sometimes it really
is
the principle.
Why else would Patrick Ewing turn down a new contract with the New York Knicks that would have paid him more than $5.3 million a year, making him the most highly paid player in team sports?
Under his contract, the Knicks' center has the right to offer his services to other teams if, after his sixth season, he is not among the four highest paid players in basketball.
When that season ended earlier this year, the Knicks said he was among the top four; Mr.
Ewing said he wasn't.
Given the complexity of modern pro contracts, who knew?
The Knicks said the issue was moot, since they were prepared to offer him the record team sports salary in any case.
But Mr.
Ewing maintained that, new contract or no, the Knicks had failed to meet the salary clause of the old one, and he had the right to shop around.
An arbitrator is now considering the matter.
"The issue is not about money," said Mr.
Ewing's lawyer.
"It's about freedom of choice, and Patrick feels very strongly about that."


Answering The Mail
Q.
I own a one-story house that is now more than 45 years old.
I have a problem with condensation in the attic in the winter, so much so that you can see drips on the interior walls below.
The attic has three roof vents, and I have checked to be certain that the vents under the eaves are not blocked by insulation.
The roof does not leak, and there is no condensation problem in the summer.
Is there any way I can solve the winter condensation problem?
A.
The first thing I would check is the humidity inside the house, for it sounds as though it may be too high.
If you have a humidifier on the furnace, turn it way down during cold weather, or turn it off completely to see if this helps.
I also suspect that you do not have enough ventilation in the attic.
In addition to continuous eave vents, you probably need continuous ridge vents, but you can probably get by with doubling the number of roof vents you have now.


Topics of The Times; Reclaiming Fifth Avenue
The New York State Legislature moved wisely last week to curb the abuse of an 1894 law granting disabled veterans peddling privileges on city streets.
New York City properly limits street vending at congested sites to food and printed material.
But the old law allowed disabled veterans to sell any goods without restriction.
When a judge upheld the law last year, shoddy merchandisers hired disabled veterans to hawk T-shirts, knock-off jewelry and other items on Fifth Avenue.


A New Spin on Shaw's 'Pygmalion'
"EDUCATING RITA" has quite enough instant uplift and sustained amusement for reasonable summer theater diversion.
There's also a hint of honest provocation in it, should you want that too, but it's not threatening.


No Headline
A Poet Laureate Dies
Howard Nemerov, a Pulitzer Prize- winning poet known for his ability to handle the contemporary world in formal verse, is dead at 71.
Page 18.


Baseball; R-E-S-P-E-C-T: Yankees Have Earned It
The Yankees gave Scott Sanderson a proper sendoff to the All-Star Game yesterday.
They reminded their lone representative of how much a group effort it has been in their long climb to within one game of the break-even point with one game left before the break.
On a day Sanderson faltered, the Yankees again proved they are unquestionably this season's American League all-stars of respectability.
They rallied, roared and relieved.
They ripped 13 hits, including four by Steve Sax, hit three home runs, and routed the Baltimore Orioles, 13-5, at Yankee Stadium.
They continued to make people believe these Yanks are coming.


Cynthia M. Azoy, Banker, Engaged
The engagement of Cynthia Margaret Azoy, an assistant vice president at First Fidelity Bank of New Jersey in Morristown, to Christopher Davis Rooke, a bankruptcy manager for A.T.&amp;T.
Credit Corporation in Parsippany, N.J., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Philip L. Azoy of Morristown.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Azoy, 35 years old, graduated from Lafayette College.
Her father retired as a vice president of the Irving Trust Company.
Her mother, Elizabeth M. Fowler, is a financial-news reporter for The New York Times and the author of five books, most recently "The New York Times Career Planner."


Answering The Mail
Q.
I own a one-story house that is now more than 45 years old.
I have a problem with condensation in the attic in the winter, so much so that you can see drips on the interior walls below.
The attic has three roof vents, and I have checked to be certain that the vents under the eaves are not blocked by insulation.
The roof does not leak, and there is no condensation problem in the summer.
Is there any way I can solve the winter condensation problem?
A.
The first thing I would check is the humidity inside the house, for it sounds as though it may be too high.
If you have a humidifier on the furnace, turn it way down during cold weather, or turn it off completely to see if this helps.
I also suspect that you do not have enough ventilation in the attic.
In addition to continuous eave vents, you probably need continuous ridge vents, but you can probably get by with doubling the number of roof vents you have now.


At Home in Tuscany
OUR trips always involve a conflict between nature and civilization.
My husband, Tony, is happiest on a remote island looking for mussels, and I prefer to be carried from one fabulous building to the next, while being fed labor-intensive meals I could never make myself.
Common to us both is a desire to see plants, people, animals and art in situ.
We are lucky to live in New York City where the world comes to us, but it arrives detached from its original place: meaningless, dispirited, deconsecrated.
Where does it come from?
Before it gets transplanted, assimilated, cooked and catalogued, what is it?
We travel to find out.
What we wanted to find on this trip was the world we saw in "Painting in Renaissance Siena, 1420-1500," a show that gave us a winter of pleasure at the Metropolitan Museum of Art three years ago.
A relatively small show, it drew many people for a new look at paintings that for me at least had been an obscure part of Art 105.
My favorite artist here, and I was hardly alone, was the Master of the Osservanza.
His "Life of St. Anthony" and "Passion Predella" pictured a vibrant and detailed contemporary environment embracing anachronistic biblical scenes in the foreground.


Put a Period on Start, Now
After nine years of strategic arms reduction talks, the U.S. and the Soviet Union have nearly completed a 450-page draft treaty.
That's half the length of "The Brothers Karamazov," which took Dostoyevsky only two and a half years to write.
But then Dostoyevsky didn't have to get Washington and Moscow to agree on every comma.
Three unsolved issues remain.
None has much military consequence; all are politically nettlesome.
But agreement can surely be reached in time for a treaty signing this month.


Postings: 20 Stories Off Third; Pension Fund Plans Addition
The world's largest pension fund will be expanding its Manhattan headquarters to keep up with the size of its portfolio.
TIAA-CREF, the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association-College Retirement Equities Fund, has seen its assets multiply five times, to $95 billion, over the past decade, requiring more space for its headquarters staff.
Accordingly, the pension fund will build a 20-story, 160,000-square-foot addition to its present headquarters at 730 Third Avenue on an adjacent lot on 45th Street that the fund owns.
Demolition on the lot begins this month and construction will start in September, with completion planned for mid-1993.
The addition will match the current building's gray brick style.
As part of the project, the present lobby entrance on Third Avenue will be renovated and given a two-story atrium partially clad in granite.


Sports People: Tennis; Trying to Regain Fame
JOHAN KRIEK will be playing again in the Hall of Fame championships in Newport, R.I., starting tomorrow.
The 33-year-old South African-born Kriek, once No. 7 in the world ranking, is trying to come back from surgery to his right elbow that removed bone spurs and calcium deposits.


Anne Patterson, Lawyer, Marries
Anne Winchester Patterson, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Robert P. Patterson of New York, was married in Cold Spring, N.Y., yesterday to Christopher Finn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Macy Finn of Sharon, Conn.
The Rev.
James Tubridy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Loretto Church.
Mrs.
Finn, 34 years old, is an assistant United States attorney in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University, as did her husband, and received a J.D. degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a judge of Federal District Court in New York.
Her mother is a real-estate agent for Douglas Elliman-Gibbons &amp; Ives in New York.


Organizing the Garage
GARAGES house more than just the family car.
Because they are convenient, have larger doors than closets and are accessible from outdoors, all manner of items wind up inside, sometimes pushed against the walls to gain space but more often left where they are.
If this is the summer you vowed to finally get the garage organized, following are some tips.


Frustration of Getting a Refund on Canada's New Tax
WHEN Canada instituted its 7 percent tax on goods and services this year -- everything from hotel rooms to legal bills -- the government assured visitors that the tax would be refunded in an expedient manner.
"Just save your receipts and take them to the duty-free shop at the airport or the border when you leave and you'll get a cash refund," travelers who asked were told as they entered Canada.
The tax, similar to the V.A.T. (value-added tax) that prevails in Europe, took effect Jan. 1, replacing a 13.5 percent tax on manufactured goods.
But the experience of visitors over the past few months seems to indicate that things are not so simple.
Murray and Marsha Mittman of Roslyn, L.I., wrote the Travel section last month after returning from the Canadian Rockies, saying they wanted to warn people that the tax "makes your vacation a terrible hassle."


Washington at Work; Senator Faces a War on Two Fronts
John C. Danforth, who says what he likes most about the Senate is "a fight, a big fight," is in the middle of two of them, the battles over the civil rights bill and the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
The Missouri Republican is the Bush Administration's most important antagonist on the civil rights bill.
His insistence that Republicans reject the politics of race and his ability to define the disputed issues as more than lawyers' quibbles have brought him close to forging a veto-proof majority for the legislation.


Style Makers; Ann Sacks, Tile Entrepreneur
Ten years ago, when Ann Sacks began selling tile out of her Portland home, the tile industry was in a slump and most interiors emphasized high-tech chrome or lots of wood.
But Ms.
Sacks was determined to broaden the availability of high-quality tile and stone work.
"I just love tile," said Ms.
Sacks, now 42 years old.
"I figured if I could get people to see it, it would sell itself."


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Hicksville 180,000
8 Lewis Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old legal 2-family colonial; eat-in kitchens, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.
Mineola 166,000
428 Argyle Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, basement, brick and aluminum siding; taxes $2,400.
Northport 170,000
327 Woodbine Avenue  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 100-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.
St.
James 230,000
109 Hobson Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 0.75 acres, 2-car garage; taxes $6,700.
Smithtown 215,000
2 South Lot Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; den w/fireplace, finished basement, office, deck, 0.5 acres; taxes $5,800.
Westbury 195,000
19 Pinetree Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; dining room, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $4,900.
OTHER AREAS Scarsdale, N.Y. 510,000
61 Franklin Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; 3 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, breakfast room, family room, playroom; taxes $12,498.
Branford, Conn. 168,250
28 Woodvale Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old split level; living room with vaulted ceiling, formal dining room, needs renovation; taxes $1,601.
Freehold, N.J. 182,000
39 Hampton Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, h/w floors, family room; taxes $3,852.


5 Agencies Adapt to Abortion Ruling
AFTER the United States Supreme Court upheld a ban on abortion counseling at federally financed clinics, Nancy O'Keefe of Planned Parenthood of Nassau County strived to maintain her organization's finances while retaining its integrity.
"So I got to thinking that maybe we could build a little shack out in the parking lot," she said, "and there you could talk to me if you wanted abortion information."


California's Tax 'Revolt' Faces Challenge
A case challenging Proposition 13, California's "tax revolt" law, is wending its way toward the U.S.
Supreme Court.
If the court agrees to hear the case, its decision is likely to affect every homeowner in California.
At issue is the law's way of taxing property.
Its critics say it lets homeowners of long standing pay far less in property tax than newcomers.
Stephanie Nordlinger, the Los Angeles lawyer who is asking the High Court to hear her case, says the law creates enormous disparities in property taxes.


'Brother-in-Lawford'
PETER LAWFORD
The Man Who Kept the Secrets.
By James Spada.
Illustrated. 504 pp.
New York: Bantam Books. $22.50.


With a Crack, Wood Makes a Baseball Comeback
As recently as 1985, the wooden baseball bat seemed doomed in all but professional leagues, done in by aluminum bats that not only were far more durable but also seemed to contain more base hits.
Never mind that no fan ever preferred the ping of aluminum striking the ball to the resounding crack of a wooden bat.
Or that every great slugger has made his name using wood.


Dicey Times In Moscow And Berlin
Contrary to popular conviction, most critics prefer celebration to condemnation.
So it was disappointing to confront two legendary European musical institutions, the Berlin Philharmonic early last month at Carnegie Hall and the Bolshoi Opera over the last two weeks at the Metropolitan Opera, and find them suffering through perilous transitions.
Both the Berliners and the Bolshoi came here with big reputations honorably earned, and both were marketed with a panache reminiscent of the late Sol Hurok's, with ticket prices to match (a $135 top for the Bolshoi).
When people pay top ruble, they not only expect to have a good time, they resent being told they shouldn't have had one.


The World; A Rising Sense That Iraq's Hussein Must Go
WHILE President Bush is going through the diplomatic motions of trying to get the Iraqis to peacefully surrender their nuclear weapons-making equipment, many Administration officials are beginning to come around to the view that there is no diplomatic solution for their Iraq problem.
The only solution, in this view, is the removal of President Saddam Hussein.
Wars do not usually end with the defeated general still in power in his capital, but for a variety of reasons the Bush Administration was prepared to live with the Iraqi leader.
But that decision is now under review.
Mr.
Hussein's relentless efforts to retain his nuclear bomb components are making it increasingly difficult for Washington to justify having left him in power.
In fact, many officials now acknowledge, as long as he is there the gulf war will never really be over.


Tennis; For Becker-Stich, a Few Common Factors
They are both towering Germans.
They both use their serve like an agent of vengeance and they are the foundation of their nation's reascendant Davis Cup team.
But beyond that, the resemblance between three-time Wimbledon champion Boris Becker and first-time finalist Michael Stich all but disappears.


Kuwait Still Perceives Iraqis as a Threat
The biggest internal security threat facing Kuwaiti police is the presence of scores of Iraqi agents suspected to be hiding in Kuwait, Interior Minister Hamud al-Sabah said today.
The minister, the member of the ruling royal family who oversees all police and state security forces, said in an interview that he is making a special effort to round up Iraqi suspects, and that one or two are being arrested almost every day.


From Homemaker to Wage Earner in Appalachia
Five years ago, Katie Rollins left her kitchen and barnyard for a regular paying job, as a clerk in Uncle Tom's Grocery and Restaurant here.
Her husband, Doug, used to work in a coffin factory, but it closed in 1984; he then lost a second job as a part-time handyman.
Now Mrs.
Rollins says he is too depressed to look for work.
The economic crunch came when Mrs.
Rollins had a miscarriage late in pregnancy five years ago.
"I got this bill for $1,700 for 11 hours in the hospital," she said.
"We had no insurance. That's when I started making my own decisions."


Upstairs, Downstairs
To the Editor:
The Museum of Modern Art's exhibition "Seven Master Printmakers: Innovations in the 80's" and Roberta Smith's criticisms of it are ironically timely  [ "Narrow Notions of Greatness at the Modern," June 23 ] .
In his retrospective downstairs at the Modern, Ad Reinhardt posthumously skewers art-world hype (and slick, salable images as a manifestation) through a series of hilarious and irreverent cartoons, then bathes the viewers in a real genius glow with his reductive "black" paintings.


Mary Fernandez to Wed Adam Louis Buchsbaum
Mary Frances Fernandez and Adam Louis Buchsbaum, doctoral students in computer science at Princeton University, plan to marry in October.
The prospective bride, 27 years old, is the daughter of Evangeline Fernandez of Tatum, Cameroon, and Francisco Fernandez of Logrono, Spain.
Mr.
Buchsbaum, 25, is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Solomon Buchsbaum of Westfield, N.J.
The couple are magna cum laude graduates of Brown University.
Her mother is a member of the Peace Corps in Cameroon.
Her father is an English teacher.
His father is a senior vice president of technology systems at the A.T.&amp;T.
Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, N.J.


Senate Can Do More on Court Nominations
To the Editor:
With the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas, yet another conservative, to the already heavily weighted Supreme Court, some may ask: Can progressive, liberal and moderate lawmakers do anything to stop the Supreme Court (and the Federal judiciary generally) from continuing what many view as a swift and dangerous move to the right?


HOW SHORT IS TOO SHORT?
I was sorry to read that "the mission to deflate society's cult of stature" is placed in the hands of the National Association of Short Adults, "a semise rious, 300-member lobby whose motto is 'Down in front!' "
The way in which N.A.S.A. is portrayed suggests that only a lunatic fringe of little people defend shortness -- and do so by pertly declaring that they "take up less space." MIRANDA B. HICKMAN
Schenectady, N.Y.


Q and A
A Disputed Appraisal Question: A relocation company has come up with a value for my home which I believe is unfair.
I believe the valuation is based on an erroneous home inspection report.
Can I order another inspection to try to have this worked out? . . .
Cord Johnson, Manhattan Answer: There is nothing to prevent you from getting another appraisal, but if you expect your employer to pay for it or to consider it, you should check with your superior first.
The answer may depend on the terms of the contract your employer has with the relocation company.
The value of a home usually is based on two independent appraisals, but when there is a wide discrepancy between the appraisals, sometimes a third one is ordered, and in some cases the homeowner may provide the third appraisal.
Perhaps your employer can work this out for you with the relocation company.
Concrete Ceiling Problem  Question: I purchased a co-op in 1989 and had it painted at the time.
Last month I noticed the ceiling's paint had started coming off as if there were a leak.
The superintendent said that there is no leak.
When I reported the problem to the board I was told that the problem has been caused by the fact that the ceiling is a concrete material.
The co-op board said that it is not responsible for correcting the problem.
Are they correct? . . .
Lisa Berman, Manhattan  Answer: Maybe.
The corporation would be responsible for correcting a leak or any other structural defect.
But the consensus among construction professionals asked about this problem was that the ceiling may not have been properly prepared for plastering and painting.
The ceiling should have been sealed with a special primer.
The primer coat, which is applied like paint, fills the holes and makes the surface less porous so the paint or plaster is not affected by moisture that may accumulate in the concrete.
This probably should have been done by the builder at the time of construction or during any substantial renovation.
In any case, it sounds as your problem is one with which the board is familiar.
You might ask what successful remedies other shareholders have used.
Most boards have engineers or architects as members who might be able to guide you.
Expanding Co-op Board Question: I live in a building that was converted to a co-op in 1983.
The bylaws specify that the number of directors in the corporation should be five with no specific reference to an increase in number.
Our board has decided to increase the number of members from five to seven.
Can they do this without a vote of the shareholders? . . .
Arjan Awal, Manhattan  Answer: It would depend on the language in the co-op's incorporation documents.
According to Stuart Saft, an attorney who specializes in real estate matters and who is a vice president of the Council of New York Cooperatives, the co-op's certificate of incorporation may give the board the flexibility of increasing or decreasing the number of members.
"Often the certificate will say, for instance, that a board shall be comprised of no less than 3 but no more than 7 members." he said.
"If that is the case, an expansion could be done without a shareholders vote."
If your co-op's documents of incorporation only reflect the language that is in the bylaws -- that there be five board members -- any expansion of the board would require the participation of the shareholders.
For some co-ops, a copy of the certificate of incorporation is part of the prospectus.
If this in not the case in your co-op, the board should be willing to provide a copy.


All About/Blood Banks; A Multibillion-Dollar Business in a Nonprofit World
Blood banking is a paradoxical business, a multibillion-dollar industry whose product is largely donated and then sold by nonprofit organizations.
"Blood is a bit like water," said Donald Doddridge, president of the American Association of Blood Banks, which represents about 2,370 independent centers in the United States.
Though the raw material is, for the most part, free, "someone has to get it and purify it, which costs money," he explained.
"Basically we're supplying a product and selling it."


Camera
Photographers, sleep well.
Scientists are guarding film, ready to attack faults or flaws as soon as they are discovered.
In photographic film technology, research and development never ends.
An emulsion comes to the market, and tinkering starts.


Talking: Gardening; Sharing The Land In Condos
AS midsummer approaches, many residents of suburban condominums are gazing longingly at their neighbors in one-family houses who are beginning to harvest produce from lush vegetable gardens.
Though they may have been only too willing to give up backyard chores when they moved into a condo, they now feel a sense of loss.
Ruth Price, for example, who moved four years ago from a one-family house in Guilford, Conn., to a condominium about 30 miles away, suffered such withdrawal symptoms that she now helps tend a friend's vegetable garden in the next town.


Edges Fray on Volvo's Brave New Humanistic World
Since August 1988, when A.B.
Volvo opened its car-assembly factory in the southwestern Swedish city of Uddevalla, it has been hailed around the world as one of the boldest gambles in what is known as humanistic manufacturing.
But this noble experiment is increasingly looking like a noble failure, its productivity nowhere near the exacting standard of world competition.
At Uddevalla, about 45 miles north of Volvo's headquarters here, Volvo became the first large-scale carmaker to turn its back on a system that has prevailed in the industry since the days of Henry Ford: the assembly line.
Pehr G. Gyllenhammar, Volvo's visionary chairman, wanted to prove at Uddevalla that the craftsman approach of having a small team of highly skilled workers build an entire car, when combined with advanced materials handling, could compete after all.


Miss James to Wed Burton McHugh Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Wallis of Wyndmoor, Pa., have announced the engagement of her daughter, Jennifer James, to Burton Peek McHugh Jr., a son of Mrs.
Burton P. McHugh of New York and the late Dr.
McHugh.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss James, 25 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is the director of annual giving at the Baldwin School.
Her stepfather is associate director and acting director of Episcopal Community Services and her mother, Margaret Bodine Wallis, is the director of annual giving at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, both in Philadelphia.


HOW SHORT IS TOO SHORT?
Certainly, cures for real illnesses are important; dwarfism, with all its attendant health problems, should be treated.
But the implications of a drug company determining an image of physical correctness, attainable by the purchase of their expensive drugs, is frightening.
As a guidance counselor at an independent school in New York City, I was upset by the implications of the article on human growth hormone.
No one likes to see children unhappy.
But it seems to me that one of the tasks of parents is to help children see past their immediate discomforts and to give them confidence.
Life is about overcoming difficulties, and children are remarkably resilient.
In my experience, one of the few things that can derail them is the sense that their parents wish they were different.
LAURA CLARK
Bronx


Poets Can't Beat TV, So They Join It
On a clear Saturday afternoon in New York City, a young black woman stands in front of the kiosk at Astor Place, talking.
Her looks verge on the nondescript: medium height, short hair brushed off her face, navy coat, plaid pants, heavy black shoes.
She holds a newspaper.
All around her, the sounds of the street -- sirens, engines, a rush of passing feet and voices, even the snap of the chill wind -- threaten to drown out her words, but the woman's voice rises angrily above the din.
A black man was killed while surrendering to two white police officers  But Donald Trump was on the front page  As a man who can buy his cake and eat it too  And movie stars continue to take precedence over justice  And politicians' personal lives continue to take precedence over the homeless  And names like Mike Milken, J.F.K.
Jr. and Donald Trump  Are just fancy names for irrelevance.


Man, 81, Found Slain In His Apartment
Frail, 81-year-old Leslie Holtz was choosy about the water he drank but not cautious enough about who he let into his Staten Island home, the police and neighbors said yesterday.
Mr.
Holtz's body was found by his landlord at 9:35 P.M.
Friday in his sparsely furnished apartment at 28 Fort Place in St.
George, where he had lived alone for 10 years, the police said.
An electrical cord was found around his neck, they said, and he had been beaten over the head several times with a blunt instrument, which was not found.


Another Turn in Previn's Career, To New York
Many a suburbanite, dozing on the 6:48 to New York morning after morning, must occasionally dream of a more glamorous existence -- that of a major orchestral conductor, say, shuttling among the musical capitals of the world.
But surely no globe-hopping maestro could find much to envy in the settled routine of the urban commuter.
Except perhaps Andre Previn.
Mr.
Previn has been the most international of creatures.
Born in Berlin in 1929, he moved with his family to Los Angeles 10 years later and developed a thriving career there as a film composer and jazz pianist.
He turned to symphonic work in the early 60's and was the principal conductor of the London Symphony from 1969 to 1979.
He bought a home in Surrey, England, in 1967, which he maintained for more than two decades, even while serving as the music director of the Pittsburgh Symphony (1976-84) and the Los Angeles Philharmonic (1985-89).


Susan Martin is Married
Susan Campbell Martin, a daughter of Charlotte W. Martin and David N. Martin, both of Richmond, was married there yesterday to David Barclay Mitchell, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Mitchell.
The Rev.
Don Raby Edwards officiated at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Mitchell, 29 years old, is the marketing director of David B. Mitchell &amp; Company, a hotel-marketing concern in New York.
She graduated from Williams College.
Her husband, 49, heads the company.
He graduated from Westminster College in Fulton, Mo.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.


Postings: SoHo Renovation; A Business Pied-a-Terre
A home away from home is being built for out-of-town companies that need temporary quarters in New York City.
Under the name of Walden House, the project involves the renovation of a 119-year-old structure at 49 Mercer Street, between Grand and Broome Streets, in the SoHo-Cast Iron Historic District.
Until recently, the six-story building was home to a textile company.


World Markets; The French Market as a Temptress
The sudden decline in the French stock market is making it attractive again -- at least for the investor who has a tolerance for the political risk that arrived with Edith Cresson, France's new Prime Minister, and the patience to wait for a hoped-for interest rate cut.
The market's fall has been quick.
From a 1991 high of 1,874.81 on June 11, the CAC-40 index of leading blue chip French stocks has dropped more than 8 percent in three weeks, closing at 1,723.14 on Friday, This is the lowest it has been in four months.
The decline is now eating into the spectacular gains made in the rally that began in January when the Persian Gulf War started.


Sunday Outing; On S.I., Rattlers, Sharks, Otters, etc.
If you and your family are seeking an out-of-city experience -- without really wanting to leave New York -- a trip to the Staten Island Zoo might well be pleasing.
Set in a lush eight-acre park in West Brighton, the Staten Island Zoo is a little jewel that features petting animals, pony rides, a tropical rain forest and an aquarium with such delicious specimens as piranha, alligators and sharks.
The zoo also has one of the nation's best collections of raptors, including eagles and falcons, plus an assemblage of snakes that is guaranteed to bewitch the most cantankerous child.


What Was It About 'Amos 'n' Andy'?
THE ADVENTURES OF AMOS 'N' ANDY
A Social History of an American Phenomenon.
By Melvin Patrick Ely.
Illustrated. 322 pages.
New York: The Free Press. $22.95.


Mandela Group Votes to Retain Curbs
The African National Congress, winding up its first full conference here in more than three decades, today urged that domestic demonstrations and foreign sanctions be continued to keep up pressure on South Africa's white-minority Government.
A resolution adopted on coming negotiations said the talks with the Government must be linked to "continuing mass struggle and international pressure" -- references to protests and sanctions.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
A DREAM DEFERRED  America's Discontent and the Search for a New Democratic Ideal.
By Philip Slater.
Beacon, $19.95.


Graham Greene's Sinners
To the Editor:
I read with interest and chagrin Paul Theroux's essay "An Edwardian on the Concorde: Graham Greene as I Knew Him" (April 21).
The range of Greene's genius exceeded even the limits of the Concorde, for what always fascinated him and the other members of the "Brideshead" generation was the mysterious intersection between the borders of this world and the next.


Hardball
COLLISION AT HOME PLATE
The Lives of Pete Rose and Bart Giamatti.
By James Reston Jr.
Illustrated. 326 pp.
New York: Edward Burlingame Books/ HarperCollins Publishers. $19.95.


Ruby Keeler Still Moves to a Berkeley Beat
Busby Berkeley represented the exuberant fantasy of the Hollywood musical comedy at its most extravagant.
And the star who personified those comedies, as well as a peculiarly American innocence, was Ruby Keeler.
The actress is featured in 3 of 12 Berkeley musicals to be screened in "Mostly Busby: 50 Years of Choreography in the Hollywood Musical," at the Public Theater from Friday through Aug. 25.
The series of 38 movie musicals also offers an overview of dance created for film by Fred Astaire, Stanley Donen, Gene Kelly, Hermes Pan and others.


Bert S. Harmon, Lawyer, 85
Bert S. Harmon, a lawyer who practiced in New York for more than 50 years, died on Thursday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 85 years old and also lived in Pompano Beach, Fla.
The cause of his death was not immediately known, his family said.


Man Dies in Collapse Of Building in Bronx
A 35-year-old Brooklyn man helping to renovate a long-abandoned city-owned building in the Bronx died yesterday when two floors of the five-story building collapsed on him, the police said.
The victim, Gregory Washington, of 384 Barbey Street in the East New York section of Brooklyn, was one of several workers who had been gutting the building for the past week, a police spokesman, Officer Hugh Barry, said.


As MTV Turns 10, Pop Goes the World
MTV blasted onto cable television 10 years ago -- Aug. 1, 1981, to be exact.
About 12 seconds later, the complaints began, and they have grown more extensive and sophisticated as the music-video channel has shown its power to shape the commercial fortunes and, inevitably, the content of popular music around the world.
By hitching would-be hits to the pervasiveness of television, the recording business found a marketing tool that brought it unprecedented profits.
At the same time, pop music -- which had usually been too scruffy for television -- became one more kind of programming, transformed by the needs and esthetics of television.
As sports, movies and politics had capitulated to television, so did nearly every kind of pop music that harbors ambitions toward mass popularity.


Weicker and Legislative Leaders Resolve Little in a Short Meeting
Legislative leaders met with Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. for only 45 minutes today in their fourth day of talks to come up with a tax plan to end the budget impasse here and enable 20,000 furloughed state employees to return to work.
Democratic leaders continued their discussions after Governor Weicker left their offices for the day at 1:45 P.M.
Another session with Mr.
Weicker was scheduled for Sunday at 9 A.M.
Little was said today as the short session broke up and Governor Weicker walked from the Legislative Office Building back to the Capitol, surrounded by television crews and news photographers.
There had been few expectations that today's meeting would resolve the divisions between income-tax advocates and opponents.
A Partial Shutdown
But even without progress in the talks, it appeared likely that Monday could be the last day of the partial shutdown of state government ordered by the Governor.
Mr.
Weicker has until then to sign or veto a temporary budget resolution passed by the House and Senate at the start of the week or it will take effect without his signature.
And any veto, legislators say, would immediately be overridden.
Governor Weicker has said that once the resolution takes effect, authorizing state spending for 14 days, he will end the partial shutdown of state offices that has furloughed nearly 40 percent of the work force.
Mr.
Weicker said he would announce his intentions on the resolution Sunday morning, before the talks resume.
Connecticut has been without a budget since Monday, the start of the new fiscal year, prompting the Governor's shutdown of offices.
Mr.
Weicker said he had no choice but to suspend nonessential services, because laws require the state to have a balanced budget, and he had no budget at all.
Long-Term Source of Revenues
Mr.
Weicker, however, had vetoed two budgets approved by the House and Senate that relied on a broad expansion of the state's 8 percent sales tax to cover currently exempt goods and services.
The Governor insists that the budget provide a reliable long-term source of revenue while stimulating the economy by cutting the state's high sales and corporation taxes, and he says he cannot see how to accomplish those goals without an income tax.
The meetings between Mr.
Weicker and the Democratic and Republican leaders of the House and Senate began Wednesday, the day after the Senate killed an income-tax plan that the House had approved and Mr.
Weicker had said he would sign.
It was the second income-tax plan to die in the legislature.
In the last two days the pace and length of the sessions between the Governor and the legislative leaders has slowed, as the legislative leaders have begun talking with their members and consulting on their negotiations.


Concerts Feature Jazz, Folk and Show Tunes
THE living is easy, as the Gershwins so eloquently proclaimed, and in summertime the listening also tends to be lighter, bringing a proliferation of jazz, folk and theater music concerts this week.
Some events involve driving out of Westchester, but one can start at the Ward Pound Ridge Reservation in Cross River, where an old-time fiddling convention begins at 11 o'clock this morning and continues until about 5 P.M.
Jigs, reels, bluegrass and assorted other forms of fancy fiddling will be on display.
There's a $10 parking fee per car but there is no admission charge (285-7275).


New &amp; Noteworthy
GET SHORTY, by Elmore Leonard. (Dell, $5.99.) Forced out of the loan-sharking business, a Miami hoodlum moves to Hollywood, where he finds himself feeling perfectly at home in his new job in the film industry.
Last year our reviewer, Nora Ephron, praised this novel for its "great, punchy, pitch-perfect Elmore Leonard dialogue and great Elmore Leonard sentences, long looping twisting strings of words that turn around and back up and go the other way, managing somehow (but how?) to avoid all the accouterments of punctuation like colons, semicolons and parentheses."
A MIDWIFE'S TALE: The Life of Martha Ballard, Based on Her Diary, 1785-1812, by Laurel Thatcher Ulrich. (Vintage, $13.) Reconstructed from town records and elliptical, sometimes incoherent journal entries, this book tells about the people of Hallowell, Me., from the viewpoint of a woman who delivered as many as 50 babies a year.
"Thanks to Mrs. Ulrich's imaginative talent, Martha Ballard's diary becomes a major source through which we can vicariously experience the rural life of early New England and reimagine the character of men's and women's economic and family existence," Carl N. Degler said in The Book Review last year.
"Laurel Thatcher Ulrich wears her learning lightly and her prose sings." The book won the Bancroft Prize and the Pulitzer Prize.


Fruit Desserts: Making Use of Freshness
Peaches, plums, and apricots: these are the fruits that in winter make a better subject for a still-life study than for eating.
Sink your teeth into a gorgeous-looking apricot that has been wrapped in tissue paper and imported at great expense from afar, and it has the texture of mashed potato.
But now, at last, peaches and apricots are ripe and fragrant; plums are full of flavor and ready for baking in beautiful tarts.
Fruit desserts will be only as good as the fruit used in them.
If it is overripe, it will turn mushy.
If under ripe, it will not have much taste.
The best way to judge any piece of fruit is to smell it.
It should have a pronounced fragrance.
As summer progresses, the best fruit shows up at farmers' markets or roadside stands where locally grown produce is sold.
This means that fruit is picked ripe, since it does not have to survive a long journey.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Clifton 165,000
50 Hollywood Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; c/a, eat-in-kitchen, close to transportation; taxes $2,080.
Freehold 182,000
39 Hampton Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, h/w floors, family room; taxes $3,852.
Howell 74,900
43A Piazza Correale  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 18-year-old town-house condominium; c/a, 1-car garage; monthly charges $105; taxes $2,035.
Jackson 86,900
12 May Boulevard  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting, screened porch; taxes $2,555.
Ramsey 230,000
232 Canterbury Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; stained-glass windows, wine cellar, fireplace; taxes $4,217.
Upper Saddle River 434,000
22 Ranch Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; deck, fireplace, full basement; taxes $6,228.
OTHER AREAS St.
James, L.I. 230,000
109 Hobson Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 0.75 acres, 2-car garage; taxes $6,700.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 510,000
61 Franklin Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; 3 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, breakfast room, family room, playroom; taxes $12,498.
Branford, Conn. 168,250
28 Woodvale Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old split level; living room with vaulted ceiling, formal dining room, needs renovation; taxes $1,601.


What's 100 Feet Long and Has Suckers?
BEAST
By Peter Benchley. 350 pp. New York: Random House.


Fruit Desserts: Making Use of Freshness
Peaches, plums, and apricots: these are the fruits that in winter make a better subject for a still-life study than for eating.
Sink your teeth into a gorgeous-looking apricot that has been wrapped in tissue paper and imported at great expense from afar, and it has the texture of mashed potato.
But now, at last, peaches and apricots are ripe and fragrant; plums are full of flavor and ready for baking in beautiful tarts.
Fruit desserts will be only as good as the fruit used in them.
If it is overripe, it will turn mushy.
If under ripe, it will not have much taste.
The best way to judge any piece of fruit is to smell it.
It should have a pronounced fragrance.
As summer progresses, the best fruit shows up at farmers' markets or roadside stands where locally grown produce is sold.
This means that fruit is picked ripe, since it does not have to survive a long journey.


Myths Perpetuated
To the Editor:
In his movie "Jungle Fever," Spike Lee has unwittingly cast a shadow on advances that have been made in perceptions of black-white intermarriage since the Supreme Court repealed anti-miscegenation laws in 1967  [ "Love and Hate in Black and White," June 2, 1991 ] .
Despite his intentions to eradicate certain distortions, his depiction of an adulterous love affair between a middle-class black architect and a working-class white woman perpetuates the myth about a higher status black man "marrying down" to gain status from the preferred race of the lower-class white.


Sunday Dinner; Cheap But Not Compromising on Quality
New York City is indeed the most expensive dining spot in the country; it's also one of the cheapest.
While the city's pre-eminence as a cosmopolitan commercial center has spawned some of the greatest restaurants, it's variegated ethnic makeup has also led to a colorful subculture of inexpensive places to dine.
Here are just three in Manhattan.
Le Steak
1089 Second Avenue (58th Street), (212) 421-9072 -- There are not many places in midtown where you can have a satisfying three-course dinner for $22.95.
Le Steak has been a fixture on Second Avenue for a little over 25 years, and it is still going strong.


Golf; Alcott Confronting Two Big Tasks in One
Throughout her career, Amy Alcott has thrived on righting reversals of fortune -- so much so that she whenever she needs a healthy infusion of alter ego, she refers to herself as Amy Adversity.
But after 17 years of professional golf, Alcott is admittedly running low on crisis fuel, and there's a feeling that the battle for her next victory may bring more duress than any of the previous 29.


CORRECTION
A chart last Sunday with an article about the First Philippine Fund tracked the performance of the wrong stock .
A corrected chart appears on page 24.


Travel Advisory; American Adds London Routes
Starting this month, American Airlines is operating five daily nonstop flights between New York and London.
American began three flights a day between Kennedy International and London's Heathrow and one flight a day on the Newark-Heathrow route on July 1.
On July 20, there will be one daily flight between Kennedy and Gatwick, London.
This new schedule is a result of the airline's purchase of three Trans World Airlines routes to London for $445 million.
Analysts said American was under pressure to keep up with United Airlines, the nation's second largest carrier, which began flying into Heathrow in February on routes it purchased from the financially troubled Pan American World Airways.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I own a one-story house that is now more than 45 years old.
I have a problem with condensation in the attic in the winter, so much so that you can see drips on the interior walls below.
The attic has three roof vents, and I have checked to be certain that the vents under the eaves are not blocked by insulation.
The roof does not leak, and there is no condensation problem in the summer.
Is there any way I can solve the winter condensation problem?
A.
The first thing I would check is the humidity inside the house, for it sounds as though it may be too high.
If you have a humidifier on the furnace, turn it way down during cold weather, or turn it off completely to see if this helps.
I also suspect that you do not have enough ventilation in the attic.
In addition to continuous eave vents, you probably need continuous ridge vents, but you can probably get by with doubling the number of roof vents you have now.


Lauren H. Derby Planning to Wed
Roger Alden Derby of Vero Beach, Fla., has announced the engagement of his daughter, Lauren Hutchinson Derby, to Andrew Apter, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
David E. Apter of North Haven, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Derby, 31 years old, graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in Latin American history from the University of Chicago, where her fiance is an assistant professor of anthropology and she is studying for a doctorate in history.
She is the daughter of the late Laurie Hutchinson Derby.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of the United States Trust Company of New York.


Agency Cited for Poor Leadership
A House subcommittee today issued a report that cited "serious leadership failures" in the Environmental Protection Agency and accused the department's own watchdog office of failing to pursue potential waste and fraud in $8.6 billion of Government contracts.
The report and an accompanying letter to the head of the agency, William K. Reilly, criticized the department's inspector general.


BEST SELLERS: July 7, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
2
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
2
1
7
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
3
2
17
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
4
9
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
5
7
9
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
6
5
67
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
7
6
3
THE RUSTLERS OF WEST FORK, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $18.) A frontier novel featuring Hopalong Cassidy, first published in 1951. (LP)
8
13
2
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The disappearance of a couple sailing off Bermuda raises a question: is a fabled creature from the deep responsible?
9
12
2
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
10
8
4
VORTEX, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $21.95.) A war in southern Africa, sometime in the future, involves Cuba and the United States.
11
9
10
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of two perpetrators of an insurance scam.
12
10
6
IMMORTALITY, by Milan Kundera. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) Through the lives of characters in 19th-century Weimar and present-day Paris, the author reflects on contemporary life.
13
1
THE PIRANHAS, by Harold Robbins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) A young man discovers the ways of Hollywood, Wall Street and the aviation world -- and his family's connection with organized crime.
14 *
19
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman enables them to solve romantic problems. (LP)
15 *
15
3
A SOLDIER OF THE GREAT WAR, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $24.95.) An elderly Italian professor recalls a life spent as soldier, hero, deserter, lover and family man.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
33
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
2
1
8
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How the President and his high military commanders made their decisions during the first two years of the Bush Administration.
3
6
5
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
4
4
3
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America.
5
13
3
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
6
1
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
7 *
12
2
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
8 *
8
8
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
9
3
5
COUNSEL TO THE PRESIDENT, by Clark Clifford with Richard Holbrooke. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the lawyer who served as adviser to several generations of Democrats.
10
1
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
11
7
2
PAUL HARVEY'S FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH, edited by Paul Harvey Jr. (Bantam, $15.) Anecdotes told by the radio broadcaster.
12
5
4
REAL PONIES DON'T GO OINK! by Patrick F. McManus. (Holt, $16.95.) A humorist's essays about life's foibles at home and outdoors.
13
2
BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS, by Stephen Jay Gould. (Norton, $22.95.) Thirty-five essays on natural history.
14
9
11
NANCY REAGAN, by Kitty Kelley. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized biography of the former First Lady.
15
7
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated on campus.
16 *
11
5
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
3
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
2
3
78
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a fellow named Waldo.
3
1
35
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
4
45
HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal with today's problems.
5
4
22
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
WITH FIRE AND SWORD, by Henryk Sienkiewicz. (Copernicus Society of America/Hippocrene, $24.95.) Thundering hoofbeats pound the Ukrainian plains in this extravagant historical novel of Polish gentry and rebellious Cossacks in the 17th century, first published in Polish in 1884 by the author of "Quo Vadis."
BET THEY'LL MISS US WHEN WE'RE GONE, by Marianne Wiggins. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) Virtuoso short stories, all dealing with the limits of memory, language and thought.
A GLIMPSE OF SCARLET: And Other Stories, by Roxana Robinson. (Edward Burlingame/HarperCollins, $18.95.) A stunning first collection of stories, chiefly concerning lost familial love and the struggle to rebuild it.
COLD WARRIOR.
James Jesus Angleton: The CIA's Master Spy Hunter, by Tom Mangold. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An account of the C.I.A.'s 20-year chief of counterintelligence and his futile, obsessive, destructive hunt for a Soviet mole in the agency.
ISRAEL'S SECRET WARS: A History of Israel's Intelligence Services, by Ian Black and Benny Morris. (Grove Weidenfeld, $24.95.) A thoroughly documented demystification of Israel's three spy services, including blunders as well as triumphs.
THE CAMBRIDGE SPIES: The Untold Story of Maclean, Philby, and Burgess in America, by Verne W. Newton. (Madison Books, $24.95.) There's little doubt that Maclean hurt the American atomic weapons program, Mr.
Newton finds, but the full impact of the ring's activities awaits the release of files by the K.G.B.
THE VOICE OF AMERICA, by Rick DeMarinis. (Norton, $18.95.) Fidelity -- between mother and son, husband and wife, soldier and nation -- is the issue in these fierce, often hilarious short stories.


IN NOTE TO SOVIETS, BUSH URGES ACCORD ON STRATEGIC ARMS
In a move to prepare for a superpower summit meeting this summer, President Bush sent President Mikhail S. Gorbachev a message today asking the Soviets to show more flexibility in negotiations on a treaty limiting long-range nuclear weapons, Administration officials said.
Mr.
Bush suggested that Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh, meet as soon as next week in Washington, if it would help seal agreement on a strategic arms reduction treaty, the officials said.


On the Street; Get Wet, Then Squeal
The Lilliputian set is staying cool and wet around sprinklers and in wading pools with fountain sprays in Central Park.
Squeals and screams hang in the hot, humid air as the youngsters dart under the water in what is often a first-time experience.
During the recent above-90-degree days, the girls (or at least their mothers, who dressed them) showed a preference for one-piece swimsuits, often decorated with hip ruffles.
Variations on the one-piece suit gave the illusion of two pieces, with contrasting top and bottom fabrics and front cutouts.
Floral patterns were the most popular, although a few junior sophisticates sported black maillots, one with black fringe replacing the demure ruffles around the hip.


Making a Difference; Pact Leaves Motorola in an Odd Position
Last week's extraordinary agreement between Apple Computer and the International Business Machines Corporation, longtime archenemies, may have left executives at Motorola Inc. wondering if they would end up in the catbird seat or the hot seat.
As part of their agreement to form a joint venture in software, Apple and I.B.M. both also agreed to use a new version of I.B.M.'s RS/6000 microprocessor to be designed and manufactured by Motorola.
The new chip will make Motorola a strong contender in the race to define an industry standard based on RISC, or reduced instruction set computing, a technology that simplifies and speeds up computers.
But it also put Motorola in the uncomfortable position of manufacturing a chip which could wipe out its own RISC processor, the 88000.


Daphne E. Moon Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Harris R. Hester of Darien, Conn., have announced September wedding plans for Mrs.
Hester's daughter, Daphne Elizabeth Moon, and Gordon Bruce Dunn 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Dunn of Cleveland Heights, Ohio.
Miss Moon, 28 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
Her stepfather was the president and chief executive of Cluett Peabody &amp; Company, clothing manufacturers in New York.


Correction
A listing on June 9 with an article about the Tatras Mountains on the Czechoslovak-Polish border referred incorrectly to a private tour operator in New York.
It is the Orbis Polish Travel Bureau; the Polish National Tourist Office is at 333 North Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Ill. 60601; telephone (312) 236-9013.


Fashion; Hot Shot
Sherilyn Fenn luxuriates in the hot studio light like a cat lazily sunning herself.
Wearing bright lacquered nails and very little else, Fenn, who played the sultry Audrey Horne on the now defunct television series "Twin Peaks," is fixing the camera with a come-and-get-it gaze that recalls the young Jane Russell.
Crouched behind the lens, chanting "more, more, more," Steven Meisel is urging Fenn to heat up her performance.
Then, all at once, the shutter is silent, the single movie lamp goes black, and Fenn gets up to break for lunch, shedding much of her magic as she goes.


Miss Johnson Marries Kenneth Selden
Elisabeth Stewart Johnson, an executive in a Los Angeles film-production company, and Kenneth Alan Selden, a motion-picture director, were married yesterday in Memphis at the Unitarian Church of the River.
The Rev.
Jesse Garner, a Presbyterian minister, performed the service.
Mrs.
Selden, 30 years old, graduated from Yale University and is a senior vice president at Addis Wechsler &amp; Associates.
She is a daughter of Mina F. Johnson of Memphis, an associate professor at Shelby State Community College there, and Charles S. Johnson of Los Angeles, a retired copy writer for several New York advertising agencies.


Parkway Project Guards the Wetlands
WETLANDS were once considered prime areas for highway development.
Since they were not suitable for housing, the thinking went, they could be paved over and used to carry commuter traffic.
But in recent years Federal and state highway policies have changed, with concern focused today on protecting the delicate ecological balance of wetlands.
As a result, government officials say, new construction on many older highways is becoming increasingly expensive and time-consuming.


Correction
A clarification on Neem oil, a Japanese beetle-control spray mentioned in this column on June 16: Neem oil is sold as Margosan-O by the Grace Sierra Horticultural Products Company of Milpitas, Calif., but is available in this country only to professional growers, who are testing its effectiveness.
The company said it hopes that individual consumers will be able to buy it within several years.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Released Ernie Whitt, catcher.
Called up Chito Martinez, outfielder from Rochester of the International League.
Signed Mark McLemore, infielder to a minor league contract and assigned to Rochester.
Placed Craig Worthington, third baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Waived Fernando Valenzuela, pitcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Fired John McNamara, manager.
Named Mike Hargrove manager.
Olympics  Basketball  World Basketball League
HALIFAX WINDJAMMERS -- Waived Elander Lewis, guard.
YOUNGSTOWN PRIDE -- Activated Fred Cofield, guard, from injured reserve.
Waived McKinley Singleton, forward.
Waived Tim Jackson, forward, for the purpose of placing him on the taxi squad.
Soccer  American Professional Soccer League
APSL -- Terminated the Salt Lake Sting, effective immediately, for the inability to meet minimum performance standards.
College
LEWIS-CLARK STATE -- Named Gary A. Picone athletic director.
Olympics
USOC -- Named Thomas Crawford director of coaching development, effective August 16.


Making a Difference; Showdown in the Gas Patch
In the San Juan basin of northwest New Mexico, a handful of energy companies have sold natural gas from an unlikely source, underground coal deposits, for $1.50 or more per 1,000 cubic feet in the last few years.
Spot prices routinely vary widely depending on the heating season, but an unusually warm winter and recession sent prices tumbling to their lowest levels in 20 years this spring, below $1.20.
When big gas buyers in southern California bargained last week for a deeper cut, to 95 cents, J. Larry Nichols balked.


Miss Thorp Plans To Marry in Fall
November wedding plans for Charlotte Ridgely Thorp and Darryl Joseph Donohue, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Donohue of Franklin Lakes, N.J., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Peter C. Thorp of Bronxville, N.Y.
Miss Thorp, 26 years old, is known as Ridgely.
She is an officer in the legal department at J. P. Morgan in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the manager of the university relations department at Citibank in New York.
Her mother, Schatze Thorp, is an associate at Valerie Wilson Travel in New York.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about refugees fleeing Kuwait for Iraq misidentified the refugees.
They are Bedoons, a stateless people living on the margins of Kuwaiti and Iraqi society, not Bedouins, the nomadic tribespeople who live in the Arabian and North African deserts.


None of an Employer's Business
Imagine being fired from your job for smoking a cigarette or taking a drink in your own living room.
Janice Bone and Daniel Winn don't have to imagine it.
Ms.
Bone was fired from the Ford Meter Box Company in Wabash, Ind., when nicotine was found in her urine.
The company policy: No smoking, ever.
Mr.
Winn was dismissed from the Best Lock Corporation of Indianapolis for admitting that he had had drinks several years earlier.
Best Lock's policy: No drinking, ever.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Apr. 91
Apr. 90
Change
Starts
981
1,217
-19.4%
Completions
1,083
1,310
-17.3%
Sales
500
534
- 6.4%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.88
9.85
10.34
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.30
7.31
8.57
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.72
9.69
10.17
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.31
7.31
8.27
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.74
9.77
10.26
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.14
7.13
8.49
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
10.11
10.06
10.53
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.71
7.70
8.67
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
6.36
6.37
8.13
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.23
9.23
9.84
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Travel Advisory; Israel's 625-Mile Trail for Hikers
Hikers will soon be able to count Israel as a spot to visit year round, and the country, which suffered from a decline in visitors during the Persian Gulf war, is hoping for a return of tourists.
Work has started on mapping out a 1,000-kilometer (625-mile) Israel Trail to extend from Dan, a northern town near the Lebanese border, to Eliat in the south on the Red Sea.
Israel already has hiking routes, but because of religious reasons and terrain conditions during various seasons, most of them are not accesible to hikers all year long.


Maureen Moran, Executive, Weds
Maureen Moran, a vice president in the travel-related services division of American Express in Hackensack, N.J., and Peter John Koppenaal, a vice president at Merrill Lynch in New York, were married yesterday at St.
George's Church in Maplewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Dean Lanning, a Methodist minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Koppenaal, 34 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Hofstra University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Moran of Wheatley Heights, L.I.
Her father retired as an accountant.


Andre Previn, Joyful About Playing Jazz for the Neighbors
AFTER two years of living quietly in the county, Andre Previn is going public as a neighbor.
The Caramoor Music Festival, so close to his home in this hamlet, so rich in performance possibilities, has lured him to a working summer in Westchester.
Beginning next Saturday, and for three consecutive weekends, Mr.
Previn will conduct, play the piano and perform chamber music in a six-concert "Andre Previn Series" at Caramoor in Katonah.
Setting aside his classical scores, he will return to the Venetian Theater at Caramoor at 7 P.M.
Sept. 7 to play jazz.
That concert, featuring a trio that drew crowds to the Tanglewood Music Festival in the Berkshires last summer, will benefit the Rippowam Cisqua School, an independent day school here that Mr.
Previn's son, Lukas, attends.


Corrections
The Sunday Dinner column last Sunday misstated the address of the Cafe de Paris.
It is 924 Second Avenue, at 49th Street.
The column also misstated the restaurant's policy on credit cards.
Although it offers a special three-course dinner for $25.50, which must be paid in cash, it accepts major credit cards for other meals.


Atelier Where Sculptors Retain Control
EARLY in his career as a sculptor, J. Seward Johnson Jr. found that he had problems when he asked commercial foundries to cast his clay models as life-size bronzes.
"I found they weren't willing to share their knowledge about the process with me or any other artist," said Mr.
Johnson, whose works are very realistic depictions of people at work or leisure, like a gardener on his knees in a flower bed or a businessman hailing a cab with a newspaper.
"They just wanted you to hand over your model without any questions," he said.


Without Her Permission
To the Editor:
The photograph of Georgia O'Keeffe and Alfred Stieglitz that appeared with Michael Peppiatt's measured review of "O'Keeffe and Stieglitz" (May 26), Benita Eisler's account of the two artists' "romance," was reproduced without either the "courtesy" imputed to me or permission for its use (I control the reproduction rights).
An inadvertent error on the part of The Times: apparently insufficient information was stamped on the reverse of the print found in the morgue eight years after its delivery, with other photographs, for the review of my book, "Stieglitz: A Memoir/Biography."


Laura B. Carson Wed in Chicago
Laura Bruce Carson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Carson of Chicago, and John Walter Banes 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Banes 3d of Towson, Md., were married yesterday at the Fourth Presbyterian Church of Chicago.
The Rev.
David Donovan officiated.
Mrs.
Banes, 28 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received a master's in public and private management from Yale University in May.
Her father is president of American Technical Institutes in Chicago, operators of private vocational schools.


Dollar Rises Against Yen
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
138.30
137.45
151.70
per Dollar
German Mark
1.8265
1.8105
1.6520
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1439
1.1417
1.1617
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6155
1.6220
1.7865
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$369.55
$368.00
$360.20
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Long-Word Competition Stretches On
To the Editor:
In "Sesquipedalians" (editorial, June 26), you credit "an F. Scully" with coining the longest word in the English dictionary.
You refer to Frank Scully, author of six books for the convalescent called "Fun in Bed," of which "Bedside Manna" was the third and least successful.


Gang Investigated in Tourist Slaying
Detectives investigating the stray-bullet slaying of a young woman tourist in Chinatown said yesterday that they had found two bullets and several witnesses in the shooting and had focused the hunt for a killer on members or former members of the notorious Ghost Shadows gang.
There were no arrests and no suspects were identified, investigators said, but accounts by eyewitnesses indicated that the shooting of Rhona Lantin, a 26-year-old visitor from Silver Spring, Md., was an accident, the result of a tragic random shot fired in a violent street gang's internal dispute.


Campus Life: Washington; Policy Would Put Limits On Students With HIV
The department of health sciences at the University of Washington is considering a policy to exclude students carrying HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS, from performing certain types of invasive procedures.
The university's AIDS Advisory Committee, which is made up of 23 faculty members and administrators from the health sciences, says it hopes to forward a set of general recommendations to the university's president, William P. Gerberding, by late July or early August.
Pending Mr.
Gerberding's approval, individual medical programs would decide which procedures would fall under the policy's restrictions.


Crime Nearly Pays in L.A.


Why So Many Children Need Extra Help
This is in response to the article "Hundreds in Preschool Special Education"  [ May 19 ] .
It becomes a dangerous vehicle of formulating public opinion when an article appears that not only quotes erroneous facts, but presents information out of context.
National statistics indicate that between 9-11 percent of the population is disabled.
The fact that Suffolk County is serving 7.5 percent of the population merely indicates that there are still many unidentified young children in the County who should be receiving services.


Separatists in Europe Indirectly Reinforce Unity in Yugoslavia
Nationalist groups in Corsica, Northern Ireland and the Basque Country have commanded little international attention in recent days, yet these and similar movements have been quietly influencing the way several Western European governments are viewing the Yugoslav crisis.
The immediate reason that the 12-nation European Community has come out in favor of preserving Yugoslavia's unity remains the fear that dismemberment of the Balkan state could spread instability and encourage other separatist movements across Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.


Scandal Reveals Holes in Rules for Foreign Banks
The largely unsupervised rise and sudden fall of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International illustrates the holes in the international bank regulatory system and is expected to bolster efforts in the United States to improve supervision of foreign banks.
Friday's action against the bank, once one of the largest private banks in the world, was initiated by the Bank of England after the British bank regulator said it had found evidence of fraud including concealed losses and false accounting methods.
B.C.C.I. had operations in 69 countries and assets of about $20 billion.
Its offices in New York and Los Angeles were closed by state banking regulators as were those in six other countries.
Rapidly Growing Bank
B.C.C.I., created largely by Arab capital and Pakistani managers, grew largely without supervision by bank regulators through the 1970's and 1980's into an empire operating at its peak in more than 70 countries.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
IVES CONCERTS  "Sundays in the Park With George Ives" is an addition to Danbury's summer music programs.
George, the father of Charles Ives, the Danbury composer, was a band leader and the inspiration for the series of free outdoor concerts to be given every Sunday in July at the Charles Ives Center.
The grounds will be open from 1 to 5 P.M. for picnicking and strolling, with the Danbury Brass Band performing at 2 P.M.
Today's program will focus on early works by Charles Ives, while next Sunday's music will be "British All the Way," and the remaining two concerts will feature works written expressly for the Danbury Brass Band and international selections.


Commercial Property: Retail Condominiums; For the Premier Locations, The Price Is Commensurate
TO put into perspective the price paid by Mitsui Real Estate Sales for a retail condominium at Madison Avenue and 66th Street, consider the amount of space taken by this paragraph.
Had it been part of the recent deal, it would be worth $38.
Mitsui, the Manhattan-based subsidiary of Mitsui Real Estate Development Company of Tokyo, has paid $14.75 million for five stores at the base of a 10-story landmark apartment house at 45 East 66th Street.
The stores, numbered 773 to 781 Madison Avenue, amount in all to 5,167 square feet.


How MTV Plays Around the World; Occident Prone In Poland
Everyone in Poland these days is talking about moving closer to Europe, and one signal of this preoccupation is the sudden prominence of MTV.
Though not widely distributed, the channel is making its presence felt: on fledgling independent radio stations, from Radio Zet in Warsaw to Radio Fun in Cracow, the selection of music, particularly the healthy dose of rap, reflects the pace of MTV Europe.
"Tele Express," an afternoon news and life style program, regularly shows a video recorded off MTV; youth-oriented programming on state-run television intersperses interviews with videos, and sets are tuned in at bars and clubs in major cities.
Leszek Stefiej, a Radio Zet co-founder, believes that MTV casts a long shadow over the Polish music scene: "MTV is the only reason most people buy satellite TV. It's the only way people here have to keep up with the music."


Recession Inspires Innovative Approaches to Business
AS businesses, individuals and state and local governments struggle to weather the recession that has gripped the economy since the end of the 1980's, economic survival for some has been accompanied by employee layoffs, a paring down of personal and household budgets and cutbacks in services in the public sector, economists say.
And though recent statistics offer a glimmer of hope for recovery, they say, a rebound is likely to be gradual, with those groups hurt the most by the recession -- developers, contractors and bankers -- facing a particularly arduous climb.


Deposits in Britain
A bank deposit insurance fund here may cover some of the losses connected with the seizure of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
But some depositors could still face potentially large losses.
Of the $3.2 billion on deposit in British branches of the bank, about $1.2 billion are in pounds sterling, according to the Bank of England, Britain's central bank.
Only sterling deposits are covered by the deposit-protection fund, which is financed by bank contributions.
And not all types of sterling accounts are eligible for coverage.
For example, banks and professional investors cannot claim compensation.


Travel Advisory; St. Paul's Charges Entry Fee
St.
Paul's Cathedral in London has introduced admission fees for sightseers -- although not for worshipers -- because of a growing financial deficit estimated at $680,000 a year.
Admission is $3.40, $1.70 for the elderly, students and children (calculated at $1.70 to $:1).
The charges do not apply between 7:15 and 9 A.M. or 4:15 and 6 P.M. from Monday to Saturday.
There is no admission charge on Sunday.
St.
Paul's, designed by Sir Christopher Wren, is one of the five most visited buildings in England.


Israel Not Budging on Settlement Expansion
The Israeli Government is convinced it faces a tough choice between continuing its expansion of West Bank settlements or getting aid from the United States for the absorption of Soviet Jews.
And it has made a clear decision: settlements will continue.
Israel greeted President Bush's latest criticism of its West Bank settlement expansion program, last Monday, with a low-key response that masked a deep and growing concern that the state may be forced to pay a heavy price for its settlement drive.Even though Mr.
Bush softened his criticism by saying he did not believe there should be any quid pro quo between settlements and additional aid, officials here are convinced that Washington may refuse Jerusalem's request for $10 billion in loan guarantees for immigrant housing -- if Israel does not stop building new West Bank settlements or does not show more flexibility in the peace process.


Postings: 3-Year Wait for Approval; Syosset Getting a Shopping Center
After three years of negotiations with officials of the Town of Oyster Bay, Long Island developers have been given a go-ahead to build Syosset Village Centre, a 130,500-square-foot shopping center at 111 Jericho Turnpike, near Underhill Road, in Syosset.
Construction is to begin in the fall, with completion scheduled in the spring of 1993.
The developers, Syosset Village Associates of Syosset, and their architect, the Spector Group of North Hills, agreed to several guidelines covering design, landscaping and traffic flow that were imposed by the Town Board and Town Supervisor.


Erin P. Donovan Planning to Wed
The engagement of Erin Patricia Donovan, an interior designer for ISC Inc., to Christopher Michael Mone, a lawyer, both in New York, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph G. Donovan of Plandome, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Donovan, 24 years old, graduated from Providence College and the Parsons School of Design.Her father is a real-estate developer and Long Island restaurateur.


Sports of The Times; Credo of Sports Agents: Manipulate for Money
NEARLY seven weeks ago, Bill Parcells stood at a microphone announcing his resignation as the Giants' coach while his agent, Robert Fraley, stood in the shadows.
With his celebrated client having decided "it was time" not to seek a multimillion-dollar contract extension, Fraley should have been saddened by the loss of his percentage.
Instead, the agent was smiling and joking with anyone who would listen.
Why?


Victoria Love to Wed Ronald Yusim
November wedding plans for Victoria Love and Ronald Maxwell Yusim, Manhattan psychotherapists, have been announced by her parents, Stanley J. Love and Diane Love, both of New York.
Ms.
Love, 29 years old, a cum laude graduate of Barnard College, has a master's in social work from Columbia University, as does her fiance.
She practices at the Karen Horney Clinic and is in training at the American Institute for Psychoanalysis.
Her father is president of Joseph Love Inc., a real-estate business and children's-wear manufacturer.
He is a governor of the West Point Society of New York.
Her mother is a painter and designer


Britain Needn't Rush Into United Europe
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis, in his June 21 column, excoriates the British for questioning a proposal to revise the European Community treaty to include in its preamble reference to "a process leading gradually to a union with a federal goal." He ridicules Margaret Thatcher for observing that Britain's Parliament had managed for 700 years and should be retained.


New Mannequin on the Scene
FOR respiratory distress, the major objective of administering CPR is to keep the victim breathing by blowing air into the mouth.
When cardiac arrest occurs, the rescuer has to keep the blood flowing to the brain by taking turns blowing into the mouth and compressing the chest.
Until September, trainees in Nassau County practiced solely on Resusci Anne, with a vinyl body, fake hair and real clothing.
A Norwegian dollmaker, Asmund S. Laerdal, invented the life-size model of a young woman in 1960.


Ellen Miller to Marry Rupert Gavin in September
Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Miller of Worcester, Mass., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Ellen Janet Miller and Rupert Gavin, the son of Mrs.
David Gavin of London and the late Mr.
Gavin.
Miss Miller, 30 years old, is a director at Lehman Brothers International in London.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Mr.
Gavin, 36, is a group commercial director in London of Dixons, a chain of retail stores.
He graduated from Cambridge University.


Only the Equipment Is Small-Scale
Tourists like to remember where they have been, which is why they always take pictures.
But methods for recording travels have changed over the years.
Victorians whipped out their sketchpads (Victorians were always taking drawing lessons).
Later, tourists lugged cameras, and from a purely pictorial point of view, photography remains a supreme instrument of visual expression.
Yet today's wayfarers increasingly turn to video; for by combining sight, sound and motion, video captures more ambiance.


Wall Street; Ignore Foreign Stocks at Your Peril
There was a time when America's public and private pension funds, which control about $2.7 trillion in assets, fretted about the risk of investing abroad.
Today, in a striking turnaround, they are beginning to worry about the risk of
not
investing abroad.
"Ten years ago, the primary asset classes considered by U.S. fund sponsors were cash, stocks and bonds," said Martin L. Leibowitz, a managing director at Salomon Brothers, in a recent study.
"Since then, there has been a dramatic globalizaton of the financial markets, and fund sponsors have become increasingly aware of the gains that can be achieved through investment in international assets."


Sukey Timpson Engaged to Wed
November wedding plans for Annadel Timpson and James Edward McGolrick 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McGolrick Jr. of Manassas, Va., have been announced by her parents, Annadel B. Timpson of Westport, Conn., and James Timpson of New York.
Miss Timpson, 29 years old, is known as Sukey.
She graduated from the University of Virginia and was a member of the 1980 Junior Assembly in New York.
She is a relocation assistant at the Associates Relocation Management Company in Washington.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president at Soros Associates, consulting engineers in New York.


Making a Difference; Swiss Watchmaker Joins the Auto Game
Nicolas G. Hayek helped to resuscitate the dying Swiss watch industry.
Then he led Swatch, the little Swiss watch, to stunning marketing success.
Now he is out to produce "the Swatch car," an "ecologically inoffensive, high-quality city car for two people and two cases of beer," as he puts it.
SMH, the leading Swiss watchmaker, of which Mr.
Hayek is chairman, has been working on the car for a year.
It signed a contract this week with Volkswagen to establish an equally owned Swiss-based company to develop the car.
"This is not just a contract," Mr.
Hayek said.
"It is a new dimension in the car industry."


Miss Heins to Marry Russell Brownback 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Heins 2d of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elisabeth Phillips Heins to Russell James Brownback 3d, the son of Mr.
Brownback Jr. of Edina, Minn., and Wilma Brownback of Cazenovia, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Heins, 26 years old, graduated from William Smith College and is attending the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is an executive vice president of Lehman Brothers in New York.


Rare Commodity: Artistic Greatness
To the Editor:
It has been 30 years since Jonas Salk asked Louis Kahn to design the Salk Center Laboratories.
Why is Dr.
Salk trying to recapture (or perhaps prolong indefinitely) that moment of artistic greatness by commissioning a "Kahnian" addition to the center?


CRIME
If John Harvey's novels were songs, Charlie Parker would play them.
Like "Lonely Hearts" and "Rough Treatment," his earlier, equally melancholy police procedurals, CUTTING EDGE (Holt, $18.95) sings the blues for people too bruised to carry the tune for themselves.
Charlie Resnick, the compassionate cop-hero of this superb series set in the English Midlands, can't see the pattern in a sequence of mutilations of staff members at a local teaching hospital.
A young surgeon's hands are destroyed, a male nurse is almost castrated and a student nurse is attacked with such ferocity that she dies from her wounds.
But where's the motive in all this savagery?


Man Held in Robbery of Assistant Prosecutor
An 18-year-old Brooklyn man was arrested late Friday night and charged with shooting an assistant district attorney in the back while robbing him at an automatic teller machine on Wednesday, the police said.
The suspect, Kenneth Martinez, was arrested at his home, 234 Sands Street in Brooklyn Heights, at 11:45 P.M.
Friday, said a police spokesman, Officer Hugh Barry.
The police said Mr.
Martinez had been identified in a lineup but provided no other details about witnesses.


Baseball; Hargrove In, McNamara Out in Cleveland
The Cleveland Indians, with baseball's poorest record, dismissed Manager John McNamara today and replaced him with first-base coach Mike Hargrove.
McNamara, 59 years old, was in the second year of a two-year contract with the Indians, the sixth major league team he has managed.


Basketball; Ewing Issues Statement, But Big Questions Remain
Patrick Ewing yesterday publicly addressed his contract dispute with the Knicks, which will go to arbitration July 22.
In a statement released by his representatives at ProServ, Ewing denied that he was motivated by greed last month when he rejected a new contract offer by the Knicks that, the team said, would have made him the highest-paid player in any team sport.


Nightly News Looks Beyond the Headlines
Under pressure from cable news and local news and in hopes of stemming a ratings erosion, for some time now the main network news programs have been edging away from the day's headlines toward features and themes.
That means, to get the disheartening aspect out of the way, that the number of soft stories, particularly about show business, have gone up markedly.
In the first half of 1990, according to the Tyndall Report, a newsletter that monitors the evening newscasts, the programs gave an average of 68 minutes a month to arts and entertainment coverage, compared to 38 minutes in 1989 and 1988.
More emphasis on entertainers in a celebrity-saturated medium may not seem strictly necessary, but in their more sober moods, "ABC World News Tonight," "The NBC Nightly News" and "The CBS Evening News" have also been paying more sustained attention to such subjects as the jobless and the homeless, health care and education.
To be sure, features on serious matters have long found a place on the tube, but not always in such a sustained way. (CNN is also pitching in, but the networks still have the big audiences.) But those of us who have criticized network news for soft or superficial coverage must welcome any indication of greater seriousness.
One week last month offered an unusual opportunity to inspect the sorts of efforts that may signal a new direction for the nightly news.


About Men; Forgiveness
The sound of the twin turboprop engines dropped an octave, and the 18-seat Jetstream nosed downward through a winter cloud layer and toward a rural airport in northern Idaho.
When the Snake River became dimly visible in the gray, December overcast, I took the letter out for a last read.
"You will notice some major changes in your father," his wife had written.
"Although he is very excited about seeing you after all these years, please understand that he gets confused and frustrated these days." She added: "We will pick you up at the airport. Plan to spend the night with us."


Lee Without Tears
LEE CONSIDERED
General Robert E. Lee and Civil War History.
By Alan T. Nolan. 231 pp.
Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press. $22.50.


Bigotry Of Another Hue
To the Editor:
Congratulations are in order for Spike Lee for advancing racism as a valid topic in contemporary cinema.
Though one can fatigue of hearing him whine about the perceived slights he's experienced at Cannes and the Academy Awards, there's nothing dubious about his skills as a film maker pushing heretofore untouchable limits.


Outside the Israeli Mainstream?
To the Editor:
While I can sympathize with the frustrations of two authors who believe their book has been assigned to an unsympathetic reviewer, it does Steven Emerson and Cristina Del Sesto no credit to cast wild aspersions in their own defense.


In Pennsylvania Politics, It's a Season of Turmoil
Political analysts cannot recall a year that has given Pennsylvanians so many shocks and left so much uncertainty as this one.
Confusion has boiled in the aftermath of recent events, including Senator John Heinz's death, the planned resignation of Representaitve William H. Gray 3d, the House majority whip, and a Federal court's decision that pulled the rug from under plans to fill these vacancies in Congress when it invalidated some of Pennsylvania's election laws.


Be True to Your School
To the Editor:
The eight points delineated in "How Business Can Help in Schools," are on target.
May I add three more:


RECORD BRIEFS
Mendelssohn: The Works for Cello and Piano
James Kreger, cello; Gerald Robbins, piano.
Musical Heritage Society 512820Z; CD and cassette.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
GENTLEMAN REBEL  The Memoirs of H. Stuart Hughes. Ticknor &amp; Fields, $24.95.


M. R. Manley to Wed Linda Schechter
Mr. and Mrs.
Loren Schechter of Forest Hills, Queens, have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Linda Jennifer Schechter and Michael Robert Manley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Manley of West Islip, L.I.
Miss Schechter, 24 years old, and her fiance, 25, received law degrees in May from Fordham University.


How MTV Plays Around the World
Europe  Translating MTV Into English


Results Plus
GOLF Three Tied for Lead


The Region; In New York City, a Budget Of Dreams Deferred
IN adopting its grimmest municipal budget in years, New York City danced up to the edge of doom last week, and then did what it always does: it kept going.
Now the question is whether it can improve upon the new budget's painful blend of deep service cuts and higher taxes, or simply continue the trend.
Street lights will not be shut off to save money, as Mayor David N. Dinkins warned they might when he proposed the budget in May, and the city's larger swimming pools will not close.
But they will be open fewer days this summer, and the Mayor, municipal labor unions and the state are still struggling to save what they can of the city's services and amenities.


Travel Glitches Behind, Kruk Clears the Way for First All-Star Trip
As with most first-time All-Stars, John Kruk of the Philadelphia Phillies reacted initially to his selection by pinching himself, not believing that he was actually chosen to go to Toronto and play with "those guys" -- his fellow All-Stars -- on Tuesday.
Kruk then burned a lot of energy trying to figure out if he would actually ever get to Toronto.


Thomas's Journey on Path of Self-Help
Just before Christmas in 1980, Clarence Thomas decided at the last minute to attend a small convention in San Francisco.
It was a gathering of black conservatives, an exotic species then and now, and the young Congressional aide decided to pay his own way to get there.
It was an epiphany of sorts, he later told friends: Being in the company of a few dozen fellow blacks who bucked the orthodoxy of the traditional civil rights groups was an exhilarating experience.


Woman Found Dead Floating in a Lake
A 21-year-old Long Island woman was found dead in Artist Lake, the police said.
A man walking along the lake early Friday morning noticed the woman lying face down in the water.
He waded into the lake to take a closer look, then called the police, said Sgt.
Robert Doyle.


The Nation: Symbolic Justice; A Remade Court Shifts The Fulcrums of Power
AS the Supreme Court, Justice by Justice, cements a new conservative majority into place, an absorbing human and institutional drama is unfolding.
Its essential, almost timeless elements are on display in headlines and news conferences: the passing of the old guard, the shifts in power that turn winners into losers and yesterday's dissents into today's majority opinions.
In less immediate and accessible form, another drama is being played out on the wider stage beyond the Court.
Recent decisions herald other kinds of realignments, shifts in power among the branches of the Federal Government and in relations between the Government and the states.


An Artist, Present at the Creation, Reports


HOW SHORT IS TOO SHORT?
Werth's article on the development and use of human growth hormone is a succinct indictment of the most troubling aspects of America's health-care system.
Why do insurance companies subsidize human growth hormone shots while they desperately seek to avoid paying for "experimental" drugs that might ease the pain of thousands of Americans with AIDS?
Health care through market research may be the death of us yet.
JOHN T. O'KEEFE Cambridge, Mass


Other Views On Medical Waste
As a veterinarian and an ecologically concerned New Jersey resident, I read the June 2 article "Medical Waste Law Draws Criticism" with great interest.
My comments:
As reported, 1,500 inspections on $4.5 million of collected fees equals $3,000 per inspection.
Two to seven inspectors (use seven) plus possibly an equal number of support staff and a director yield an office of 15 people.
Fees generated at $4.5 million yield $300,000 per employee.
New Jersey government requires new programs to be financially self-sufficient.
Are the fees collected excessive?


Latin Rhythms At Lincoln Center
Latin music will dominate three of the four evenings of Midsummer Night's Swing on the Lincoln Center Plaza this week.
Wednesday will be tango night, with Raul Jaurena and Marga Mitchell as guest performers.
Because Wednesday is lesson night, tango lessons by Marie Bastone will be included in the $6 admission.
On Thursday, soca -- Trinidadian soul calypso -- will be provided by Designer, a Caribbean musician, and on Friday the Cuban percussionist Daniel Ponce will play yoruba music.


Monica Mary Sciales to Wed William A. Furrelle
Dr. and Mrs.
William J. Sciales of Flushing, Queens, have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Monica Mary Sciales, and William Arthur Furrelle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Furrelle of Yonkers.
Ms.
Sciales, 26 years old, is an account supervisor in New York for U.S.
Concepts, a division of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Worldwide Advertising.
She graduated from Fordham University.
Her father, an internist, and her mother, Dr.
Nancy E. Shevell, a pediatrician, share a practice in Flushing.


Grace Cardoso Is to Marry Douglas J. Murdock
Mr. and Mrs.
Luiz Philippe Cardoso Jr. of Rio de Janeiro have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Grace de Araujo Lima Cardoso and Douglas James Murdock, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Murdock of Haverford, Pa.
The prospective bride, a graduate of the Academy of Art College in San Francisco, is a graphic designer at Amsterdam Art, an art supply shop in Berkeley, Calif.
Her father is the traffic manager at the Lackman Shipping Company in Rio de Janeiro.


Holly Dunn, Environmentalist, Wed in Cape Cod
Helene Kempton Dunn, the manager of the Nature Conservancy's South Fork-Shelter Island chapter in Sag Harbor, L.I., and Alexander Grinnell, a New York architect, were married last evening at their Cape Cod summer home in Waquoit, Mass.
The Rev.
Donald Cassidy, a Congregationalist minister, led the interdenominational service.
Mrs.
Grinnell, 54 years old, graduated from the San Francisco Conservatory of Music and has a master's degree in musicology from American University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did her husband's.
Known as Holly, she is the daughter of Mrs.
Kempton Dunn of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Mr.
Dunn.


Long-Word Competition Stretches On
To the Editor:
"Sesquipedalians" (editorial, June 26) indicates that Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan attempted to create the longest word in the English language by adding "ism" to a 29-letter word.
You note that pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis, at 45 letters, exceeds Mr.
Moynihan's purported neologism.


Mutual Funds; Watch Out for Overlapping Funds
Investors who own several mutual funds may wonder whether the funds all buy the same stocks.
Sometimes they do.
A recent study by Michael D. Hirsch, investment adviser to the Fund Trust Series -- six mutual funds that invest in other funds -- found a significant overlap in the top 10 stock holdings of the 35 funds that he follows.
Mr.
Hirsch tracks the holdings at least quarterly to insure the overlap never exceeds 20 percent.
Recently, Mr.
Hirsch's has found an anomaly.
Of the growth-and-income funds, for instance, 90 percent own shares in International Business Machines, as do more than one-third of the aggressive-growth funds.
Philip Morris is another stock that appears in the portfolios of many funds.


Miss Seidel Wed To T. S. Douglas
Anne Beatrice Seidel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Seidel of Providence, was married yesterday in Little Compton, R.I., to Timothy Stuart Douglas, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
R.
Gordon Douglas of Lawrenceville, N.J.
The Rev.
Beverly Edwards performed the ceremony at the United Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Douglas, 26 years old, graduated from Northeastern University and received a master's in education from Simmons College.
She teaches the first grade at the Corlears School in New York.
Her father is a professor of physics at Brown University.


RECORD BRIEFS
Wagner: Scenes for Baritone
Jose van Dam, bass-baritone; Orchestre National de Lille conducted by Jean-Claude Casadesus.
Forlane UCD 16633; CD only.


Budget Said to Set Stage for Future Battles
BY relying on some one-time revenue sources to help balance the state's new $14.7 billion budget, Gov.
Jim Florio and the Democratic-controlled Legislature may have made balancing next year's budget an even greater challenge.
The new budget includes between $500 million and $700 million in revenue that will not be counted on a year from now, and Dr.
William C. Freund, a professor of economics at Pace University, said, "That reeks of a quick fix that can do some permanent harm."


December Bridal For Kerry Decker
The engagement of Kerry Anne Decker, a third-grade teacher on Long Island, and Kenneth P. Ducey Jr., the president of Specialized Computer Services in Garden City, L.I., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
George K. Decker Jr. of Garden City.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Decker, 25 years old, graduated from Susquehanna University in Pennsylvania and has a master's degree in elementary education from Adelphi University.
She teaches at Oakwood School in South Huntington.
Miss Decker's father is a Family Court judge in Nassau County.


VOX POPULI
Comment books, like thank you notes, generally offer balm without bite.
Not so the well-thumbed book at the National Museum of American Arts exhibit "The West as America," which opened this spring in Washington to almost immediate controversy.
Visitors from all over America have paused to flail or to applaud the exhibit, which set out to unmake the myth of the American West in the wall texts that accompany the 19th- and early-20th-century American paintings.
For about a year, the museum has been providing comment books for all its exhibitions.
The remarkable thing about the comment books for "The West as America," according to Elizabeth Broun, the museum's director, is that "people stand in line to write paragraphs and even whole pages." Three books have been filled so far, and the museum is considering publishing them.


Wall Street; Emerson Radio Clears Up the Court Calendar
The Emerson Radio Corporation of North Bergen, N.J., has settled a host of shareholder lawsuits to pave the way for a $30 million sale of stock to International Semi-Tech Microelectronics of Toronto.
The suits complained that Emerson's top executives had sold shares while misleading the market about the company's finances and had wasted company assets on executive pay and stock options.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Tuckahoe
THE unusual name of the small Westchester village of Tuckahoe conjures up fanciful images, but its origin is firmly rooted in the ground.
The name once was believed to have come from "Turkey Ho," a call supposedly used by merchants in the village square.
That idea was discarded and now it is thought to have come from the Algonquin word ptuckweoo, a potato-like vegetable once common to the area.


Wimbledon Winners Will be Germans


Dennis Russell Davies Prepares for Brooklyn
Like their counterparts at other musical organizations in New York City, the administrators of the Brooklyn Philharmonic have spent the last few months juggling figures to account for cuts in government grants and deciding what they can afford to offer next season.
The season will be the orchestra's first under the directorship of Dennis Russell Davies and also the first under a new arrangement that ties the orchestra more closely to its home base, the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Inevitably, there were compromises: Mr.
Davies had fought to expand the orchestra's series at the Academy from five weekends to six, but was told that expansion would not be prudent.
But he was able to retain a free hand in programming the five weeks that the orchestra's management decided were within its means.


Scott Sagan to Wed Julie Handelman
Mr. and Mrs.
Martin S. Handelman of Rochester have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Julie Beth Handelman and Scott Alan Sagan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Sagan of Marblehead, Mass.
The prospective bride, 24 years old, is an economist with the Cahners Publishing Company in Newton, Mass.
She is a Simmons College graduate.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Handelman &amp; Witkowicz in Rochester.
Her mother, Sherrie Handelman, is the vice president of Travel Flair Ltd., a travel agency in Rochester.


Summer Sampler That's Mostly Musicals
GOTTA sing.
Gotta dance.
Take stock of the state's summer fare, and what do you find?
Musicals, musicals, musicals.
Even the Westport Country Playhouse is jumping onto the song and dance bandwagon after last year's success with "Me and My Girl," which starred Jamie Torcellini, who is heading the cast of Westport's production of Frank Loesser's "Where's Charlie?" coming up during a 10-week tour of summer playhouses.


Parents Obtaining Early Help With Down Syndrome
MITCHELL LEVITZ has Down syndrome, but that did not stop him from graduating from high school last month with a regular diploma.
At 20, Mr.
Levitz was a few years older than his classmates at Walter Panas High School in Peekskill, but this just underscores a lesson many parents of children with Down syndrome have learned: With time, patience and love, their children can achieve more than previous generations ever suspected.
While a push is on to change public perceptions about the disability, the most intense efforts are aimed at parents of newborns with Down syndrome.


Brave, New 'Cruelty Free' World
Life as a vegan (pronounced VEE-gan) may be the acme of culinary correctness, but it takes some explaining in restaurants.
"You say, 'Hi, I'm a vegan,' and they think you're from another planet," says Lorrie Bauston, director of the animal rights organization Farm Sanctuary.


Organizing the Garage
Garages house more than just the family car.
Because they are convenient, have larger doors than closets and are accessible from outdoors, all manner of items wind up inside, sometimes pushed against the walls to gain space but more often left where they are.
If this is the summer you vowed to finally get the garage organized, following are some tips.


For 'Othello,' the Fault Lies in the Stars
Not all of "Othello" (at The Delacorte Theater in Central Park) is dreadful.
But, unfortunately, the worst of it can be traced to the pairing of its two stars, which means that most of the time the dreadfulness is front and center.
Raul Julia is the title character and Christopher Walken, his nemesis, Iago.
And sometime before July 14, when the run ends, someone really ought to introduce them to each other.
With this production, Joseph Papp's Shakespeare marathon is now 18 plays old, but it still has not come of age.
Has nothing been learned from prior efforts?
Does it really have to be hit or miss each time out?
And why, frankly, is the New York Shakespeare Festival seemingly incapable of developing a discernible style?
I'm not even talking about a style that would necessarily connect one production to the next -- not when A. J. Antoon gives us a slapstick "Taming of the Shrew," plopped down in the American Wild West, while JoAnne Akalaitis treats "Henry IV, Parts I and 2" as a collage fashioned from the detritus of the last five centuries.
I mean consistency
within
a given production.


It's Back-to-Back-to-Back to Brawl As Clemens Battles to 11th Victory
Roger Clemens settled down after a brawl on the mound in the second inning for his 11th victory as the Boston Red Sox rallied for four runs in the seventh to beat the Detroit Tigers, 7-4, today.
Clemens (11-5) gave up 11 hits, including consecutive home runs by Pete Incaviglia and Rob Deer setting up the pushing and shoving that buried Boston's All-Star right-hander in a big pileup.


Try Reversing the Genders
To the Editor:
The perceptive analysis of "Jungle Fever" by Henry Louis Gates Jr.  [ " 'Jungle Fever' Charts Black Middle-Class Angst," June 23 ]  attempts to set the film in the broader context of evolving black-white social relations, but it misses an important point: interracial sexual affairs, with or without potential marriage, are seen as a problem only if the male is black.


Senate Can Do More on Court Nominations; Overruling Precedents
To the Editor:
Over the last year, the Supreme Court explicitly overruled five of its previous decisions, all in the area of criminal procedure.
From your newspaper, one would think the end of the civilization was at hand.


Charting the Migration of Puerto Ricans, and Their Resilience
ORIGINALLY, the term diaspora applied only to the exiled children of Israel.
But now it is available to all people uprooted from their homelands -- by force, like the slaves transported from Africa, or voluntarily (more or less), as in the mass migration from Puerto Rico.
This diaspora began in 1898, after the Spanish-American War, with the recruiting of 5,000 Puerto Ricans for the sugar cane plantations of Hawaii, and it reached a peak in the 1950's.
A time may come when there are more Puerto Ricans abroad than at home, for already the estimated total of expatriates and their descendants is 2.5 million, while the island population is around 3.5 million.


WESTCHESTER PUT IN LEGAL CONFUSION
A state appeals court ruling that Westchester's Republican-controlled legislature can redraw district lines without submitting the plan to voters has thrown the reapportionment plan into confusion -- again.
Two weeks ago, Justice W. Denis Donovan ruled in State Supreme Court in White Plains that the newly drawn districts could not take effect until county voters had a chance to approve them.
This meant that, in practical terms, legislators and challengers could ignore the new boundaries and run in districts formed in 1983.


The Region; Budget Battles End, Casualty Counts Begin
City services shrink Reductions are from how much was spent last year.


Linda Bowen Is Engaged
A September wedding is planned for Linda Sue Bowen, the daughter of Francis Bowen and Louise Clement, both of Baltimore, and Philip Delafield Carroll, the son of Philip Carroll of Ellicott City, Md., and Mrs.
G.
Cheston Carey Jr. of Baltimore.
Ms.
Bowen, 36 years old, heads Bowen Associates, an interior design firm in Baltimore.
She graduated from the Maryland Institute College of Art.
Her first two marriages ended in divorce.
Mr.
Carroll, 29, is a product manager for Sylvan/KEE, a software developer in Columbia, Md.
He graduated magna cum laude from Williams College and has a doctorate in history from Stanford University.


Foundations Collaborate to Ease Strain of Government Budget Cuts
Fourteen charitable foundations in New York City have banded together to help make up some of the money being cut from the city's budget for youth services.
So far they have donated $1.4 million to send several hundred poor children to summer camps, to keep 25 play streets open and to help 20 neighborhood organizations pay their rent.


Why So Many Children Need Extra Help
It was with dismay that I read the article on preschool programming for handicapped children.
This article presented a somewhat negative, one-sided view of preschool for the handicapped.
As an educator with 30 years' experience working with handicapped children, 15 of which are as a teacher-facilitator of a local school-district-based preschool program, I must take exception to the tone and content of the article.
For many years educators have been aware that when a child is diagnosed as having a handicap or to be at high risk for developmental disabilities, early intervention is indicated.
Research has revealed that early experiences have a positive influence on functioning and that influence affects all areas of functioning.


Pas de Deux to the Fore


Long-Word Competition Stretches On
To the Editor:
Re "Sesquipedalians" (editorial, June 26): I was taught that the longest word in English is "smiles" -- there's a mile between the first and last "s."  ALFRED NASSAR New York, June 28, 1991


Campus Life: Houston; Commuter School Closes the Doors Of Its Last Dorm
The only dormitory at the University of Houston's downtown campus will close at the end of the summer, forcing the school's handful of on-campus students to seek housing elsewhere, the school's president has announced.
The decision, made in early June, was revealed at a June 26 meeting of the university's Board of Regents by President George W. Magner.
The closing will affect about 150 students -- most of them from outside the state -- at the commuter campus of 9,000.
Students Present Petition
Mr.
Magner cited the deteriorating physical state of the building, acquired by the university in 1981, as well as budgetary concerns as factors contributing to the decision to close the dormitory, known as University Center.


Laura Everett Weds James W. Stanley
Laura Chenoweth Everett, a management consultant with Andersen Consulting in Hartford, and James Walton Stanley, a teacher at Kingswood-Oxford School in West Hartford, were married yesterday at Trinity College Chapel in Hartford.
The Rev.
William J. Eakins, an Episcopal minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Stanley, 24 years old, graduated from Trinity, as did her husband, 25.
She is the daughter of Mary M. Everett of Wellesley, Mass., and Addison L. Everett of Manlius, N.Y.
Her father is the chief financial officer of Syracuse Supply, a diversified holding company in Syracuse.


State Is Trying to Protect Its Endangered Species
MARGARET ARDWIN was turning over rocks in a small stream that feeds a reservoir outside Hartford, when she spotted a salamander.
Ms.
Ardwin, a botanist, said she might have found a spring salamander, considered a threatened species in Connecticut, and she went scrambling over the moss-covered, water-slick rocks for a better look.
A few days earlier, another member of her team, Adam Fry, had discovered a previously unknown site for the grasshopper sparrow, considered endangered in the state.
To find a spring salamander would have been another conservationist's coup.


Carsten Sierck, Law Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander W. Sierck of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Carsten Wentworth Sierck to Stockton Ward Atterbury, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Rennie Atterbury 3d of Peoria, Ill.
A January wedding is planned.
The couple are both 24 years old and students at the University of Virginia Law School.
Miss Sierck graduated from the National Cathedral School and Columbia College.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Beveridge &amp; Diamond.


Whirling Teacups And Ferris Wheels
"LOOK down there," says Orson Welles in a mocking tone to Joseph Cotten in "The Third Man" from atop the Prater's Riesenrad, its giant Ferris wheel.
Welles plays Harry Lime, an American villain in postwar Vienna, and Cotten is the pulp western writer with the unlikely name of Holly Martins who has arrived for the very-much-alive Harry's funeral.
"Would you really feel any pity if one of those dots stopped moving forever?" Welles continues.
"If I offered you $:20,000 for every dot that stopped, would you really, old man, tell me to keep my money, or would you calculate how many dots you could afford to spare? Free of income tax, old man, free of income tax. It's the only way to save money nowadays."


P.L.O. Gives Up Arms to the Lebanese Army
Guerrillas of the Palestine Liberation Organization, driven out of their last bases near Israeli forces, handed over weapons to the Lebanese Army in the south of the country tonight.
The Syrian-backed Lebanese Government, saying the guerrillas no longer threatened Israel, urged the United States to push Israel to withdraw from the area it calls its security zone north of its border with Lebanon.


Travel Advisory; U.S. Warnings On Yugoslavia And India
The State Department has issued warnings to travelers about Yugoslavia and parts of India.
Americans in the Yugoslav republics of Slovenia and Croatia are advised to consider leaving them as soon as possible.
In an advisory dated June 28, the department said it continued to recommend that Americans defer all travel to Yugoslavia because of heightened political tensions, violent clashes between authorities and demonstrators and travel disruptions affecting roads and railways.
Travelers should contact the American Embassy in Belgrade.
In an advisory dated June 24, the department strongly recommends that travelers avoid India's Kashmir valley and the state of Punjab until further notice.
Terrorists in Kashmir recently kidnapped five foreigners, it said, while in Punjab the political strife connected with the elections has generated public violence.
Although most of the violence is not directed at foreigners, trains and buses are often targets, and public demonstrations can quickly erupt into violent clashes, the department reports.


Karen Akers &amp; Co. Head for Guild Hall
NOV. 6, 1989: On the opening night of a musical revue, "Closer Than Ever," at the Cherry Lane Theater in Greenwich Village, Karen Akers, who was in the audience, approached a co-director, Steven Scott Smith.
"It was intermission, and she already wanted to do five of the songs in her club act," Mr.
Smith recalled.
" 'That's a part of my life they're singing on stage,' she said."
Nov. 11, 1990: "Ms. Akers has discovered new physical and expressive resources while sharpening her already astute taste in material," wrote Stephen Holden in a review in The New York Times of Ms.
Akers's act at the Ballroom in Manhattan.
The act included three selections from "Closer Than Ever." Mr.
Smith saw it, and so did Daryl Roth, one of the show's three producers.


Emma Carne to Wed Ethan Michael Rasiel
Dr. and Mrs.
Stuart Carne of London have announced the engagement of their daughter Emma Carne to Ethan Michael Rasiel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Amram Rasiel of Marblehead, Mass.
A spring wedding is planned.
Miss Carne, 26 years old, is an associate at Goldman, Sachs in New York.
An Oxford University graduate, she received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her fiance.
Her father is the president of the Royal College of General Practitioners in London.


Judicate on When to Disclose
To the Editor:
"Loose Lips at the N.A.S.D." (Wall Street, June 9) creates an erroneous impression regarding Judicate Inc. by suggesting that proper disclosure procedures were not followed.
The pilot program with the National Association of Securities Dealers represents just one of a number of new company programs which began in 1991.
This program has meaningful potential and provides the brokerage community with a much-needed service.
However, Judicate does not feel that every contract signed in its normal course of business triggers a disclosure obligation.
The N.A.S.D. press release represented an element in a public relations campaign to provide the requisite exposure to potential participants within the brokerage industry.
This is no different than one of our major insurance carrier customers endorsing the use of Judicate to their various branch offices.
The article's focus on the timing of the press release seems misplaced.
JAY D. SEID  Philadelphia, June 19
The author is president of Judicate Inc.


Sarah Klemmer To Marry in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond J. Klemmer of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Dr.
Sarah Colman Klemmer to Dr.
Leonard Nick Girardi, the son of Barbara Girardi of Sewickley, Pa., and the late Leonard Girardi.
Both are second-year surgical residents at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Dr.
Klemmer, 29 years old, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and its medical school.
Her father is a director of Webb Johnson &amp; Klemmer, an executive-recruiting firm in New York, and president of Big Brothers/Big Sisters of New York City.


Traffic Alert
U.S.O.
Street Fair: Seventh Avenue will be closed today from 34th to 42d Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Keeping Alive Harry Chapin's Legacy
HARRY CHAPIN rests on a hill overlooking Route 110 in Huntington.
"We thought he'd like the symbolism," his wife, Sandy, said.
"We picked the highest point in the cemetery so he could look down on 110. He was always talking of erasing that road, the symbolic dividing line of Long Island. Harry wanted to bring all Long Islanders together."
On a day when most Long Islanders were together, crowding the beaches and waterways as the temperature headed to 90, a cool breeze blew on Harry's hill.
The wind rustled the bushes and violets surrounding the late singer's headstone, actually a large rock his children once played on which was brought from New Jersey.


Other Views on Medical Waste
In regard to "Medical Waste Law Draws Criticism": Robert M. Confer, chief of special waste planning, notes the reduction of small-generator fees from a minimum of $528.50 to $100 a year and the budget cut for his state bureau.
Unfortunately, he fails to acknowledge the original grandiose plans of his bureau, which necessitated such fees.
According to the New Jersey Register in 1989, staffing proposals and yearly related costs were as follows:


Leslie M. Arndt To Marry in Fall
The engagement of Leslie Michelle Arndt to Louis Cavaliere, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Cavaliere of Pine Brook, N.J., has been announced by her parents, Dr.
Nancy Y. and Dr.
Gerald Arndt of Westport, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
The prospective bride, 27 years old, is the assistant editor for college-level literature and composition textbooks at Blair Press in Boston.
She graduated from Muhlenberg College and received a master's degree in English from Northeastern University.
Her father is a human relations consultant and marriage and family therapist.
Her mother is a clinical psychologist and marriage and family therapist.


Women's Views on Women
A COUPLE of years ago, it was "Bad Girls" at Aljira; now, it is "Designing Women" here at Rutgers, and once again there are no grounds for alarm.
A Rutgers Summerfest exhibition displayed in Douglass College's Walters Hall Gallery, it was sponsored by the Mason Gross School of the Arts and organized by the printmaker Judith Brodsky, who is also a professor in the school's visual arts department.
The women are seven, and the designs they have are not on men, of course, but on the image of womankind.
Most have had them since the 1970's, when women in the arts generally began taking up arms against male supremacy.


Marlo N. Marron Weds David P. Fiore
Marlo Nicole Marron, an actress, and David Paul Fiore, an architect, were married yesterday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Canon Cecily P. Broderick y Guerra, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony, assisted by Msgr.
Paul D. Panza.
Mrs.
Marron Fiore, 23 years old, graduated from City College and completed her training at the William Esper Acting Studio in June.
She is a daughter of Paulette M. Quann of Wilton, Conn., and James M. Marron of Ardsley, N.Y.
Her father is the director of facilities at the Manhattan School of Music.
Her stepfather, Byron G. Quann, is the marketing communications director of of the International Business Machines Corporation in White Plains.
Her stepmother, Maxine Marron, is a dietitian.


Eastern Europe's Leaders in Bind As Economic Reform Stirs Anger
Eastern Europe's transition to a market economy is reaching a pivotal phase as public dissatisfaction grows over the higher prices and layoffs caused by new economic policies.
Even as economic changes bear their first fruit in Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary, strikes and protests are increasing pressure on governments.
Political leaders find themselves walking a tightrope, wanting to carry out economic transitions as fast as possible but worried that public dismay with the resulting pain could throw them out of office.


Even B-Schoolers Say It's a Bummer
I had braced for a showdown at my 20th Harvard Business School reunion last month.
Asked to speak on a panel about leveraged buyouts -- had they helped or hurt American competitiveness? -- I came prepared to denounce them to an unbelieving, unrepentant audience.
After all, when I was at the B-school, critics called it the West Point of Capitalism.
I didn't expect more than a few supporters -- maybe Mark Drucker, who still sports a bump on his head from the Columbia University demonstrations of 1968, or Art Marks, who traveled to the Deep South to fight for desegregation in the 1960's, or Archie Edwards, a former art student at Harvard College.


The Cultivated Gardener; Can't Get Money To Grow on Trees? So Buy Some Seeds
You know you're hooked when you start growing perennials and biennials from seed.
When it actually occurs to you that $15 plants don't spring full-blown from pots at the local nursery.
That you could actually have lavender bordering the herb garden, a wall of hollyhocks against the old shed, a sea of columbine by the back door.
All for a few dollars.
Sure, it takes a few years, but it's like having children.
You don't get them after they have graduated from college and therapy; you sign up for the duration.


The Executive Computer; Can You See the Standards Through the Fog?
Like fog banks rolling over an already jumbled terrain, in the last two weeks two alliances each proposed to create a new industrywide standard for the class of powerful personal computers known as RISC-based work stations.
Apple Computer Inc. and the International Business Machines Corporation signed a letter of intent on Wednesday to develop advanced operating system software that will run on the next generation of both Apple and I.B.M. high-end personal computers.
The computers will be built around a new version of I.B.M.'s RISC System/6000 microprocessor, which will be jointly developed by I.B.M. and Motorola Inc.


The World; Has Pluralism Really Come To Moscow?
EVEN if the new political movement announced last week by Eduard A. Shevardnadze and several of the Soviet Union's most prominent political reformers fails to collect the far-scattered opposition into a genuine political party, the announcement already marks a notable milestone on the Soviet Union's tortuous road to democracy.
Just as Mr.
Shevardnadze's resignation as Foreign Minister last December exposed the cracks in the Gorbachev regime, so his decision to quit Communist ranks and raise the banner of the Democratic Reform Movement dramatizes the crumbling of the once-monolithic party.


Miss Consolino to Wed W. H. Murphy
Mrs.
Joseph T. Consolino of New Canaan, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Sarah Woodman Consolino, to William Harlow Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Richard Murphy of New Canaan.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Consolino, 23 years old, graduated from Sweet Briar College and is studying for a master's in teaching.
Her father, the late Joseph T. Consolino, was president and publisher of Times Books in the early 1980's and later a vice president at Random House.


Headliners; For Computers, Call David and Goliath, Inc.
ONLY a month ago it would have been unthinkable, but last week freewheeling Apple Computer and staid I.B.M. put aside their decade-long rivalry and agreed to jointly develop software and hardware and set a new standard for the next generation of computers, which will combine pictures and sound with more conventional means of displaying data.
The agreement of intent signed by the two largest makers of personal computers is the latest in a series of collaborations between manufacturers and software developers trying to reverse sliding profits.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TOUCHING THE ROCK  An Experience of Blindness. By John M. Hull. Pantheon, $19.


Air Travel
To the Editor: I have been very loyal to Continental Airlines for the past couple of years, hoping to accumulate enough miles in my frequent-flier account to enable me to request two coach tickets to Europe.
Recently I called to reserve two tickets to Frankfurt for September.
I was willing to fly any time during the month.
To my surprise I was told that there were no seats available and that I should book a year in advance.
I am rarely able to make travel plans that far ahead.


Mildred Dunnock, 90, Acclaimed As Broadway's First Mrs. Loman
Mildred Dunnock, the actress best known for her performances in stage and screen productions of "Death of a Salesman," died Friday evening at Martha's Vineyard Hospital in Oak Bluffs, Mass.
She was 90 years old, said her daughter, Linda McGuire.
Her daughter said that Miss Dunnock died of old age. She lived in West Tisbury, Mass.


Lisa Elliott, Art Director, Is Married in Westchester
Lisa Havemeyer Elliott and Brad Jeffrey Kronauer were married yesterday at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Capt.
Michael Coffey of the U.S.
Army, an Evangelical Presbyterian minister, performed the service, assisted by Deacon Patrick Troy.
Mrs.
Kronauer graduated from the Pratt Institute and is an art director for the Gregory &amp; Clyburne advertising agency in Stamford, Conn.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles K. Elliott Jr. of Ardsley-on-Hudson, N.Y.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Just How Bad Is the Air Over Kuwait?
FOUR months after the retreating Iraqis torched Kuwait's oil wells, the job of putting them out is bringing slow progress and bitter recriminations.
So is the job of assessing the environmental damage.
Thus far the United States Government has looked at the smoke as if it were over Pittsburgh, evaluating the pollution by the yardsticks of the Clean Air Act: ozone, carbon monoxide, acid rain and small particulates.
Environmental advocates complain that the questions more important to this particular kind of pollution have gone unanalyzed so far -- the carcinogens in unburned and partially burned oil, and the great clouds of big soot particles, the ones that are too big to pose much danger to human lungs but might change the climate.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: George E. Hill; Municipalities Face Some Tough Times
FOR the past 25 years, George E. Hill has been a professor in the Institute of Public Service at the University of Connecticut, which provides training for municipal officials and does research on issues of interest to municipalities.
Mr.
Hill is also the Mayor of Mansfield, president-elect of the Connecticut Conference of Municipalities and a member of the State Municipal Finance Advisory Committee, which is monitoring the financial problems of Waterbury, Stratford and New Haven.
Mr.
Hill has been involved in municipal government issues since the mid-1960's, when he served as budget director in Hartford.


Annette Bening, Hot but Cool
Annette Bening is not another Hollywood tootsie poised for stardom.
Though it is true that on film Ms.
Bening does for the little black dress what Marlon Brando did for the T-shirt.
And that she seems to have a knack for sashaying across the screen with her clothes off nearly as much as she does with them on.
But in less than two years, Ms.
Bening has zinged into the limelight -- as much for her willingness to bare herself emotionally as physically, for her chameleonlike ability to slip from one role to the next.


Nina Rohdin Is Married
Anne Marie Christine Rohdin, a daughter of Bengt Arne Rohdin of Uppsala, Sweden, and Anne Marie Rohdin of Mora, Sweden, was married in Amagansett, L.I., yesterday to Charles Pierson Churchill, a son of John Churchill of Perryville, N.J., and Mary Churchill of New York.
The Rev.
Robert Stuart officiated at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Churchill, 26 years old and known as Nina, is an account executive with the Sanyo Fashion House in New York.
Mr.
Churchill, 29, is a financial consultant for Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in New York.
He graduated from Hunter College.


Connecticut Fumes Over Budget Impasse
Behind the counter at the Occum Package Store in this small eastern Connecticut village, Dawn Raymond does the work bartenders usually do.
She listens.
The last few days she has been listening to short-tempered talk from the people here, much of it about Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and his order on Tuesday to close much of Connecticut's government because of the budget fight in Hartford.
"They're basically talking about the shutdown, that's all," Ms.
Raymond said.
"They're afraid of losing whatever they have."


At the Rockefellers', Rain Is No Damper
The trustees of Historic Hudson Valley celebrated the 40th anniversary of the organization and remembered its founder, John D. Rockefeller Jr., at a dinner-dance on June 22 at the Rockefeller estate in Pocantico Hills, N.Y.
During the cocktail reception, guests toured Kykuit, the mansion, and its gardens.
Rain forced the reception to the estate's stables, amid the carriages and early automobiles.
The dinner and dance was in an 18-pole tent.
The honorary chairmen were Brooke Astor, Richard H. Jenrette, Peggy and David Rockefeller and Mary and Laurance S. Rockefeller.
The organization operates public programs at six historic properties: Sunnyside, Philipsburg Manor, Van Cortlandt Manor, Montgomery Place, the Union Church of Pocantico Hills and Federal Hall National Memorial.


Campus Life: Maryland; A College's Roots: Students to Use An English Manor
University of Maryland students will participate in an overseas program during the next five years that will solidify a link between the university and its 17th-century founding family in Britain.
A five-year $75,000 contract signed this month will enable university students and researchers to use the buildings and grounds of Kiplin Hall, a country manor built in the 1620's by George Calvert, the first Lord Baltimore.


Vinca Climbs on the Botanical Hit Parade
VINCAS are moving up in the gardener's popularity poll.
This annual flower is gradually pushing out impatiens as a favored garden plant for a show in summer and for good reason.
It grows in full sun or partial shade.
It has few problems, if any.
And it thrives in poor soil and needs little extra watering.
The plant is handsome, too, with shiny leaves and an overall perky look.
The only negative is that vinca is a tropical species, and it does not flower well or thrive when nightime temperatures are cool, below 60 degrees or so.
It is also one of the first plants to be felled by frost in the fall.


New Yorkers, etc.
Whoever would have thought that a day would come when an attractive woman wanted to be inconspicuous, melt into a crowd -- in short, not be noticed?
It's happening, at least at some times and in some places.
And if a somewhat superficial observation means anything, the times and places are multiplying.
This attempt at being just another unremarked face is an outgrowth of something that once primarily affected the affluent.
Some years ago, in a number of the world's major cities, many women stopped wearing important jewels and impressive gold jewelry in public.
There was increasing concern about being targeted for a robbery, a feeling that sparkling baubles invited trouble.
The result was that costume jewelry, much of it extraordinarily expensive, became ever more popular, but it proved to be less than an ideal solution because much of it looks genuine.


Baseball; Leary's Latest Loss: His Job
Tim Leary was given a choice yesterday by General Manager Gene Michael.
The $2-million-a-year Yankee right-hander can take his 4-8 record and 6.30 earned run average to a crowded, talented bullpen or to the minor leagues.
Michael met with Manager Stump Merrill after Leary absorbed the Yanks' 7-4 loss to the Orioles on Friday night.
Leary, who is 32 years old, immediately declined the demotion to Columbus, which is his contractual right, but Michael told him to think about it during the All-Star break.
"He'll get more opportunities to work his way out of this at Columbus than in our bullpen," Michael said.
Leary declined to comment yesterday.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SECRETS OF PARIS  By Luanne Rice. Viking, $19.95.


Topics of The Times; South Africa Bans the Bomb
First came Brazil and Argentina, then France.
Now it's South Africa's turn.
Who will be next to sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty?
In South Africa's case, the decision is especially significant.
Of all the states to renounce bomb-building so far, South Africa came the closest to building the bomb.
Assuring that it goes no further will pose a special challenge to international inspectors.


The Inn Is Old, the Restaurant Is New
ANOTHER Manhattan transplant has taken root this summer in the fertile soil of the Hamptons.
The owners of Madison Avenue's Ca'Nova have brought their sunny Mediterranean cuisine to Quogue.
Seasons at the Inn at Quogue is the new venture.
A beguiling 200-year-old inn and captivating, visually arresting food make it a hard-to-beat combination.
The dining room is large, soft and summery with pastel floral wallpaper, black-and-white turn-of-the century photographs and well-spaced tables covered in white cloth, each punctuated with a single pink rosebud.


Bradley K. Richards Weds Ms. Kissick
Elizabeth Davenport Kissick, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William L. Kissick of Philadelphia, and Bradley Keegan Richards, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy W. Richards of Westerly, R.I., were married yesterday at the First United Methodist Church of Germantown in Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Theodore W. Loder officiated.
Ms.
Kissick, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Yale University; in May she received an M.B.A. in health-care management from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, a former chairman of the Yale Alumni Fund, is a professor of research medicine and health-care systems at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her mother, Priscilla Kissick, is the executive director of the Wissahickon Hospice in Philadelphia.


The Virtues and Pitfalls of Telling No Stories
The New York City Ballet season shot off to such a sensationally successful start in April with its 12-day run of "The Sleeping Beauty" that its swing into repertory for the next eight weeks risked an anticlimax.
Yet Peter Martins's staging of "The Sleeping Beauty" did not dominate the engagement, simply because the company's storehouse of ballets made for a final and perfect sense of balance.
These two aspects of the season were connected.
The virtues of the City Ballet's first "Beauty," discussed previously in these pages, stood out in relief.
The novelty value of a creative company's glance back at its 19th-century lineage via the Petipa-Tchaikovsky classic was also self-evident.
But it was above all a "Beauty" that paid tribute to the solidity of the very repertory that succeeded it within the season.


How MTV Plays Around the World; In Mexico, A Video Veto
Shortly after MTV made its debut on Mexico's Cablevision five years ago, it was abruptly pulled off the air, reportedly after the President's wife complained that its contents were scandalous; rock-and-roll, it was predicted, would lead to promiscuity, if not satanic cults.
Such precautions were ultimately negated by the unstoppable flow south of American culture.
MTV is back on the air on Multivision, a pricey cable service with looser ties to the Government than Cablevision's.
The service features 16 hours daily of American MTV.


Corrections
An article on page 21 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the New York City Opera misidentifies the director of "A Little Night Music." He is Scott Ellis.
The same article also misstates the length of Christopher Keene's tenure as executive director of the company.
He is beginning his third season.


Rappin' and Reelin'


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
May consumer credit, in billions
$1.5
$1.70
Thursday
Initial jobless claims, in thousands
420
423
Friday
June producer prices, percent change
-0.1
0.6
June retail sales, change in percent
0.6
1.0
May inventories, percent change
0.1
-0.5
Monday: Bank for International Settlements meeting in Basle  Wednesday: Seven-year Treasury auction  Friday: World agriculture supply and demand estimates *
Crop production estimates *
Bundesbank council meeting *
President Bush and Prime Minister Kaifu meet in Maine.


A New Look at Accessory Apartments
WHEN his mother got sick, Frank Zambito created a one-bedroom apartment in the back of his home where she could live and he could care for her apart from the other members of his family.
After she died three years ago, Mr.
Zambito rented out the apartment as a way of bringing in extra income to help with his expenses.
And now he intends to use it to house his elderly in-laws.


Of Cornopeans and Other Band Rarities
When the ophicleide, saxhorn and cornopean were in flower in the latter half of the 19th century, so were the American brass bands that played them.
Those instruments and many others that are little known today were standard in the thousands of bands that brightened communities throughout the country.
Most such instruments have joined the horse and buggy in the museum of Americana, but one present-day ensemble, the five-member Chestnut Brass Company, is devoted to preserving these horns and the music that was popular at the time.


It All Began With Hollywood
To the Editor:
I wonder if any old-timers reading your amusing feature on the flaky Playbill "who's who"  [ "Playbill Biographies Kiss and Don't Tell All," June 16 ]  can recall what precipated Actors Equity into ruling that their members could become the authors of their biographies?


HOW SHORT IS TOO SHORT?
More basic research into the physiology of normal growth-hormone secretion is needed as are double-blind, placebo-controlled studies to evaluate the effects of growth-hormone administration.
These should be performed in a university setting, with funding from an independent source.
In the meantime, what are small children to do?
I believe the Oriti family is doing Marco a disservice.
Every time he receives an injection, his feelings of inadequacy are reinforced.
Since he excels in areas that do not require tall stature, why doesn't his family encourage those abilities and help him develop an interest in other activities through which he can develop normal self-esteem.
PAUL M. RUDOLF, M.D.
Washington


A Warning For Golfers
To the Sports Editor:
In "The Death That Should Save Lives" (The Times, June 16), Dave Anderson is hopeful that the publicity of the electrocution at the United States Open will save lives in golf's future.
Anderson should have warned enthusiasts of the general risks of courses' open expanses and where not to take cover.
A tall, isolated tree or structure is hazardous, a tree being the more hazardous because of its water content.


Celebrating African Culture in Brooklyn


Vinca Climbs on the Botanical Hit Parade
VINCAS are moving up in the gardener's popularity poll.
This annual flower is gradually pushing out impatiens as a favored garden plant for a show in summer and for good reason.
It grows in full sun or partial shade.
It has few problems, if any.
And it thrives in poor soil and needs little extra watering.
The plant is handsome, too, with shiny leaves and an overall perky look.
The only negative is that vinca is a tropical species, and it does not flower well or thrive when nightime temperatures are cool, below 60 degrees or so.
It is also one of the first plants to be felled by frost in the fall.


Senate Can Do More on Court Nominations; A Law of Vengeance
To the Editor:
The United States Supreme Court has done more than overturn recent precedent (editorial, June 30) by ruling that relatives of victims of capital offenses may testify to influence sentencing: the Court has legitimized vengeance as a purpose, rather than as a consequence, of criminal justice.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 7
Neither Ted Williams nor Joe DiMaggio played today because of the All-Star Break.  *4&gt;No game


Organizing the Garage
GARAGES house more than just the family car.
Because they are convenient, have larger doors than closets and are accessible from outdoors, all manner of items wind up inside, sometimes pushed against the walls to gain space but more often left where they are.
If this is the summer you vowed to finally get the garage organized, following are some tips.


Savoring Maine's Unspoiled Nature
JUST when you're ready to concede southern Maine to the fate of a development rampage in the likeness of Cape Cod, the sign for the Wells Reserve appears, and what was the flotsam and jetsam of a vacationland stupor becomes instead the flora and fauna of a seaside rapture.
The contrast is as sharp as it is improbable.
Having glazed the eye with its commercial stock in trade, Route 1 at the northern end of Wells delivers up one of the unremarked splendors of the Maine coast.
Quite suddenly one is afield in a landscape pastoral and pristine, an unexpected domain of woodland and saltmarsh, fallow pasture and barrier beach.
From the high ground at the Laudholm Farm, the 1,600-acre reserve falls away to the Atlantic, revealing the lay of the land and the sweep of the coast.
In the near view, on either flank, two glinting rivers curl and oxbow through the marsh to empty into the ocean, while in the distance the singular bulge of Mount Agamenticus rises as a lone sentinel.
Overall the effect is to reclaim, in the mind's eye, an identity, indeed an integrity to this coast.
One hikes the reserve's trails, inspects its forests, marsh and estuary ecologies, basks on its beaches and absorbs its serenity, and exults in its hard-won exemption from the flanking rampage.
Somehow not even the condo clusters and beachfront subdivisions looming to the south can detract from the experience of seeing southern Maine in a salubrious light, as a natural wonder of distinctive if imperiled character.


The Region; In Albany, a Budget With No Heroes
THE 214th session of the New York State Legislature drew to a close early Thursday morning in much the same way legislative sessions have always ended, with empty coffee cups, candy wrappers and an all-night debate on bills that would have passed no matter what anybody said.
But, with the detritus collected and the session finished, it was clear this had been no ordinary year in Albany.
Instead of the usual self-congratulatory speeches by state leaders, there were admissions of failure and sighs of regret.
And for good reason.
Virtually all of the six-month session had been spent wrestling with the state's budget gap, estimated to be as high as $6.5 billion.
By the time it was all over, Governor Mario M. Cuomo and the State Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, a Nassau County Republican, had broken their pledge not to raise the state's income tax.
And after months of fighting and negotiating, posturing and pleading, there was a sense that the Governor and the legislative leaders, rather than reaching a consensus on the state's most pressing issue, had simply worn each other down.
The budget they produced seemed to be less a solution to the state's fiscal problems than a testament to the flaws of the process.


Headliners; Noblesse Obliged?
Are unreimbursed palace maintenance costs deductible as a business expense?
Can Gibraltar be claimed as a dependent?
Queen Elizabeth II would have to bone up on such matters if Simon Hughes had his way.
Mr.
Hughes, a Liberal Democrat, introduced a bill in Parliament last week that would end the monarch's exemption from income taxes.
Though the measure stands no chance of passing -- the Labor and Conservative parties oppose it -- four out of five Britons agree that the Queen should be taxed, according to a recent newspaper survey.
The exemption is, after all, not exactly an age-old tradition.
The practice began in 1937, when the Queen's father, King George VI, asked the Inland Revenue whether he had to pay taxes and was told no.
The Queen's personal wealth is estimated at anywhere from $2 billion to $10 billion, and Mr.
Hughes said her taxes would come to around $11.2 million a year.
"This is not a bill motivated by the politics of envy," he said, "but by a desire for justice."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 7, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
7
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
2
2
THE VOICE OF THE NIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.95.) A reprint of a 1980 novel, published under a pseudonym, about a shy boy and his evil best friend.
3
2
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Guests from many parts of the world get together in a small Scottish town.
4
3
DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $5.95.) Dirk Pitt tries to save America from an extremist.
5
7
SECRETS OF THE MORNING, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.95.) A young music student is haunted by the ghosts of her lovers, present and past.
6
2
BREATH OF SCANDAL, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) The nightmare a woman suffered in a Texas town and how she gets even years later.
7
3
SECOND CHILD, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) A horrible crime committed 100 years ago comes back to haunt a quiet Maine village.
8
2
MOUNTAIN LAUREL, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.50.) An Army officer's assignment, on the eve of the Civil War, to escort a glamorous singer during her tour of the Colorado gold fields.
9 *
5
THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $5.99.) Murder and chicanery amid the mansions of California's Orange County.
10
17
RED DRAGON, by Thomas Harris. (Dell, $5.95.) A retired F.B.I. agent returns to service to track down a serial killer.
11
7
"G" IS FOR GUMSHOE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.95.) On her 33d birthday, the private eye Kinsey Millhone finds herself on a hit list.
12
1
DYING YOUNG, by Marti Leimbach. (Ivy, $5.95.) While devotedly caring for a man dying of leukemia, a woman has an affair with a stranger.
13 *
38
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
14
6
ONCE A PRINCESS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.95.) A woman in Mississippi is visited by the European prince to whom she was affianced.
15
1
ROBIN HOOD: Prince of Thieves, by Simon Green. (Berkley, $4.50.) A retelling of the life of the heroic outlaw of Sherwood Forest.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
7
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
2
2
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
3
85
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
4
2
DAVE BARRY TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Fawcett, $10.) Reflections on the crises of middle age by the syndicated humorist.
5
16
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
6
11
MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff describes the craft of the game.
7 *
400
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
8 *
6
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
9
6
BY WAY OF DECEPTION, by Victor Ostrovsky and Claire Hoy. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An account of the operations of Mossad, the Israeli spy service.
10
40
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
11 *
47
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) The Arab-Israeli conflict over the past decade.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
49
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
11
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
3
29
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
16
THE REVENGE OF THE BABY-SAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
5
6
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Postings: Exurban Conversion; Columbia Condos
The Styuvesant Hotel has been a fixture in Stuyvesant Landing, N.Y., a Columbia County hamlet of about 100 residents, for so long that its exact age is something of a mystery.
But sections of the building, which was ravaged by fire in 1880, are believed to date to the 1650's.
For the past three years Joel Bernstein, a Manhattan attorney, and Alan Kirk, a Columbia County carpenter, have been rebuilding and restoring the rambling frame hotel which in the recent past was a small apartment house with a restaurant and bar.
The new owners have converted it into a condominium with seven duplex and triplex apartments.
The units, each with two bedrooms, range in size from 1,500 to more than 2,000 square feet.


Business Diary/June 30-July 5
COMPANIES Goliath Joins Goliath in the Computer Wars


The Walking Wounded
THE FORESEEABLE FUTURE
By Reynolds Price. 253 pp. New York: Atheneum. $21.95.


Spas
To the Editor: "Pleasures of the Spa: Mud to Meditation" (Travel, April 7) recently came to my attention, and I was amused to read that eating less makes for a better vacation and that the way to have a really terrific vacation is to exert yourself.
Even the elders are put on diets.
One wonders what is the grand design in taking away cigars and coffee from a 90-year-old grandfather or telling 95-year-old Aunt Sophie that she is not allowed to eat potato pancakes?
After the meal and the rest, it was the practice to take a nice nap -- before the next meal -- in order to build up the energy to walk to the dining hall.
KAREN DE CROW  Jamesville, N.Y.


Sports of The Times; Justice Served Or Broken?
SOME would say it was thrilling tennis Steffi Graf and Gabriela Sabatini played yesterday in front of the future King William, age 9, and lesser beings.
But Casey Stengel might have lamented, "Can't anyone here serve this game?"
Graf won, 6-4, 3-6, 8-6, to reclaim Wimbledon's women's singles title.
Later, she revealed she once played tennis with the Princess of Wales, and has volunteered to teach tennis to Lady Diana's son.


How MTV Plays Around the World
Brazil  Yo! They're Dancin' In the Streets


For Everybody's Sake, Push Those Fledglings Out of the Nest
To the Editor:
Your June 16 front-page report on more single young men in the United States living with their parents is unfortunate.
It appears merely to inform readers of an interesting phenomenon.
The tone conveys amused tolerance and ignores the long-term impacts of the phenomenon.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-9
A message was sent to the Kremlin by President Bush asking for more flexibility in negotiations on a treaty limiting long-range nuclear weapons.
The message was aimed at preparing for a summit meeting.
Page 1


Gisela Warburg Wyzanski, Zionist Leader, 79
Gisela Warburg Wyzanski, a leader in Zionist women's and youth activities for several decades, died yesterday at her home in Cambridge, Mass.
She was 79 years old.
She died of leukemia, her famlly said.


Context Is All-- Or Nothing
"Inherent vice" is a conservator's term regarding works of art made with materials likely to deteriorate, like Leonardo's "Last Supper," which was a ruin within 50 years because of its experimental technique.
At the Center for Photography at Woodstock, Robert Mahoney, a guest curator, has had the clever notion of considering photography's tendency to lose its original meanings and acquire new ones over time its inherent vice; he has rounded up a few good photographers who play with this idea in a show called " 'Inherent Vice': Old Photos" (through Saturday).
Every kind of art is subject to reinterpretation because of loss of data and changing times; some scholars think the Greek kouroi of the sixth century B.C. represent gods; others think them mortals.
But photographs are so tied to time, place, events and fashion, so easily distributed to societies that have no idea of their intent, and so hapless without explanatory captions that they grow old fast and their meanings are particularly unstable.
Many Civil War photographs now heavily charged with emotion were originally engineering or reconnaissance reports; some of the great 19th-century landscape photographs were commissioned as geological survey records, and the passage of time turns snapshots into souvenirs and advertising photos into art.


Janis Gottfried Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Alex Gottfried of Edison, N.J., have announced 1992 wedding plans for their daughter Janis Melinda Gottfried and Ronald Dan Lipson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Lipson of Edison.
Miss Gottfried, 26 years old and a graduate of the University of Delaware, is an auditor for the Defense Contract Audit Agency in Mountainside, N.J.
Mr.
Lipson, 25, is the vice president of operations at the Luminaire Lighting Corporation in Edison.
He graduated magna cum laude from Lehigh University.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Current Sculpture
Some people happen upon an open pair of pliers and simply close them.
Stanley Lench of Oceanside makes Leonard Bernstein out of them.


Focus: Proposition 13; California's 'Tax Revolt' Faces Challenge
A CASE challenging Proposition 13, California's "tax revolt" law, is wending its way toward the U.S.
Supreme Court.
If the court agrees to hear the case, its decision is likely to affect every homeowner in California.
At issue is the law's way of taxing property.
Its critics say it lets homeowners of long standing pay far less in property tax than newcomers.
Stephanie Nordlinger, the Los Angeles lawyer who is asking the High Court to hear her case, says the law creates enormous disparities in property taxes.


Verdi Alfresco


How Yugoslavs Hold Off Full-Fledged Civil War
The outbreak of full-fledged civil war in Yugoslavia was avoided last week by the actions, behind the scenes and in public, of politicians and generals, with some prodding by foreign officials.
The turning point in efforts to prevent the outbreak came last Sunday night, after three Western European foreign ministers helped persuade officials to go ahead with the election of Stipe Mesic, a 57-year-old Croatian lawyer and politician, to be the chairman of the federal presidency.
Until then, Serbian officials had blocked the election, and that had added to the tensions that led to the outbreak of fighting after the republics of Slovenia and Croatia declared their independence from the central Government on June 25.
Defense Minister's Restraint
Then, two days after Mr.
Mesic's election, the threat of more fighting arose, but further bloodshed was avoided when the Defense Minister, Gen.
Veljko Kadijevic, was persuaded in meetings with civilian leaders including Prime Minister Ante Markovic not to appear on state television to throw down the gauntlet to Slovenia.
Instead, two members of the collective federal presidency -- its chairman, Mr.
Stipe, and the Macedonian delegate, Vasil Tupurkovski -- flew to the Slovenian capital, Ljubljana, to convey the army's resolve to use extensive force, including air strikes, unless Slovenia allayed the army's anger by agreeing to free trapped army units.
Those units had sought unsuccessfully to seize control of Yugoslavia's northern borders from Slovenia.
General Kadijevic is believed to have decided not to go public because he feared that renewed fighting with Slovenia could cause hundreds if not thousands more deaths, and because the election of Mr.
Mesic offered renewed chances for a negotiated settlement to the crisis.
But even though General Kadijevic did not appear on television Tuesday night, the powerful army chief of the staff, Gen.
Blagoje Adzic, did, reiterating army complaints of harassment and threatening a vigorous response.
Before dawn on Wednesday, an armored column of more than 180 tanks, armored personnel carriers and supply vehicles set out from barracks south of Belgrade.
But by midday the column had halted just short of the Croatian border, near villages and towns where fighting has been going on between ethnic Serbs and Croats.
It remains unclear who ordered the column to set out, though it appears likely that it was General Adzic.
At a news conference on Wednesday, a Government spokesman, Predrag Kasic, complained that while Prime Minister Markovic had been in close contact with General Kadijevic in the tense hours of Tuesday, the Cabinet had neither discussed General Adzic's statement "nor was it consulted about it."
This sequence of events tends to support the view of General Kadijevic as a moderating force within the military.
He is a 65-year-old veteran of Tito's Partisans, who fought in World War II against the German and Italian fascists -- and against other Yugoslavs.
His appointment as Defense Minister in 1988 was welcomed in Slovenia.
"He has seen too many graves and horrors caused by fratricidal war and enmity among peoples," the Slovenian daily Delo wrote at the time, explaining his propensity for compromise.
Born in Croatia of a Serb father and Croat mother, General Kadijevic was trained at the Army War College in Washington after studying at Yugoslavia's Military Academy.
Fluent in English, he is described as a keen on keeping the army out of politics.
Western European foreign ministers had come to Yugoslavia on June 28 to mediate an end to the fighting by getting General Kadijevic to agree to a cease-fire if Slovenia and Croatia would accept a three-month suspension of their moves toward independence.
Serbs Set tough Condition
More important, they prevailed on the tough 49-year-old Serbian leader, Slobodan Milosevic, to drop his reservations about Mr.
Mesic's election.
Since 1988 Mr.
Milosevic, the head of the Serbian Communist Party, now renamed the Socialist Party, has been the man who has pressed Serbia's demands for increased authority.
Even though though designating the chairman of the presidency is ordinarily a routine matter, Mr.
Milosevic effectively vetoed the election of Mr.
Mesic in May because of the Croatian's commitment to drastic revision of Yugoslavia's federal setup.
Serbs Set Tough Condition
On June 29 Mr.
Milosevic and the leaders of Serbia, with nine million people the largest republic, said they were willing to drop their veto of Mr.
Mesic, but only if Slovenia and Croatia abandoned their plans for independence, thus effectively saying no.
But by last Sunday he had reversed course and Mr.
Mesic was elected.
Mr.
Milosevic's shift was partly a result of Western pressure.
"At the end of the day, he did not want to be seen in Europe as the wrecker of an agreement that seemed a very good agreement all over Europe and America," an experienced diplomat said.
But Mr.
Milosevic, a clever tactician who kept a low profile through most of the recent conflict, may simply have sought to draw Mr.
Mesic into the political minefield that he himself was avoiding.
Nevertheless, renewed fighting followed on Tuesday and Wednesday, and by Thursday the tension was tangible.
But a meeting of the collective presidency under Mr.
Mesic was called, and to everyone's relief the senior leaders of the Defense Ministry, including General Kadijevic, attended.
Mr.
Markovic, an able administrator with little political clout, appeared relieved that the presidency, under whatever constraints, was at last functioning again.
Called upon to steer the federal Cabinet without a functioning presidency at the outbreak of the crisis, Mr.
Markovic, a 66-year-old economist who for years headed a successful electrical company in Croatia, could only use personal persuasion to sway the actions of the military.
Already on Thursday, the presidency was aware that while Slovenia might be willing to fulfill some demands, like the release of prisoners and partial dismantling of roadblocks, its leaders believed that the border issue could only be resolved by negotiations among the "highest authorities," presumably meaning the Western European foreign ministers, who are set to return on Sunday to resume mediation.
Mr.
Mesic, pressing for compromise, proposed that Slovenia be permitted to retain control of the border if it would agree to turn over customs revenues to the federal Government.
The Messengers
That message was conveyed to Slovenia by the federal presidency via two of its members, Mr.
Tupurkovski of Macedonia and the Bosnian delegate, Bogic Bogicovic.
They flew to Ljubljana on Friday.
But today, talks with the Slovenian leaders were broken off, and Jelko Kacin, the sharp-tongued Slovenian Information Minister, a hawk in the leadership, accused the presidency of carrying out the dictates of the military.
Finally, with the conflict persisting, Mr.
Milosevic made his move.
After meeting early today with the Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Yuri Klinchisky, a personal envoy of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Mr.
Milosevic said that those who did not want to remain within Yugoslavia should be permitted to leave.
More ominously, he declared in a televised address that the Yugoslav Army should naturally remain as the defender of those who stayed.


In Urban Bustle, Fresh Air Fund Children Start a Pilgrimage
New York City's decibel count began its annual decline on Tuesday as the first bus caravan carrying a vanguard of 7,000 youngsters left the Port Authority Bus Terminal on Manhattan's West Side for the farms and woodlands of Virginia and West Virginia.
It was the start of the 114th annual migration sponsored by the Fresh Air Fund, an independent, nonprofit agency that since 1877 has provided free vacations to 1.6 million New York City children from low-income families.


Jail Time Must Come Before Playing Time for Rams' Troubled Perry
How bad off can the Los Angeles Rams' offensive line be?
Bad enough that they're willing to wait nearly two weeks for tackle Gerald Perry to get out of a Denver jail to join the team at training camp on the California-Irvine campus.
When the Rams made a draft-day trade for Perry, sending running back Gaston Green and a 12th-round pick to the Broncos for Perry and a fourth-round pick, they knew Perry might have to spend some time in jail.
Perry had been charged with sexually assaulting the girlfriend of teammate Orson Mobley in November 1990.
He pleaded guilty to the charge last spring and began serving a 45-day sentence in the Arapahoe County Jail on May 23.


Hoping Japan's Rate Cut Lifts Stocks Here
Markets around the world are used to dealing with conflicting monetary and fiscal policies.
But in Japan these days, the markets are being torn between happiness over newly friendly central bankers and worry about suddenly hostile cops.
For the moment, fear of cops seems paramount.
To Occidental ears, the scandal sounds a bit odd.
What the big brokers seem to have done is to bring to securities sales the policy that once made Sears this nation's leading retailer: "Satisfaction guaranteed or your money back." The brokers are accused not of defrauding customers, but of refunding their losses.


Northampton Journal; Here's Where It Began For Four Ninja Turtles
There was a time when talk about sewers in this New England city drew little more than a sniff from buttoned-down residents.
But eight years ago, all that began to change.


The Elderly: Lost in the Capital Gains Fight
To the Editor:
After most of the heat from last year's debate on capital gains tax relief seemed to wind up in a hot potato that politicians now seem reluctant to touch, it was refreshing to read "Most Wanted in America: More Capital" (Forum, June 23).


'Red Love'
To the Editor:
In his review of my novel derived from the Rosenberg case, "Red Love" (In Short, June 2), Andy Solomon writes that the suffering described in my account of Kolyma, the Soviet concentration camp, "is so great that it defies credulity." The problem with brief reviews is that a good deal must be compressed into a few words.
Phrases leap out at the reader and demand clarification.
Does Mr.
Solomon mean that such suffering is incomprehensible in the way the Holocaust remains inaccessible to our imaginations?
Or does he mean that I appear to be exaggerating?
If so, I would suggest that Mr.
Solomon start reading Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, Eugenia Ginzburg and Robert Conquest.
Nothing in "Red Love" surpasses the atrocities depicted in their works.
DAVID EVANIER  New York
Andy Solomon replies:
David Evanier provides a welcome opportunity to clarify an ambiguity in my wording.
I do not question the authenticity of his depiction of suffering in Soviet labor camps.
On the contrary, his description of that torment is among the most compelling and convincing prose in the book.
I meant that the suffering itself defied belief.
I apologize for any uneasiness my lack of clarity may have caused him.


Ms. Hozore Engaged To Charles F. S. Locke
Judith S. Hozore of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter, Elissa Hozore, to Charles Frederick Stoumen Locke, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harry R. Locke of Pottstown, Pa.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hozore, 30 years old, teaches science at Wyncote Academy in Wyncote, Pa.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a master's in agronomy from Cornell University.
Her late father, Seymour Hozore, was a partner in the New York law firm of Kramer Levin Nessen Kamin &amp; Frankel.
Her mother, a lawyer, directs the planned giving program at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Tech Notes; In Search of Leadless Water
This spring, the Environmental Protection Agency toughened its standards for concentrations of lead in drinking water after determining that small levels of the metal absorbed by the body can cause an array of health problems.
Water companies will be given many years to bring their lead levels down, however, and in the meantime, sales of filters to screen out lead in the home are expected to pick up.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
No Free Grapefruit
Q.
I found a sprouting seed in a grapefruit and planted it in potting soil.
In a month, it has grown two inches.
What are the chances of this tree surviving in my apartment, especially through the winter?
How big can I expect it to grow and how fast?
And what should I feed it?
Charlotte Chandler, New York City.
A.
Grapefruit trees (Citrus paradisi), which are believed to have originated in the West Indies, do make wonderful house plants.
Give them as much sunlight as possible all year, advised Debbie Peterson, the editor of the Rare Pit and Plant Council newsletter.
Keep the soil evenly moist.
Mrs.
Peterson also suggests feeding them periodically with a fertilizer like Stern's Miracid, which contains chelated trace elements, and "in about 10 to 15 years it may hit your ceiling." But don't expect free grapefruit.
"Only grafted plants bear fruit," she said.
Short and Formal
Q.
I would like to use a hedge as a formal outline for a part of my garden, but I want this outline low.
What plants can I use, and how should I do this?
Amy Gross, Pittsburgh.
A.
A good hedge begins with good spacing, and that in turn depends on the rate of growth and size of the plants used.
The farther they are apart, the longer it will take for a hedge shape to form.
Even though they are more expensive than bare root plants, it is best to start with container-grown or balled plants, which are easier to plant and less likely to die.
Also, to get a neat, formal line, use stakes at each end and run a taut string as a guide when planting.
Plants that can be clipped severely enough to keep a formal hedge low include Euonymus alata Compacta, yews (Taxus media Hicksii and T. cuspidata Nana), Barberrys (Berberis thunbergii Erecta, B. t. Minor and B. buxifolia Nana), arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis Little Gem), English boxwood (Buxus sempervirens Suffruticosa), Japanese quince (Chaenomeles japonica Alpina), dwarf Japanese holly (Ilex crenata Convexa), Viburnum opulus Nanum, dwarf white spruce (Picea glauca Conica) and lavenders.
Hardy Hibiscus in a Tub
Q.
I have been given a large Hibiscus syriacus Diana in a tub.
What kind of plant is this?
For the winter, should I leave it in the container or transplant it to the garden?
Sophia F. Stenger, Hightstown, N.J.
A.
You have been given an old-fashioned flowering shrub, which is also sometimes called Rose-of-Sharon, or althea, and which can grow 12 feet tall.
A native of China and northern India, it has been grown in the United States since the 18th century.
Diana is a cultivar that was developed in 1963 by Dr.
Donald Egolf of the United States National Arboretum.
It bears large, shallow, bell-shaped white flowers from early summer through early fall, in both sunlight and light shade.
Since this is a winter-hardy plant, it should do fine outside all year in a container, providing the tub is about 16 inches high, wide and deep.
Late in the fall, add a mulch of shredded bark or pine boughs and water periodically if there is little rain or snow through winter.
Address questions to Garden Q.&amp;A., The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.


Coins
Earliest Colonial Coinage
While some of us dig in our pockets for change, hoping to find an old Mercury dime or Standing Liberty quarter, others are digging up old coins in the oddest places.
From time to time, new examples of rare coins are discovered in collections.
Usually they have been misidentified or have been passed on to heirs who hold the collection never guessing that a valuable coin is hiding among more common ones.


The Devil's Mouthpiece
STALIN'S PROSECUTOR
The Life of Andrei Vyshinsky.
By Arkady Vaksberg.
Translated by Jan Butler.
Foreword by Robert Conquest.
Illustrated. 374 pp.
New York: Grove Weidenfeld. $24.95.


The Executive Life; In July, the Gadgets and Wizards Bloom
If you spent July 4 at the beach, you may have noticed a strange beeping, whirring and glowing on the sand.
This summer's crop of techno-toys has arrived in force.
Executives are snapping up portable communications devices.
Check the battery index for verification.
"With all the battery-operated items people carry around, batteries are a terrific business," said Marc Balmuth, president of Caldor Inc., a discounter based in Norwalk, Conn.
At his Bridgehampton, L.I., store, battery sales have risen more than 15 percent since winter ended.


New Prime Minister Takes Office in Kashmir


Auto Racing; Ex-Racer Battles A Double Disaster
Of all the teams competing this weekend at the National Hot Rod Association's Summernationals in Englishtown, N.J., none is more representative of the struggle to overcome adversity than Darrell Gwynn's.
Gwynn, 29 years old, was one of drag racing's young stars in its most glamorous class, Top Fuel.


Some Chores For Hot Days
Seeds have trouble germinating in hot soil, so when planting lettuce, chard, beans, squash, carrots and fall crops, pre-sprouting the seeds helps.
Place seeds between two damp paper towels and put in plastic bags until they sprout.
"Organic Gardening" magazine says that seeds planted when sprouts are only an eighth of an inch long produced heartier seedlings than those from sprouts a quarter-inch long.
Plant sprouted seeds in damp soil and keep well-watered.
Cut faded blooms off geraniums, snapdragons, petunias and other annuals to keep them blooming.
If pansies' blooming has slowed, give them a haircut and a drink of liquid fertilizer and they will bloom again as the weather cools.
Insects are proliferating, so keep spraying aphids with insecticidal soap.
Apply Bt (bacillus thuringiensis) to cabbages to kill cabbage looper and imported cabbageworm.


Mobile 'Clinic' Helps the Homeless Mentally Ill
EACH day before noon, many of this city's poor and homeless congregate at a soup kitchen just outside the main commercial district.
Most go right inside to eat, but a few, including some who appear to be among the most destitute, stop to speak with a neatly dressed, energetic woman in her mid-40's, who has parked outside.
The woman invites the homeless men and women into a mini-van near the church's door, and for a few minutes she engages them in intense conversation.


Julie Danos Is Married
Julie Amelie Danos, a marketing manager for American Express in New York, and Lee Robinson Hill Jr., the president of the World Professional Squash Association, were married yesterday in Denver at Blessed Sacrament Catholic Church by the Rev.
Msgr.
William H. Jones.
Mrs.
Hill, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Colorado.
Her husband, 30, graduated from Princeton University.


Lauren Heifetz Is Engaged to Wed Brian Caesar
The engagement of Lauren Elise Heifetz, a lawyer, to Brian William Caesar, head of an oil brokerage, both in New York, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Saul Heifetz of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Heifetz, 29 years old, graduated from Boston University and Brooklyn Law School.
She is a commercial litigator for the firm of Santangelo, Santangelo &amp; Cohen.
Her father is the president of HEI Development, builders in Chestnut Ridge.
Her mother is an assistant to the vice president of Rockland Community College in Suffern, N.Y.
Mr.
Caesar, 29 and a Rollins College graduate, is the president of Gamma Energy and Trading.
He is the son of Miriam Caesar of Miami and the late Jay M. Caesar.
His mother owns Caesar's at the Charter Club, a Miami delicatessen.


Concert of Concentration Camp Music
The Hawthorne Quartet will give a concert tomorrow night at 7:30 at the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center, devoting the program entirely to music composed by four inmates at the Terezin concentration camp in Czechoslovakia during World War II.
The SS forced prisoners to create artworks, and used the camp as a model of a "paradise ghetto" where music, dance and art were allowed to flourish.
More than 100,000 Jews were put to death there.
The music of Terezin was unearthed by a Boston Symphony Orchestra violinist, Mark Ludwig, who learned of its existence through reading Jewish history.
He did research, interviewed survivors and traveled through Europe to find scores.
The concert will feature work by Hans Kras, Gideon Klein, Zikmund Schul and Viktor Ullmann, all of whom were killed at the camp.


Corrections
On the same page, a brief announcement of the New York Grand Opera production of "La Traviata" in Central Park misstates the performance date.
It is Wednesday evening, not Tuesday.


How MTV Plays Around the World
'MTV Internacional'  No Julio Allowed


Wyoming
To the Editor: Susan B. Davidson's article "Galloping Around Wyoming" (Travel, June 2) brought a big grin to my face as I, too, spent a great week at Bitterroot Ranch two summers ago.
I did, however, have the good fortune to attend one night of the powwows at Fort Washakie.
When we told Bayard Fox, Bitterroot's owner, that we wanted to attend, he found us a taxi driver who had never been to a powwow before but was game to try (the directions she was given included the instructions "when you get to the Texaco station, roll down the car windows and listen for the drums").


Ideas &amp; Trends; Making Sure a Landscape of Symbols Doesn't Say Less Than Meets the Eye
IN a city park, the image of a dog with a slash through it tells strollers that their pets aren't welcome.
On a coffee cup, connecting arrows indicate that the container can be recyled.
On VCR's, triangles and dots mark Play, Fast Forward, Rewind and Record.
Slowly but inexorably, symbols are being used in place of words to tell people what to do, where to go, or how to do it.
The symbols are meant to be instantly understandable, to cross barriers of language and education.
Sometimes they are even meant to be fun, like the icons used in computer programs.


The Toughening of Scout Troop 100
Nate Snead was repelled by a "long green thing" inside his tent.
It was a lizard.
Jon Danielson was worried that it was going to rain.
It did.
And Brian Jennings wondered if there was a spot to go swimming.
There wasn't.
With endless questions and boundless enthusiasm, the members of Boy Scout Troop 100 from Governors Island were on their first outing of the summer at Camp Alpine in a densely wooded area of Alpine, N.J., 10 miles north of the George Washington Bridge.


Weight Loss In Rowing
To the Sports Editor:
"Cracking Down on Wrestlers' Weight Loss," (The Times, June 18) was very informative; however, you missed the world of lightweight crew.


Organizing the Garage
GARAGES house more than just the family car.
Because they are convenient, have larger doors than closets and are accessible from outdoors, all manner of items wind up inside, sometimes pushed against the walls to gain space but more often left where they are.
If this is the summer you vowed to finally get the garage organized, following are some tips.


A Trove of Mexican Baroque
ON the map of Mexico, tiny Tlaxcala looks like an afterthought -- a stretch of high plains in the midst of the Sierra Madre Oriental, bordered by the states of Mexico and Hidalgo and all but engulfed by the mighty state of Puebla.
With just 0.2 percent of the country's territory, Mexico's smallest state offers a variety of options for a getaway from the world's most populous city.
A masterpiece of the Mexican baroque, a dormant volcano and an intriguing archeological site with some of Mesoamerica's finest murals are all within easy reach of the quiet provincial capital, also named Tlaxcala, 75 miles east of Mexico City.
The state of Tlaxcala's leading attraction is the Cacaxtla murals, dating from A.D. 600 to 900, the work of the Xicalanca-Olmeca culture.
The site is a two-hour drive from Mexico City and a half-mile walk from the village of San Miguel del Milagro, where vendors greet visitors with stacks of alegrias, the Mexican equivalent of Chinese rice cakes.
The 16th-century Spanish chronicles briefly refer to Cacaxtla.
However, it wasn't until 1975 when a grave-robbing attempt led to the discovery of fragments of a colorful mural that the area began to attract national and international attention.


Lite Light Runs Away in the Oaks
Lite Light overcame time, distance, sickness and tradition yesterday when she made a smashing return to New York, outran Meadow Star by seven lengths in the Coaching Club American Oaks at Belmont Park and won one of racing's most highly touted return matches.
The 3-year-old filly, owned and accompanied and serenaded by the rap singer M. C. Hammer, not only kept Meadow Star from completing a sweep of racing's Triple Crown for fillies but also became the first filly to defeat her in 12 races.
And for the piece de resistance, she broke the record for the race, covering the mile and a quarter in 2:002/5 and clipping more than one second off the mark of 2:014/5 set in 1968 by Dark Mirage.


Corrections
An article on June 23 about plans for renewal in Paterson misattributed sponsorship of a bill to create an urban-enterprise zone and a health-enterprise zone in the city.
The main sponsor is State Senator John A. Girgenti.
Mayor William J. Pascrell Jr., who is also a State Assemblyman, is co-sponsor of a different bill, which would create urban-enterprise zones in several communities, including Paterson.


The World; Why La Dolce Vita Is Easy for Europeans . . . As Japanese Work Ever Harder to Relax
BEFORE sunrise last Monday, a group of hearty trekkers made their way to the top of Japan's most instantly recognizable symbol, Mount Fuji, raised their arms in a cheer of "Banzai!" to welcome the rising sun, and then did the only prudent thing.
They scampered off the mountain before they were overrun by the hundreds of thousands of climbers who will follow them to the majestic volcanic crater this summer, marching toe-to-heel up the same path, past the same trinket stands, to see the same sun rise.
Leisure has its martial moments in Japan and the Mount Fuji climb -- everyone should do it once, the saying goes, and only fools do it again -- may be Japanese group recreation at its most regimented.
And it is a mentality that the Government hopes is part of a passing era.
Even before France's Prime Minister, Edith Cresson, declared the Japanese relentless "economic animals" seeking to "dominate the world" with their workaholic habits, a halfhearted campaign began here to convince the country to relax.
To a younger generation that questions the merits of working 9-to-9 and then drinking with colleagues until the last train home, the new push for shorter hours and longer vacations is welcome.
To many over 50 it is evidence that the tough stuff that made Japan a great competitor is lost.


About Cars; In the Doldrums, a New Lease on Life
HERE he comes, Steve Betz, with his zero-down-$199-a-month-Grand Am.
He is Pontiac's manager of marketing in the New York zone, and he is, as they say, all het up.
Leasing is his baby, and the excitement comes at a time when sales are nothing to write to the home office about.
But then he has this plan. . . .
"There are 18 zones in the country," Betz said, "and we're the only one that sold more Grand Ams this year than last. It's been a tough year in the automobile business, but the Grand Am and the Grand Prix are 70 percent of our business. And, since we started the plan, 37 percent of our business also is leasing."


When Shopping on the Cheap, Persistence Pays Off
It's easier to be rich but, alas, most people aren't.
Most people have budgets.
Sometimes the budget is only a mental one, but there's a consciousness that both wallet and credit are thin.
Here are some tips on what to do, especially when it comes to fashion and beauty items that are important personally but can hardly be called basic necessities.
What the not-rich need when they shop for these peripheral items is simple.
The first necessity is a willingness to explore, combined with comfortable shoes.
Hunting for affordable clothes often requires scouting three, four or half-a-dozen stores before hitting the right one.


How Schools Resemble Soviet Factories
To the Editor:
Robert B. Reich makes some good points in "How Business Can Help in Schools" (Forum, June 9), but his recommendation that business should give large sums of money to public elementary and secondary schools misses the point about our educational failures.


The Nation; As Doctors Become More Specialized, and Numerous, Turf Wars Erupt Over Body Parts
THE brain surgeons are jousting with the bone surgeons, the dermatologists are rubbing plastic surgeons the wrong way, and the radiologists are fighting with nearly all of their medical colleagues.
Turf wars among doctors are nothing new.
But now, as a growing supply of highly trained specialists confronts a stingier flow of fees, competition for the right to perform -- and bill for -- lucrative medical procedures is growing more intense.


Vinca Climbs on the Botanical Hit Parade
VINCAS are moving up in the gardener's popularity poll.
This annual flower is gradually pushing out impatiens as a favored garden plant for a show in summer and for good reason.
It grows in full sun or partial shade.
It has few problems, if any.
And it thrives in poor soil and needs little extra watering.
The plant is handsome, too, with shiny leaves and an overall perky look.
The only negative is that vinca is a tropical species, and it does not flower well or thrive when nightime temperatures are cool, below 60 degrees or so.
It is also one of the first plants to be felled by frost in the fall.


BASEBALL: Notebook; The Managers Change, but the Standings Remain the Same
After the Milwaukee Brewers fired Buck Rodgers as their manager early in June 1982, they went on to win the American League pennant under Harvey Kuenn.
The Montreal Expos dismissed Rodgers early last month, but they are not headed toward the National League pennant under Tom Runnells.
But then, they didn't expect similar results.
"Not at all," Dave Dombrowski, the Expos' general manager, said.
"You don't make a managerial change only for the short run. When we let Buck go, we were 20-29, struggling and pretty far out of the race. You don't make a change at that time to think that you're going to be in a position all of a sudden to win your divisional crown. You look for changes in the way you're going to operate.


A Return to the Stage For 'Educating Rita'
"EDUCATING RITA" has quite enough instant uplift and sustained amusement for reasonable summer theater diversion.
There's also a hint of honest provocation in it, should you want that too, but it's not threatening.


Tennis; Graf Reclaims Her Grit And Title
The once-indomitable Steffi Graf, plagued for the last year by blackouts of her tennis game on the court and by black moods off it, today restored her confidence and reversed her nascent reputation as a waning star by capturing her third Wimbledon title.
The victory came at the expense of her nearest and least-dear rival, Gabriela Sabatini.
"I wanted to have that feeling again for once," said Graf, who was so elated at the chance to dwell on a major victory rather than her vulnerability that she buried her face in a towel and cried at courtside.


New York Cost-Cutting Idea: City Jobs, Outside Workers
From Phoenix to Chicago to Newark, city administrators are inviting private companies to help provide public services -- and swearing by the results: big cost savings and better service.
With New York City in such difficult financial straits, some of the city's politicians are wondering if there is more that New York could or should be doing in this area.


Ann Siegel Engaged to Michael Fischer
The engagement of Ann Barbara Siegel to Michael Walter Frederick Fischer has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Elwood Siegel of New York and Rensselaerville, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Siegel graduated from the Brearley School and the University of Colorado and received a J.D. degree from Fordham University.
She is an assistant commissioner in charge of planning and program development in New York City's Department of Juvenile Justice.
Her father, a retired film producer and director, was the president of Telic Productions in New York.
Her mother, Shirley Adelson Siegel, a member of New York City's Conflicts of Interest Board, is a former New York State Solicitor General.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I own a one-story house that is now more than 45 years old.
I have a problem with condensation in the attic in the winter, so much so that you can see drips on the interior walls below.
The attic has three roof vents, and I have checked to be certain that the vents under the eaves are not blocked by insulation.
The roof does not leak, and there is no condensation problem in the summer.
Is there any way I can solve the winter condensation problem?
A.
The first thing I would check is the humidity inside the house, for it sounds as though it may be too high.
If you have a humidifier on the furnace, turn it way down during cold weather, or turn it off completely to see if this helps.
I also suspect that you do not have enough ventilation in the attic.
In addition to continuous eave vents, you probably need continuous ridge vents, but you can probably get by with doubling the number of roof vents you have now.


Bond Rally in 3d Quarter Is Viewed as Unlikely
Recent trends in economic data appear to support the widely held view that the economy is on course for a modest rebound from a mild recession.
Nevertheless, some credit market analysts maintain that conditions could sour quickly, especially if long-term interest rates move higher in the third quarter.


Ms. Mehlman, A Lawyer, Weds
Barbara Ann Mehlman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerrold J. Mehlman of Oceanside, L.I., and Brian Scott Cousin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon B. Cousin of Marblehead, Mass., were married yesterday at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph Potasuick officiated.
The bride, 27 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
A graduate of Tufts University and a member of Phi Beta Kappa, she received a law degree cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is the labor counsel at Dow Jones &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Carol E. Mehlman, is a teacher at School 5 in Oceanside.
The bridegroom, 28, is an associate in the New York office of the Chicago law firm of Baker &amp; McKenzie.
He graduated from Columbia University and received a law degree from Rutgers University.
His father is a senior consulting engineer at Stone &amp; Webster in Boston.


World Economies


Bond Rally in 3d Quarter Is Viewed as Unlikely
Recent trends in economic data appear to support the widely held view that the economy is on course for a modest rebound from a mild recession.
Nevertheless, some credit market analysts maintain that conditions could sour quickly, especially if long-term interest rates move higher in the third quarter.


New Campaigns
*
Visa U.S.A.'s latest television commercials trumpet Visa's sponsorship of the Winter Olympics and open another attack on American Express.
The first spot makes its debut this week.
The campaign, created by BBDO New York, continues a marketing strategy based on Visa's greater merchant acceptance.


INSIDE
Work, but No Budget Governor Weicker ordered state employees back to work, but Connecticut did not seem near an end to the budget passe that led to a partial closing of the government.
Page B1.


Panel Says Unneeded Rules Push Up Cost of U.S. Housing
Saying that zoning laws and other restrictions add as much as 35 percent to the cost of an American house, a Presidential commission calls unnecessary regulation one of the chief barriers to affordable housing.
The commission also proposes denying Federal housing money to state and local governments that ignore its recommendations.
Its report will be released Monday in a White House ceremony, indicating it has the support of President Bush.


Deregulation In Venezuela
The Government has lifted price controls on private-sector goods and services and deregulated business operations in an effort to liberalize the national economy.
President Carlos Andres Perez said the move was intended to attract domestic and foreign investors and reflected a determination to offer "clear and trustable economic rules for all sectors."


Leo Brown Dies at 86; Was Justice in Queens
Leo Brown, a retired New York State Supreme Court Justice in Queens who had been a government official for New York City and State for nearly 40 years, died on Friday at his retirement home in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 86 years old.
He died of a heart ailment, a family spokesman said.


Metro Matters; Dinkins Finds A Key to the City Is Togetherness
In their vague agreement last week to agree on a budget, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Peter F. Vallone, the City Council Speaker, underlined only two words in the full 15 paragraphs:
Together
, which was how they had managed to forge an agreement that established the Council as a full partner in setting the agenda of New York City government and marked what may be the beginning of a more respectful relationship.


Ismail May Miss Argos' Opener
Raghib (Rocket) Ismail's status for his first pro football game is in jeopardy after a visit to a Los Angeles doctor about his injured left leg.
Ismail, the former Notre Dame speedster who signed a multimillion-dollar contract with the Canadian Football League's Toronto Argonauts, won't return to Toronto until Tuesday night.


YUGOSLAVS AGREE TO A COMPROMISE ON BORDER POSTS
Yugoslav leaders reached an agreement today aimed at averting further fighting with Slovenia, promising the independence-minded republic limited control over its border posts.
The accord, mediated by three European Community ministers, calls for an immediate cease-fire, the return of all federal troops and local militias to their bases, the stationing of European observers, and a forceful role for Yugoslavia's federal presidency, particularly in controlling the army.
Dozens of people have been killed in clashes between the federal army and local militias in Slovenia since the republic proclaimed its independence on June 25.


Economic Watch; Putting a Price on the Soviet 'Grand Bargain'
A year ago, the idea of the "grand bargain" -- radical Soviet political and economic reform in exchange for tens of billions of dollars in Western aid -- would have been dismissed as an insult by the Kremlin and as a waste of money by the White House.
Now, the impossible seems at least plausible, and the issue of how much aid should be promised under what conditions may overshadow all others at the London economic summit meeting later this month.


Consolidating Agencies: Now It's the Clients' Turn
A PERVASIVE trend in advertising today is consolidation.
But unlike the 1980's, when agencies were consolidating, now it is the clients's turn -- to consolidate accounts.
More and more clients, especially the country's largest marketers and their many subsidiaries, are reducing the number of agencies with which they do business.
Consolidation offers efficiencies, clients say, as well as savings.
The recent examples include these:


Kremlin Calls Bush's Words On an Arms Accord 'Useful'
President Bush's message to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev urging quicker efforts to reach an arms control agreement was useful and positive, a senior Soviet officialsaid today.
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Mr.
Bush's message could help break the logjam over the strategic arms reduction treaty and lead to its signing at a summit meeting in Moscow in late July.


Home, Brutal Home: Catchers Bar the Door
"I don't know if fear is the right word. You have to anticipate the hit. You have to stay stationary. You have to know who is coming. . . . I guess fear is the right word." Rick Cerone, Mets' catcher
The play at the plate.
It has been called the most exciting play in baseball.
It has also been called the most dangerous.
Take your pick.


Israelis Planning to Stay in South Lebanese Zone
The Israeli Government made clear today that it had no intention of withdrawing from its self-proclaimed security zone in southern Lebanon, even as the Lebanese Army consolidates its control over Palestinians in the area.
The Lebanese Government is reported to have asked American representatives for help in prompting the Israelis to leave as part of an effort to take control of the whole country.


Virginia Leader Apologizes for Remark on Inquiry
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia apologized today for "misleading" the press and the public about whether he had ordered a police investigation of Senator Charles S. Robb.
The Governor said that when he denied several weeks ago that he knew anything about any investigation he was denying only that he had ordered an investigation into the private life of Mr.
Robb, his chief Democratic rival in Virginia politics.


Lester D. Supiro, 69, Engineer and Inventor
Lester D. Supiro, a metallurgical engineer and inventor who founded M &amp; R Refractory Metals Inc. of Springfield, N.J., died on Tuesday at Englewood Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 69 years old and lived in Fort Lee, N.J.
He died of heart disease, a family spokeswoman said.


Administration Faulting States Over Increasing Costs of Medicaid
In a new study, the Bush Administration asserts that states have systematically underestimated the huge and rapid increase in Medicaid costs in the last few years, resulting in billions of dollars in unexpected medical bills for the Federal Government.
State officials say unanticipated economic trends, especially the recession, caused much of the rise in costs, by increasing the number of people eligible for Medicaid because of lower incomes.


Essay; For Disunion Now
Mikhail Gorbachev has it almost right: The breakup of Yugoslavia is a portent of the dissolution now inexorably under way in the Soviet Union.
His warning, however, should not be directed at patriots who want to break free; it should be sent to tyrants who would enforce with guns the crumbling pretensions of imperialism.


Third World Embracing Reforms To Encourage Economic Growth
A powerful new economic pragmatism is sweeping third world capitals from Brasilia to Bangkok, and countries that were once proud economic nationalists are now trying to forge closer ties with the rest of the world.
The broad changes are the subject of the World Bank's annual World Economic Development Report, which was made public this morning.
And in interviews last week, government officials and economists from third world nations said they were committed to allowing market forces to flourish free of government restraints, abandoning fiscal and monetary policies that were politically motivated but economically unsound and opening borders to foreign goods and investment.  'Time for Fresh Thinking'
"Everybody is convinced it is time for fresh thinking," India's Finance Minister Manmohan Singh said in an interview last week.  [ Page D3. ]


Expunge the 'Lookout List' Paranoia
In a welcome move last year, Congress made it harder to bar foreign visitors whose views the Government finds offensive.
Such power had been granted by the McCarran-Walter Immigration Act, a paranoid vestige of the McCarthy era.
Now, if the full Senate concurs, the last mean trace of its "lookout list" can be expunged.
The 1952 McCarran-Walter Act listed 33 grounds for excluding aliens.
One of the most troublesome allowed the Government to bar visitors or immigrants who would advocate "economic, international and governmental doctrines of world Communism" and other subversive activities.


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings for this week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and an auction of seven-year notes on Wednesday.
By late in the day on Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.58 percent and the six-month bill at 5.71 percent.
In when-issued trading, the seven-year note was offered at a price to yield 8.21 percent.


Connecticut State Workers Ordered Back
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. today ordered all state employees in Connecticut to report back to work beginning Monday, ending the six-day partial government shutdown that he imposed last week but bringing the state no closer to a resolution of the budget impasse that led to the shutdown.
Mr.
Weicker said he would allow a temporary budget resolution to become law without his signature, thereby restoring all state programs through at least the end of this week.


Neuharth Tries a New Shot at Rocking Journalism
After two years of relative obscurity since retiring as chairman of the Gannett Company, Allen H. Neuharth -- the founder of USA Today -- is poised for a return to the limelight as chairman of the Freedom Forum, the flashy new incarnation of what had been the Gannett Foundation.
In June, the Gannett Foundation sold its only asset -- a 10 percent stake in the Gannett Company -- back to the company for $670 million and threw in the name "Gannett Foundation" as part of the deal.
On Thursday, the old Gannett Foundation became the Freedom Forum, with a very new orientation and an annual budget of roughly $35 million.


Dated AIDS Definition Keeps Benefits From Many Patients
Over the last three years, Carmen L. Vazquez has battled bone degeneration, chronic pelvic inflammatory disease and a blood disorder that led to the removal of her spleen.
The Bronx woman has tested positive for the AIDS virus and attributes the onslaught of ailments to her infection.
She says she cannot sit or walk for extended periods of time and is in constant pain, but until recently she was unable to get disability benefits, because her symptoms did not fit the Government's definition of AIDS.


Senate's Rule for Its Anti-Crime Bill: The Tougher the Provision, the Better
When the Senate returns from holiday recess this week, its first order of business will be finishing work on a wide-ranging anti-crime bill that few people may realize could threaten state autonomy in criminal prosecutions and sentencing and create a death penalty in the District of Columbia.
These provisions, among others, have been sandwiched within the major features of the legislation, which include limits on Federal court reviews of prison inmates' appeals, the addition of nearly 50 felonies punishable by the death penalty and broadened standards on admissibility of evidence seized by the police.


All Is Lost on Weekend for 2 Ex-Juvenile Champions
Racing's juvenile champions of 1990 completed a remarkably lost weekend at Belmont Park yesterday when Fly So Free ran third in the Dwyer Stakes on the day after Meadow Star ran second in the Coaching Club American Oaks.
Fly So Free, who won the Eclipse Award as last year's star 2-year-old colt, was outraced by the late-running Lost Mountain, who did some of his fanciest late-running of the season.
He charged from last place to first in the field of seven and beat Wayne Lukas's Smooth Performance by one length and Fly So Free by 3 1/2.


Soviet Republics Are Coming Into Their Own
To the Editor:
As a banker and businessman who spends all his time on transactions involving the United States and Russia or the Ukraine, I continue to be appalled by information gaps on both sides.
These gaps are most evident in the discussion and plans surrounding Soviet economic reform and economic assistance to the Soviet Union.


CHRONICLE
When the Mostly Mozart Festival opens tomorrow, it will herald its 25th anniversary with a bold poster by ROBERT MOTHERWELL.
The image, a reproduction of the artist's collage, is a black, splotchy M against a blood-red blob seeping over a morsel of a Mozart keyboard score.


Review/Television; Seeking the Road to Transcendence
Smithsonian World ends its sixth and final season tonight with "The Doors of Perception," an hourlong anthology of the ways human beings over the centuries have tried to achieve what the program calls transcendence.
Some, like William Blake, did it through art; others are trying to do it with crack.
If you tune into Channel 13 at 8 P.M., you will also meet devotees of witchcraft, yoga, contemplation, prayer, dance and computers.
While they rattle on about their preferred means of breaking through the mundane to reach the universal, touch God or infinity, be one with the spheres and so on, the screen is taken up with images of whirling bodies that are meant to represent some sort of extra-worldly experience.
It's enough to send friends of the mundane back to James Thurber, who advised, "Let Your Mind Alone."


Astrex Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Enquirer Finds Readers (but Not Elvis) in Britain
British readers of the tabloid press now have yet another choice, fresh from American supermarkets.
The National Enquirer went on sale in Britain on June 13 and its editor and president, Iain Calder, asserts that it is popular with readers who want "a little piece of Americana."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday Consumer Credit...May Tuesday None Wednesday Wholesale Trade...May Thursday Housing Completions...May Friday Producer Price Index...June Retail Sales...June


2d Florio Budget Is Study in Survival
With his second budget now in place, Gov.
Jim Florio has demonstrated that whatever else he stands for, he is a dedicated practitioner of the politics of survival.
In his first six months in office, Governor Florio and fellow Democrats in the Legislature championed an unabashed kind of class politics.
They raised income taxes on the affluent.
They redirected a river of money to poorer school districts.
And they loosed a barrage of fiery oratory against the insurance industry as an exploiter of the common man.


Accounts
*
Tommy Boy Music, New York, a rap music division of Warner Brothers Records, to Greenberg/Millar Advertising, New York.
This is the first national account for the six-month-old agency, which will be creating advertising for Tommy Boy's acts.
A television commercial for one group, De La Soul, is scheduled to begin appearing today.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Frederick Wildman &amp; Sons Ltd., New York, to Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, New York, for its Cockburn's Port.
Billings were not disclosed.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Freeport-McMoran Inc., New Orleans, an energy resources company, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $500 million in debt securities and warrants to buy debt securities.


Kuwait to Let Red Cross Act As Mediator in Deportations
The International Committee of the Red Cross and the Kuwaiti Government have worked out new arrangements to monitor Kuwait's deportation of foreigners, mostly Iraqis and Palestinians, Kuwaiti officials and Western diplomats say.
On Saturday, 41 people left Kuwait for Iraq under the new guidelines, which are meant to insure that deportees are not forced out in violation of international laws.


Yanks Can't Get Even at the Break But Exude Pinstriped Confidence
The Yankees might not be half bad but they aren't half good yet, either.
For the second time in three days, they failed yesterday to reach the .500 mark, traditional symbol of baseball respectability.
This time, it was a young arm, the right one belonging to Wade Taylor, that fizzled.
Taylor was roughed up by Baltimore, and the Yankees couldn't quite climb an early three-run barrier that stood in their way, losing, 5-3 at Yankee Stadium.


New York's Tough Pigeons Fight Predators for Survival
New Yorkers, like many city dwellers, have a love-hate relationship with their pigeons.
Some take bags of grain or bread to their favorite parks to feed the pigeons, or spend thousands of dollars raising fancy racing breeds on their rooftops.


Mets Are in There Pitching and Creeping Up
The arms have made it a race.
Right-handers have succeeded for the Mets.
Left-handers have succeeded.
The starts have been extraordinary, the relief exemplary.
The Mets pitchers, with their fastballs and change-ups, sinkers and split-fingers, have combined to throw a haymaker at the first-place Pittsburgh Pirates.


Three People Injured in Grocery Explosion
Three people were injured last night when an explosive device was tossed into a small grocery in the Bedford Park section of the Bronx, the police said.
The owner of the store and two customers were injured when the device, possibly a grenade, exploded, said Sgt.
Grace Ridley, a police spokeswoman.


Faradyne Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Hamptons Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


50 Years Later, Flying Tigers Are Given Veterans' Benefits
Their military flights in 1941 slowed the advance of Japanese troops, but until now the 259 pilots and crew members of the Flying Tigers could not claim veterans' status.
For years, the Pentagon did not acknowledge the Flying Tigers as anything but volunteers functioning independently of American-controlled operations.
But a special service review board recently ruled that the group had served on "active duty" in their battles in 1941.


Pro-Coal Ad Campaign Disputes Warming Idea
Coal-burning utility companies and coal producers, disturbed by public acceptance of the idea that burning fossil fuels will change the climate, are deciding whether to go national this fall with an ad campaign they tried in three markets earlier this year.
The advertising effort was tried out in Flagstaff, Ariz.; Fargo, N.D., and Bowling Green, Ky.
The campaign produced nearly 2,000 requests to a toll-free telephone line for more information, said Gale Klappa, a vice president of the Southern Company, a coal-using utility based in Atlanta.


Sheepshead Bay Losing Its Old-Salt Air
At that rare time when most New York City roads are virtually empty, at 6 A.M. on a midsummer weekend, cars full of fishermen jostle for parking spaces along Emmons Avenue in the Sheepshead Bay section of Brooklyn.
Party-fishing boat operators beckon like carnival barkers, urging them to spend $27 for a day at sea, much as they have for generations.
At first glance history seems to have made its way up to about 1960 along the avenue, and then stopped dead in its tracks: Helen Randazzo serves the same hot-and-medium sauce that has made her Sheepshead Bay clam bar famous for 35 years; George Richford "works the bay" aboard party-fishing boats much as he has since 1955, and George Schultz, the owner of Pip's, is still on the lookout for another new talent at his comedy club like Rodney Dangerfield, Lenny Bruce or Buddy Hackett.
An Uphill Struggle
But despite the survival of the fishing boats and institutions like Randazzo's, longtime residents of Sheepshead Bay say they are fighting an uphill battle to preserve the character of their community as the city's last quaint ocean-front fishing village.


People
*
Mark D. Abrams has been promoted to senior vice president and account group head at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York, from senior vice president and management supervisor. *
Lori Rathje has been named senior vice president and general manager of FCB Impact/West, a promotional marketing unit of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, Chicago.
She will continue to run FCB Impact's San Francisco operation and will add responsibilities for managing the Los Angeles office.
Robert Solomon has been named senior vice president and general manager of FCB Direct/West, the agency's direct marketing unit on the West Coast.
He will continue to be the head of FCB Direct in San Francisco and will now oversee the Los Angeles office.


Political Memo; D'Amato, The Fighter, On Defensive
It is a political adage: Bring home the bacon, and the voters will respond.
Alfonse M. D'Amato had built a career on that folk wisdom, billing himself as "a fighter for the forgotten middle class" as he campaigned for the Senate.
Shortly after arriving here, he was called a Senator with the heart of a municipal official and nicknamed Senator Pothole.


Miscellany
*
Hunt-Wesson Inc. has agreed to withdraw certain advertisements for Wesson cooking oil that contended that consumers preferred Wesson's color, taste and smell over a rival oil, Puritan, made by Procter &amp; Gamble.
The withdrawal follows a decision by the National Advertising division of the Council of Better Business Bureaus that the research on which Hunt-Wesson based its ads was no longer accurate. *
Joe Montana, quarterback of the San Francisco 49ers, will appear in a print advertising campaign for the Franklin Group of Funds, San Mateo, Calif., a mutual fund organization.
The ads will be created in-house by the company.


Southern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for 12mos to May 31


Tab Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Fledgling Cartoonists Pin Hopes On an Increasingly Unlikely Break
Last fall, Jeff Shesol was an unobtrusive Brown University senior who happened to write "Thatch," a daily comic strip, for the school newspaper.
Then he introduced a new character, Politically Correct Person.
Quicker than you can say Zonker Harris, Mr.
Shesol was a hot commodity, sought by newspapers, magazines and television programs reporting on the issue of political correctness, and pursued by book publishers and syndicators eager to add such a topically correct cartoon to their stables.


Dividend Meetings


New Retail Concepts Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Quotations of the Day
"I think we should give the Soviets as much as we can as long as it doesn't hurt us." -- Luis A. Sanchez of Miami.  [ A10:4. ]
"The Soviet Union needs a Marshall Plan, but it should be a Russian plan financed with marks and yen." -- John Dwan of the University of Utah.  [ A10:5. ]


Adjusted Census Won't Provide Fairness
To the Editor:
I disagree with "For Political Justice, Adjust the Census" (editorial, June 15), which argues that an adjusted census will make democracy fairer.
To the contrary, I believe that an adjusted census will be less fair and less accurate than the original census.
I am strongly urging Secretary of Commerce Robert Mosbacher to reject an adjustment.


Review/Television; Shopping as the Point and the Prize
Game shows are always looking for a lofty excuse to justify their existence.
You can really learn something if you watch "Jeopardy" -- that sort of thing.
So, apparently without shame, "Shop Till You Drop" -- a new series making its debut on Lifetime at 6:30 this evening -- is suggesting that its format will turn ordinary viewers into savvy consumers.
Actually, what we have here is a clinical study for sociologists, especially those who might think the more brazen forms of unbridled greed and conspicuous consumption faded with the advent of the sober 1990's.
Creditors getting testy these days?
Job situation looking wobbly?
Forget it.
Watch "Shop Till You Drop," the show that exuberantly poses the question: How would you like to win the shopping trip of a lifetime, to New York, Paris, Rome, London or Hong Kong?
Pat Finn is the genial host, dressed California-style in shirt and tie but no jacket.
He skillfully revs up the adrenalin of the contestants, two young couples seemingly provided by central casting.
Though there is a great deal of hugging and high-fiving as one couple squares off against the other, the excited players convey the odd impression that they just met only minutes earlier.


Allwaste Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


When Agencies and Clients Produce the TV Programs
LOOK closely the next time you see a television program with no advertising on it.
An advertising agency may still lurk behind it.
Next week, public broadcasting stations around the country will begin rebroadcasting "The Civil War," the acclaimed 11-hour documentary by Ken Burns that in its first go-round last September became the most-watched public television program of all time.


Another in Columbus Crew Gets to Discover Stadium
Bernie Williams got the news in the visitors' clubhouse at Louisville, which looked nothing like this carpeted, air-conditioned wonderland he was inspecting yesterday in the Bronx.
"It's very different," decided Williams, who became the eighth player to start the season at Class AAA Columbus of the International League and then join the rejuvenated Yankees during the season.
"I've been dreaming of this since I signed, six years ago."


South Africa: New Reality
The African National Congress emerged today from its first national conference inside South Africa in three decades brimming with new confidence and determination to defeat the white-minority Government at the negotiating table.
Although it refuses to call itself a political party, the congress progressed in just over five days from a self-described liberation movement to a more mature and focused political organization, displaying a pragmatism that augurs well for talks with the Government.


Huge Foreign Bank Faces Possible Collapse


At a Border Town, an Uneasy Calm
The noon deadline passed, and the mood suddenly brightened among the militia fighters and police officers who form the first line of defense for the separatist republic of Slovenia.
At the nearby Dravograd crossing into Austria, the guards, tense at 11 A.M., were jovial at 12:30.
"Everything is quiet," said their captain, almost succeeding in adopting the air of a man who had expected nothing else.
But some of his troops did not hide their relief that Slovenia's refusal to return all border posts to federal control by the Government's noon deadline had not been met with military action.


Jordanian Cancels Most Martial Law Rules
King Hussein today canceled most provisions of martial law, which went into effect after Jordan lost the West Bank in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
The decree becomes effective on Monday, the state-run Petra press agency said.


Astrakhan Journal; Hotel for Young Lovers? Perestroika Turns Pale
Tired of trysting in stairwells and graveyards, young people here persuaded one of the new insurgent city councilmen to propose that the city build a special youth hotel, with Bohemian cafe and hourly bedroom rates, to allow privacy for spooning.
In doing so, the councilman, Valery V. Karpov, touched one of the sorest spots of Communism -- the inhibitions of communal apartment living -- with one of the sharper issues of glasnost: how libertine should the new freedoms and candor be allowed to become.


Ex-C.I.A. Official May Give Iran-Contra Inquiry a Boost
The independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra inquiry is discussing a guilty plea with a former senior Central Intelligence Agency official who would give testimony that could produce a big break in the investigation, two people directly involved in the case said.
The former official, Alan D. Fiers, was in a position to know many details of the Government's efforts to assist a guerrilla army inside Nicaragua from 1984 to 1986 when Congress had effectively banned military aid to the rebels, or contras.


Court Choice Puts Nation's Racial Legacy on Table
It is 13 years since the Supreme Court ruled in the case of Allan Bakke that while public universities could not set strict racial quotas in admissions they could achieve diversity by considering the race of their applicants.
"In order to get beyond racism, we must first take account of race," Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote in a separate opinion.
It was a succinct and powerful statement of the rationale for affirmative action, the code words for policies intended to compensate blacks for their historical exclusion from the full range of economic and educational opportunities.
That rationale still underlies as much of the Court's legacy in this area as has survived the erosion of the intervening years.


City National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Arms Team Visits Iraqi Sites for 2d Time
A United Nations team visited two previously examined sites today in the first step of a study that could determine the allied response to charges that Iraq is cheating on disclosure of its nuclear materials.
Dimitri Perricos, an International Atomic Energy Agency official who heads the 37-member team, refused to comment on whether the experts had seen or asked to see an elusive cache of what the United Nations charges is nuclear weapons-making equipment.


Caribbean Utilities reports earnings for Year to April 30


Deadline in a Plagiarism Case
John R. Silber, the president of Boston University, announced today that the dean of the College of Communication would be given until Thursday to explain why he plagiarized large portions of his commencement address in May.
Dr.
Silber said the university administration would then make an announcement on Friday about the fate of the dean, H. Joachim Maitre.


Editorial Notebook; Big Bands Bridge a Gap
Anyone old enough to remember real dancing found heaven at Manhattan's Roseland Ballroom one recent night.
For four hours, a thousand or so dancers, all of them over 50, fox-trotted, lindy-hopped and jitterbugged to Jimmy Dorsey arrangements like "In the Mood" and "Indian Love Call." And when Helen O'Connell, 71, slim and sequined, belted out "Amipola," the dancing stopped, the eyes glistened and the rhythmic clapping began.
It was senior night at Roseland, but for many the high school prom seemed only yesterday.
Like Roseland, dance halls across the country have been rolling their music back to the 30's and 40's.
By and large, big bands faded out as live entertainment after World War II.
Rising costs melted some of the best down to trios.
Now, a combination of youthful nostalgia and graying enthusiasm is bringing the big bands back.


Put Rose Almost in The Hall Of Fame
It was the uniqueness of the late Commissioner of Baseball, A. Bartlett Giamatti, that he could speak to the wider significance of baseball to American life.
In no debate is he more sorely missed than the issue of whether Pete Rose should be inducted into the Hall of Fame.
As a scholar of Renaissance poetry and Greek mythology, he would have seen the issue of Rose's induction not as a question of fame, but of honor.
Rose is the most famous baseball player in modern history.
He will be remembered 100 years from now with Ty Cobb and Babe Ruth when the names of Mickey Mantle and Carl Yastrzemski have been forgotten.


Books of The Times; A Computer Program Decides to Take Over
LINGO By Jim Menick 334 pages. Carroll &amp; Graf . $19.95.
Sooner or later, it had to happen.
And in Jim Menick's amusingly playful first novel, "Lingo," it finally does.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday of John M. Astrachan misstated the nature of his medical practice.
Dr.
Astrachan was an associate professor of psychiatry in obstetrics and gynecology and an attending physician at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He had a private psychiatric practice in Manhattan.


Merrimac Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


Brock Exploration Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


2 Irishmen Shoot Their Way Out of a Prison in London
Two suspected Irish Republican Army guerrillas blasted their way to freedom from a London prison today, wounding a motorist as they fled.
The Government launched an inquiry to find out what went wrong with prison security and how the two men obtained a gun.


Review/Music; Tanglewood Opens With a Bow to Bernstein
Through all the far-flung triumphs of Leonard Bernstein's fabled career, the Tanglewood Festival, in his native state of Massachusetts, remained his spiritual home, and he, in turn, was the festival's signal musician.
In 1940, just six years after its modest origins and two years after the Music Shed was built, Bernstein enrolled in the first class of the Berkshire (now Tanglewood) Music Center to study conducting with Serge Koussevitzky, who was the music director of the Boston Symphony and the guiding spirit of the festival's early years.
Bernstein maintained a close working relationship with Tanglewood throughout his career, and just last August he conducted the Music Center Orchestra in what proved to be his last public performance.


For the P.L.O., a String of Setbacks
The Palestine Liberation Organization's decision last week to remove its heavy weapons and guerrillas from southern Lebanon is the latest in a series of setbacks weakening the leadership of Yasir Arafat and severely limiting the organization's ability to create a homeland, according to Palestinian officials in Tunis, the occupied territories and elsewhere.
Increasingly, these officials say, the P.L.O.'s existence is challenged not only by Israel, as has been the case for two decades, but also by leading Arab countries, including Syria, Egypt and Saudi Arabia.


Caribbean Fund Plan
Caribbean leaders have outlined plans to establish a $50 million private-sector investment fund within a year.
Members of the 13-nation Caribbean Community, known as Caricom, approved the plan last week.
Prime Minister Michael Manley of Jamaica said that about $25 million in private-sector money had been found.


Optimistic Economists Vs. Gloomy Executives
With few exceptions, statistical indicators now portray an American economy climbing solidly out of the recession.
Retail sales are up, along with other gauges like factory orders and output, consumer psychology and the length of the work week.
Indeed, on the assumption that the recovery is now so firmly grounded that no additional impetus is needed from lower interest rates, a few economists have begun to speculate about possible moves by the Federal Reserve to restrain the recovery by raising rates.


Scouts Founder Kept God Out of Movement
To the Editor:
Robert Baden-Powell, founder of the Boy Scout movement, never would have asked Mark Welsh or his parents if they believed in God (front page, June 23).
Contrary to the statement of Scout officials you mention, Baden-Powell did not found the movement "for boys who believe in God."


Hoosiers Glimpse a Bit of Byzantium
The line of children and church groups and ordinary Hoosiers wound through five galleries and the reception hall at the Indianapolis Museum of Art today, getting a final glimpse of four sixth-century Byzantine mosaics that have been the talk of Indianapolis and the art world.
In a turnout more typical of Manhattan than Indianapolis, people in wheelchairs and parents pushing strollers endured two-hour waits to see the ancient fragments, which were at the center of an international ownership dispute and had never been seen by the general public before the five-week exhibition ending today.


CHRONICLE
The romance between WILLEM de KLERK, a son of President F. W. de KLERK of South Africa, and ERICA ADAMS, the daughter of a prominent mixed-race politician, has taken an intriguing new turn with a report that they now plan to be married in Cape Town in December.
The Sunday Times newspaper in Johannesburg quoted a close friend of the couple as saying their plans for a July wedding were postponed under pressure from both families.


News Summary
International A2-5
An agreement aimed at averting war was reached between Yugoslav leaders and European ministers.
Under the agreement, Slovenia accepted a compromise plan for control of the disputed border posts.
Page A1


Soviet Republics Are Coming Into Their Own; From the Bottom Up
To the Editor:
United States policy makers should follow up on the fragmentary suggestion of Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Soviet Union's Russian Republic (front page, June 21), that Western financial assistance go to would-be Soviet entrepreneurs.
There is every reason to believe that a small amount of money spent on encouraging economic reform from the bottom up will be far more effectively used than a large amount spent on imposing economic reform from the top down.


Bridge
A veteran Manhattan expert who made great contributions to the game in an administrative role died nine days ago at the age of 78.
David Halper was the chairman of the National Board of Governors of the American Contract Bridge League from 1959 to 1962 and headed two committees planning constitutional reform for the league.
Halper put his legal knowledge at the service of the Greater New York Bridge Association as counsel, and was its president in 1963 and later its board chairman.
At the card tables he acquired more than 1,500 master points, and the diagramed deal, played in Bermuda in 1966, contributed to the collection.


American Voices: Aiding the Soviets; Compassion and Pragmatism on Help for Moscow
F.
Brannan Jackson's face hangs heavy with doubt as he contemplates the prospect of American aid to the Soviet Union.
When he turns his thoughts into words, the pastor of the Calvary Institutional Baptist Church speaks like a Samaritan.
"We've heard the stories of economic distress over there," he says.
"I think we should help the Soviet Union."
He goes on: "We can do it. We have the kind of economic structure that we do the things we want to, when we want to, where we want to. It is a risk. But if we can achieve stability within Russia, there may be an opportunity to achieve a peaceful relationship with them."


Poland Outcapitalisms America
In a stroke, Poland is about to create capitalism out of the rubble of socialism -- and to an extent unmatched in the West.
In a breathtaking announcement, the Polish Government has proposed making every Pole a capitalist -- by handing over to 27 million adults majority ownership of 400 state-owned factories, representing 25 percent of the country's industrial sales.
In the U.S., few own much capital: the poorest
half
of all families owns a mere 3 percent of the nation's assets.
Under the Government plan, Poland would create more capitalists, relatively, in six months than the U.S. has created in 200 years.


Teacher Labor Group Rejects National Tests for Students
Delegates at the annual convention of the nation's largest teachers' union today approved a resolution opposing standardized national tests for students.
A Presidential advisory panel has proposed that standards and tests be developed to measure student performance.
Such standards would set the skills and knowledge to be learned at various ages and grade levels.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 8


Challenger International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Stich Upsets Becker at Wimbledon
It was a sorry sight on a glorious summer day.
There he was, the imperious Boris Becker, his shoulders slumped and his bowed head leaning against the stanchion of the vacant umpire's chair as another man paraded around the most hallowed of Wimbledon's lawns carrying tennis's most prestigious trophy.
"I just didn't have it today. It's as simple as that," Becker said after the first all-German final in the Grand Slam tournament's 114-year history.
Becker, a three-time Wimbledon victor, could not remember not "having it" in so important a match.


A French Connection Helps Tourists
After her husband had been knocked out of his wheelchair in Harlem and robbed of his video camera, and after her son had chased after the thief, all Paulette Pastre could scream was, "Parlez-vous francais?"
Fortunately for Mrs.
Pastre, a French tourist on the final day of a weeklong vacation in New York City, a police car happened to be passing by.
And fortunately, Officer Samuel Joseph-Pauline happened to be inside.


Federated and Allied Face Crucial Test With Creditors
Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation, affiliated companies that are two of the country's largest department store operators, are preparing for two hectic and crucial months as they begin working closely with creditors in hopes of emerging from Federal bankruptcy protection early next year.
The retailers -- units of the Campeau Corporation of Toronto -- sweetened their offers to two classes of creditors last week in an amended reorganization plan.
The plan must be presented for approval to the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Cincinnati, where Federated and Allied are based, on Sept. 11, before it is submitted to creditors for confirmation.


Creative Computer Application reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Scott's Career May Be Over
Mike Scott's career may be over because of a sore right shoulder.
"There's a possibility that I won't pitch again," the 36-year-old Scott said Saturday.
"I realize that, and it's not going to be a big suprise to me if I don't. I think the only thing that would bring me back is if I had a major operation, which I doubt I'll do."


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo today as continuing uncertainty about the scandal at Japan's big brokerage houses kept investors on the sidelines.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks was at 22,176.17, down 722.17 points, or 3.15 percent.


As Libraries Face Cuts, Supporters Plan a Protest
Calling the plight of public libraries in the United States worse than it was during the Great Depression, librarians and their supporters from around the nation are to converge here on Tuesday to demonstrate for more financial help.
Organized by the American Library Association, the demonstration at the Martin Luther King Memorial Library here is one stop of the "Rally on Wheels," a mobile campaign.
The 52,000-member organization ended its yearly convention in Atlanta on July 4.


As the Tour de France Heats Up, LeMond Handles Rise in Pressure
Maybe Greg LeMond was right when he said that all he needed to turn his season around was some hot weather.
Finding temperatures in the 80's and 90's in Lyons for the start of the Tour de France, LeMond finished part of his weekend's work in a familiar garment: the yellow jersey of the leader of the world's greatest bicycle race.


Jane M. DeLuca Wed in Brooklyn
Jane M. DeLuca and Dr.
Peter R. Eisenstadt were married yesterday at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden by Rabbi Charles D. Lippman.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis A. DeLuca of Addison, N.Y.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Eisenstadt of Bayside, Queens.
The bride, 34 years old, is a nurse at Babies Hospital of the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.
She graduated from Hunter College and received a master's degree in nursing from Columbia University.
The bridegroom, 37, is a historian and the managing editor of The Encyclopedia of New York, which is being prepared for publication jointly by the Yale University Press and The New York-Historical Society.
He graduated from City College and received a doctorate in American history from New York University.
His mother, Betty Eisenstadt, is a social studies teacher at Andrew Jackson High School in Cambria Heights, Queens.
His father is a retired commercial artist.


TV Industry Unfazed by Rise in 'Zapping'
In the mid-1980's, the broadcast networks and advertising agencies became deeply concerned that television advertising could lose its powerful effectiveness because of a growing phenomenon called "zapping" -- the use of a remote-control channel-changer to avoid commercials.
Less than a decade later, remote-control television is standard in the vast majority of American homes, but almost no one in the industry is studying zapping -- or even talking about it.


W. J. Hornibrook, 74, Chemist and Manager
Walter J. Hornibrook, a research chemist who supervised the development of new products for E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company and the Stauffer Chemical Company, died on Tuesday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Newburgh, N.Y.
He was 74 years old and lived in New Windsor, N.Y.
He died of prostatic and liver cancer, a family spokeswoman said.


Zale Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


New York Seeks Long-Term Approach to Big Projects
In the mid-1970's, when New York City last struggled through a fiscal crisis, many of the cuts made to balance the budget were those that saved the most money while inflicting the least immediate pain.
As anyone who drives across a bridge, takes the subway or encounters a broken water main knows, the long-term price of that approach was high.
Now, at Mayor David N. Dinkins's request, and with the benefit of hindsight, a task force of city officials and business and labor leaders is trying to devise an insurance policy to guarantee that the city does not again sacrifice expensive but necessary undertakings to programs with more powerful political constituencies.


Shift Reported By McDonnell
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation plans to shift 1,600 jobs to Missouri from California to work on military and commerical jet parts, The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch reported today.
The Post-Dispatch said the aerospace company would assign more work for the McDonnell C-17 Air Force cargo jet and the MD-11 and MD-80 commercial airliners to St.
Louis from Long Beach, Calif.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER Gold Cup Title to U.S.
The United States national team beat Honduras, 4-3, on penalty kicks in the final of the Gold Cup yesterday after a marathon penalty shootout, which was preceded by 120 minutes of scoreless play.
The United States won after shooting 8 penalty kicks.
The victory, played before a crowd of 39,873 in Los Angeles, gave the United States the trophy in the first Gold Cup event, for the championship of soccer's North and Central American and Caribbean regions.


Review/Opera; Long-Delayed Munich Premiere: 'Ubu Rex' From Penderecki
Krzysztof Penderecki's curious career as an avant-garde composer has taken yet another regressive turn.
To its credit, the conventionally conservative Bavarian State Opera opened its annual Munich Opera Festival on Saturday night with a commissioned world premiere.
To its discredit, it has wasted some fine performers, a brilliant design and presumably lots of Bavarian taxpayer marks on a decidedly arid exercise, Mr.
Penderecki's "Ubu Rex."
Mr.
Penderecki still counts as one of the best-known composers in the world, and a leading musical citizen of Poland; although he has always traveled freely to the West, including a stint teaching at Yale University in the 1970's, he has been based for years in Cracow.
But his reputation has slid steadily backward, and "Ubu Rex" won't help it.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week: Advanced Telecommunications Corp., 4.5 million common shares in a global offering, with 3.6 million shares to be sold in the United States.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


A Tradition in Brooklyn


Blood Center's Painful Job: Telling Donors Test Results
Every Friday, the New York Blood Center mails a stack of bad news.
The letter is terse: "It is important for you to come in to the blood center to discuss the test result since it indicates a finding of importance to your health."
The ominous-sounding letter does not say so, but for 200 of the people who get the letter each year in New York City it means that a test taken when they donated blood shows that they have HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.


Question Box
All-Star Shutout
Q.
Toronto is host to its first All-Star Game tomorrow night.
Is there any major league team left that has not staged the game?


Mildred Dunnock, 90, Originator Of Broadway's Mrs. Loman, Dies
Mildred Dunnock, the actress best known for her performances in stage and screen productions of "Death of a Salesman," died Friday evening at Martha's Vineyard Hospital in Oak Bluffs, Mass.
She was 90 years old, said her daughter, Linda McGuire.
Her daughter said that Miss Dunnock died of old age. She lived in West Tisbury, Mass.


Castle &amp; Cooke Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


Court Choice Puts Nation's Racial Legacy on Table
It is 13 years since the Supreme Court ruled in the case of Allan Bakke that while public universities could not set strict racial quotas in admissions they could achieve diversity by considering the race of their applicants.
"In order to get beyond racism, we must first take account of race," Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote in a separate opinion.
It was a succinct and powerful statement of the rationale for affirmative action, the code words for policies intended to compensate blacks for their historical exclusion from the full range of economic and educational opportunities.
That rationale still underlies as much of the Court's legacy in this area as has survived the erosion of the intervening years.


Arms Inspections, Anytime Anywhere
As Iraq continues to deny international inspectors access to all its suspected nuclear sites, President Bush rightly condemns this blatant violation of the United Nations cease-fire.
Yet if his Administration has its way in negotiations to ban chemical arms, Iraq will have the right to refuse similar inspections of its suspected chemical-weapons sites.
The Administration's stance is worse than inconsistent.
It's fatally flawed.
The U.S. negotiating position has drawn fire from many of the 40 nations represented at the chemical-arms talks because it would undermine verification of the treaty.
Unless the U.S. changes its stand soon, it could split Western negotiators.


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
A powerful new economic pragmatism is sweeping third world capitals from Brasilia to Bangkok.
Countries that were once proud economic nationalists are now trying to forge closer ties with the rest of the world.
Government officials and economists say they are committed to changes like allowing market forces to flourish, abandoning fiscal and monetary policies that were politically motivated and opening borders to foreign goods and investment.  [ Page A1. ]  India has begun a fundamental shift in priorities that looks to South Korea and prosperous Southeast Asian nations as guiding economic symbols, its new foreign minister says.  [ D3. ]
A year ago, the idea of the "grand bargain" -- Soviet reform in exchange for Western aid -- would have been dismissed as an insult by the Kremlin and as a waste of money by the White House.
The impossible now seems at least plausible.
Economic Watch.  [ D1. ]  Interviews with scores of Americans reveals a deep ambivilance about the idea of a Soviet bailout financed by the United States.  [ A1. ]


Late Docking of a Prison Barge Saves Cash, but Cells Are Needed
The good news is that New York City expects to save $2.5 million because a new prison barge will arrive late.
The bad news is that the city has no idea where it will put the 800 prisoners who were to be jailed on the barge by late this summer or early fall.


More Than a Parade
To the Editor:
With all the hoopla about Operation Desert Storm, it is an outrage that former service members may receive a maximum of only 13 weeks of unemployment insurance, while many other unemployed people are eligible for up to 26 weeks of benefits.


5 Die as Croats and Serbs Trade Fire
While Yugoslavia's leaders gathered for peace talks on the island of Brioni today, this agrarian town in the republic of Croatia was echoing with the din of a firefight between Serbs and Croats.
The more than eight hours of shooting, which included Croatia's first use of artillery against the Serbs, halted only after the arrival of Yugoslav Army tanks.


Reducing the Risk of Death by Asteroid
To the Editor:
"There's a 'Doomsday Rock' but When Will It Strike?" (Science Times, June 18) notes that a big asteroid slams into Earth once every 300,000 to one million years.
An accompanying chart presents the risk of death for an American from asteroid impact over a 50-year period as 1 in 6,000 -- more than three times the risk of death from an airplane crash -- since 300,000 divided by 50 is 6,000.


American Expertise Meets Harsh Reality: The Angolan Business Climate
At first glance, it is a triumph of American business ingenuity.
Less than a week after a cease-fire ending Angola's 16-year civil war was signed, a small company based in Los Angeles has begun building the prototype for what will eventually become a 2,000-unit single-family housing development.


OPEC Output Higher in June
OPEC nations raised their oil output slightly last month and exceeded their new production ceiling, according to estimates released last week by the International Energy Agency.
Saudi Arabia, the world's largest crude exporter, increased its pumping in June, the agency said in a report, giving the organization total output of 22.6 million barrels of oil a day.
The energy agency is an arm of the 24-nation Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.


Seven Oaks International reports earnings for Year to April 30


Bond Unit to Be Liquidated
The family-owned company of Alan Bond, the Australian financier, has been shut down with debts of more than $760 million.
John Lord, of the Australian accounting firm Duesburys, was named to liquidate Mr.
Bond's company, Dallhold Investments, at a federal court hearing here on Friday.


Gray Skies for California Banks
California's big banks are being hit with some big shocks, and the state's slumping economy is just one of them.
A Labor Department report issued on Friday, showing that California's unemployment rate surged in June to its highest level in seven years, underscored the difficult economic climate facing the state's four largest banking companies: the BankAmerica Corporation, the Security Pacific Corporation, Wells Fargo &amp; Company and the First Interstate Bancorp.


Review/Music; Tanglewood Opens With a Bow to Bernstein
Through all the far-flung triumphs of Leonard Bernstein's fabled career, the Tanglewood Festival, in his native state of Massachusetts, remained his spiritual home, and he, in turn, was the festival's signal musician.
In 1940, just six years after its modest origins and two years after the Music Shed was built, Bernstein enrolled in the first class of the Berkshire (now Tanglewood) Music Center to study conducting with Serge Koussevitzky, who was the music director of the Boston Symphony and the guiding spirit of the festival's early years.
Bernstein maintained a close working relationship with Tanglewood throughout his career, and just last August he conducted the Music Center Orchestra in what proved to be his last public performance.


CHRONICLE
Dame JANET BAKER is to be the new Chancellor of the University of York in York, England.
She will be installed at a special ceremony in November.
In 1982, the Yorkshire-born mezzo-soprano retired from the opera stage at the age of 48, at the peak of her career.
At the time, she explained, "I have been interested in opera only on my own terms."


In Movies, a Formula Is Born: Hitching One's Star to a Song
Long before "Pretty Woman" became a hit movie, it was the title of a hit song.
So were "Sea of Love," "Bird on a Wire," "Peggy Sue Got Married," "Stand by Me," "Blue Velvet," "Soul Man," "The Mighty Quinn" and numerous other films of recent years.
Those movies may bring to the screen stories that have little or nothing in common with the songs, but the similarity of names is no mere coincidence.
For Hollywood, using the title of a pop song has become one more hook, and a very effective one at that, to lure moviegoers into theaters.


Chimpanzee Case Reinforced Critics of Wealthy Corporations
To the Editor:
"Chimpanzee Case Tests Libel Jurisdiction" (letter, June 15) by Raymond Fersko creates the mistaken impression that the New York Court of Appeals tried to usurp the position of the United States Supreme Court in dismissing a libel lawsuit that his client, the pharmaceutical corporation Immuno A.G., brought over a letter to the editor critical of the company's plans to use captured chimpanzees.


So Much More Than Food to a Chef's Dream
In the United States boys may dream of becoming astronauts or the next Michael Jordan.
In this land of truffles, terrines and 300 types of cheese, many boys dream of becoming three-star chefs.
Bernard Loiseau, who as a teen-ager hung pictures of famous chefs on his wall, has finally had his dream come true.
In March, the Michelin Guide consecrated his Cote d'Or restaurant here with a third star.


Umpire Steve Palermo Is Shot While Trying to Stop a Robbery
Major league umpire Steve Palermo and another man were shot early this morning while trying to help two waitresses being robbed in a restaurant parking lot, the police said.
Palermo, an American League umpire since 1977, was in serious condition following surgery for a gunshot wound in his back, league spokeswoman Phyllis Merhige and hospital officials said.


'India Is Now in a New Ball Game'
The Finance Minister of India says his impoverished nation has begun a fundamental shift in priorities that looks, for the first time, to South Korea and prosperous Southeast Asian nations as guiding economic symbols.
For more than four decades, India's policies have been marked by suspicion of capitalism, the United States, foreign investment and trade.
"India is now in a new ball game," said Manmohan Singh, the newly appointed Minister of Finance, a self-effacing international economist who virtually acknowledges that he is seeking to lead a revolution.
"Our country is now prepared for big changes and I think we can launch a process of changing the mind-sets of our people."


Pro Bono Campaigns For Kurdish Refugees
Advertising agencies around the world are creating campaigns to raise money on behalf of Kurdish refugees.
In the United States, participants in the pro bono effort are Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York; Martin Williams Advertising Inc., Minneapolis, and the San Francisco office of Livingston &amp; Company, Seattle.
Other countries in which agencies are involved include Australia, Britain and Italy.


Court Nominee at Focus of Debate As N.A.A.C.P. Meets in Houston
The nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court is expected to become the topic of a difficult and potentially divisive debate when the annual convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People is held here this week.
"It has indeed become a major priority," said Dr.
Benjamin L. Hooks, the executive director of the association, which considers itself the oldest and largest civil rights organization in the country.


Sherry Bernstein Wed To Stephen D. Lelewer
Sheri Lynn Bernstein, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Bernstein of San Diego, was married yesterday in San Diego to Stephen David Lelewer, a son of Bonnie Mitelman of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and Stanley Lelewer of Santa Monica, Calif.
Rabbis Peter Rubinstein and Laurie Coskey performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth Israel.
The bride, 25 years old, is studying for a doctorate in art history at Harvard University.
She is a magna cum laude graduate of Yale University.


Rig Count Off in Week
The number of exploratory oil and gas rigs working in the United States dropped last week, Baker Hughes Inc. has reported.
The oilfield tool maker said Friday that 859 rigs were operating nationally, 22 less than in the week before and 152 fewer than the 1,011 rigs working a year earlier.
Of the rigs working, 332 were seeking gas, 488 oil and 39 others were listed as miscellaneous.
The count represents the number of rigs actively exploring for petroleum and natural gas, not those actually producing.


Japanese Head Forbes Wealth List
The world's richest person is Taikichiro Mori, an 87-year-old Japanese real estate investor, Forbes magazine says in its July 22 issue.
Mr.
Mori, worth an estimated $15 billion, moved past another Japanese businessman, Yoshiaki Tsutsumi, who made his money in railroads and golf courses, on the magazine's annual list of billionaires.
Mr.
Tsutsumi, 57, had an estimated worth of more than $14 billion.


Stich Upsets Becker in Wimbledon Final


Market Place; Signs of a Weak Housing Rebound
HOUSING industry stocks, after soaring early this year, have abruptly stopped climbing and begun to trail the overall stock market.
The rise of the housing stocks, which began last November, served as a signal that the deep housing recession might end far sooner than many had expected.
But the new weakness in prices has kept one home builder from going through with a planned stock offering, even though many others succeeded and another is hoping to sell shares soon.
And the falloff in stock prices could signal that the rebound in housing is going to be weaker than had been optimistically hoped for only a few months ago.


West Side Journal; Cars Towed: 403. Owners Irate: 403.
The New York City Department of Transportation towed 403 cars, trucks and vans to its impound lot on the West Side of Manhattan on a recent rainy day.
And each vehicle told a story.


Rangers' Franco Cleared For All-Star Game Trip
Julio Franco, who has been complaining of chest pains, was given the go-ahead today to play in the All-Star Game in Toronto on Tuesday.
Dr.
Charles Cramer of Arlington said after performing two procedures that the Texas second baseman's chest pains were caused, as believed Friday, by a combination of heat and caffeine.


Perfect for 6, No-Hitter for 7, Ryan Almost Does It Again
Nolan Ryan took a no-hitter into the eighth inning and wound up allowing two hits in eight and one-third innings tonight as the Texas Rangers beat the California Angels, 7-0.
Dave Winfield, who had been 1 for 22 in his career against Ryan with 13 strikeouts, broke up Ryan's bid for an eighth no-hitter with a clean single to center leading off the eighth inning.


Discount Corp. of N.Y.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of the Times; Where Do They All Come From?
THE scary part for Americans is not that Steffi Graf, Michael Stich and Boris Becker are playing better tennis than any Yank players, but that they also speak better English than most.
This is a cheap shot, of course, but there is a grain of truth to it.
In the final weekend at Wimbledon, Graf, Stich and Becker all came off as quite thoughtful and articulate in what is, at best, their second language.


Jodi Goldhand, A Lawyer, Wed
Joanne Ilene Goldhand, a daughter of Judi Z. Goldhand of New York and Jerry Goldhand of Mount Laurel, N.J., was married yesterday to Justin D'Arms, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D'Arms of Ann Arbor, Mich.
Rabbi Elliot Holin performed the ceremony at the chapel at Princeton University.
The bride, known as Jodi, is a lawyer at the Federal Environmental Protection Agency office in Ann Arbor.
She graduated from Princeton and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father is a vice president at Tyco Industries, a toy manufacturer in Mount Laurel.
Her mother is the manager of Lebowitz-Gould Design in New York.


S. Carolina Is Said To Bid for Wenzel
Bob Wenzel, the Rutgers basketball coach, has been offered the coaching job at South Carolina, a television station reported today.
Wenzel will replace the fired George Felton if he can agree with the school on contract terms, WYFF-TV of Greenville reported.


Arab Nations Put Off Talks to Create Kuwait Force
An Arab effort to create a force to replace the dwindling American and allied presence in Kuwait appeared to have encountered new difficulties today with the postponement of negotiations on the composition of the Arab military unit.
Egypt, which had seen the force as a means of securing both significant financial help and new regional influence, sought to play down the delay as technical, but Kuwait, which announced the postponement, said no new date had been scheduled.
It offered no explanation for the holdup.


Earth Technology reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Credit 'Splendid Little War' to John Hay; Mr. Hearst's War
To the Editor:
A footnote to the letters on the Spanish-Cuban-American War by Philip S. Foner, emeritus professor of history, and Rebecca J. Scott, associate professor of Latin American history (June 27 and June 11): In 1897, William Randolph Hearst, publisher of The New York Morning Journal, demanded that the United States go to war with Spain.
In 1898, he sent the following cable to the artist Frederic Remington in Cuba: "You furnish the pictures and I'll furnish the war." SYLVIA KORNREICH ORANS New York, June 27, 1991


Bridge
Officials who try to impose on the public a new name for a familiar item often run ino resistance, especially when the revised version is longer: Mayor La Guardia announced that Sixth Avenue would be called Avenue of the Americas, but his constituents paid no attention.
Similarly, the American Contract Bridge League has for many years listed its main events as the North American Championships, but its members continue to talk about the Spring Nationals, the Summer Nationals and the Fall Nationals.


Yanks Need a Strong Start In Order to Finish on Top
At the All-Star Game break, the Yankees have won 22 of their 38 victories this season after being behind.
That spunky statistic is testimony to three team traits: clutch hitting, strong bullpen work and erratic performances from the starting rotation.
Despite all the juggling, promoting and demoting, Yankee management is not kidding itself about the club's last, irksome flaw.
The Yankees have been falling behind early in games, and the cause is no mystery.
When the second half of the season begins on Thursday at California, an active search will continue for dependable starters.


By Shooting at Stars, CBS Aims for Ratings
The All-Star Game tonight in Toronto should afford CBS Sports an evening's rest from criticism about weak baseball ratings and the hefty financial losses it has suffered from overpaying for Major League Baseball by a few hundred million dollars.
The midseason classic is a prime-time showcase, a night of major stars, big ratings and tip-top advertising rates.


Autoinfo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bank Rules Gain Urgency After Collapse
The collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International may give added impetus to changes in bank supervision that regulators worldwide have talked about for years but have not yet put in place.
As more of B.C.C.I.'s operations were closed yesterday around the world, regulators from the central banks of the 10 leading industrial nations met in Basel, Switzerland, and began to assess what changes could be made in the wake of allegations of widespread fraud at the bank.


High Court Nominee Visits Capitol Hill


Music in Review
Manhattan Philharmonic  Carnegie Hall
The typical practice of the Manhattan Philharmonic, with its monster choral concerts at Carnegie Hall, is to go to great lengths to create a problem of overweight and then see to what extent it can be solved by various conductors.
It did so twice on Sunday evening, performing Faure's Requiem ("petit," the composer called it) with a chorus, drawn from six states, that appeared to number more than 300, and Mozart's Requiem with a chorus of perhaps 130.


South Africa Signs a Treaty Allowing Nuclear Inspection
South Africa signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty today, permitting inspection of all its atomic installations.
Foreign Minister Roelof F. Botha signed his country's accession to the treaty at a ceremony here attended by the visiting British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd.


Teaching American History Without Blinders; Who Teaches It?
To the Editor:
As a history teacher for more than 15 years, who has followed the debate over history teaching in New York State, I can only roll my eyes and ask, "Where's the beef?"


BRIEFS
Debt *
St.
Petersburg Utility Authority, Fla., is tentatively offering $37.5 million in tax-exempt public utility refunding revenue bonds with a maxmum yield of 6.85 percent for a bond due in 2005, through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Yields on serial bonds range from 4.6 percent in 1991 to 6.75 percent in 2004.
The financing is rated Aa by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
Ratings *
Boise Cascade Corp.'s debt rating and the rating of the company's subsidiaries are under review for possible downgrading by Moody's. *
York Holdings Corp.'s rating of subordinated debentures, due in 2004, is under review for possible upgrading by S.&amp; P. The company is based in York, Pa.


Sulcus Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Drivers Get Honors
Drivers JOHN CAMPBELL and BILL O'DONNELL, ranked first and second on harness racing's career purse earnings list, were inducted into the Hall of Fame of the Trotter at Goshen, N.Y., on Sunday.
Campbell established himself as a driver in the early 1970's, working with his father at race tracks in the Detroit area.
His rise to prominence began after he became a regular at the Meadowlands track in New Jersey in 1978.
Campbell, 36 years old, has won $95.6 million in purses.


Navy Water School Is Faulted in a Study As Still Being Risky
A Congressional report commissioned after a Navy recruit died at a rescue school in 1988 said today that training at the Florida school was still unecessarily dangerous.
While the Navy has taken some steps to improve safety, "neither students nor instructors are psychologically screened to determine their suitability for high-risk training," said the report by the General Accounting Office, the investigative agency for Congress.


Results Plus
TRACK AND FIELD  Bubka Breaks His Own Mark in Pole Vault
Sergei Bubka inched closer to the outdoor 20-foot mark yesterday, soaring 19 feet 11 3/4 inches to raise his world record in the pole vault at a meet in Formia, Italy.
Bubka beat his mark of 19-11 1/4 set in Moscow last month.
Bubka cleared the height on his first attempt, received a thunderous ovation from the crowd, and passed on his other attempts.
Each time Bubka raises the world record, he earns between $30,000 and $40,000 from meet organizers and about $90,000 from his commercial Italian sponsor.
Bubka said recently that he believed he could go as high as 20-4 1/2, but he wants to do it gradually.
Margarita Ponomaryeva of the Soviet Union won the women's 400-meter hurdles in 54.25 seconds, the second fastest time of the year.
Kathy Freeman of the United States was second in 56.38.
Mark McKoy of Canada upset former world-record holder Renaldo Nehemiah in the 110-meter hurdles.
McKoy won in 13.53, .16 ahead of Nehemiah.
Dannette Young scored the only United States victory in the meet, taking the women's 200-meter in 23:03 seconds.
She edged Lilian Allen of Cuba and another American, Lillie Leatherwood.
Cuban athletes took the men's high jump and the women's 200- and 800-meter races.
African runners swept the top five places in the 10,000 meters, with Petro Metta of Tanzania winning in 28 minutes 7.70 seconds.


New Bud Dry Commercials Explore 'Enlightened Sexism'
Brewers and their advertising agencies have traditionally tried to reach their primary market -- younger men -- with advertising that is heavy on wild parties and young women in micro-bikinis.
But three new television commercials for Bud Draft Dry turn the tables, largely in response to criticism of sexism in earlier ads.
One new commercial shows two young women at the beach, rating the men who walk by.
A scrawny surfer complains, "Why can't they just love us for our minds?"


Mutual Benefit Life Plans to Reduce Its Home-Office Staff
Struggling to deal with a growing real estate problem, the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, the nation's 18th-largest life insurer, said today that it would reduce its home-office staff in Newark by 30 percent, or 430 people.
Included in the layoffs will be roughly a quarter of the company's managers.
In addition to trying to manage its realty problems by aggressively cutting overhead, Mutual Benefit was told today by the A. M. Best Company, the industry's leading rating agency, that it was lowering its assessment of Mutual Benefit's claims-paying ability from a top rating of "A+" to "Contingent A."


Ulysses Corrects Course
The troubled Ulysses solar explorer fired its thrusters and set course for a 1992 swing past Jupiter.
Meanwhile, NASA and European Space Agency officials investigated a two-hour loss of contact on June 14, but not announced at the time.
Space officials said it was not considered a major problem.
A Jet Propulsion Laboratory employee gave The Associated Press memos about the incident.


Music in Review
The Tanglewood  Music Center Orchestra  Tanglewood Festival
The centerpiece of the Tanglewood Festival's opening-weekend tribute to Leonard Bernstein on Saturday evening, a concert in the Music Shed consisting largely of Bernstein's own compositions, seemed to pose an interesting argument, though apparently not by design.
Bernstein's serious works are generally considered inferior to the music he wrote for stage and film, but the impression given here was quite the opposite.


Progress for Palermo
The condition of American League umpire STEVE PALERMO was upgraded yesterday from serious to fair at Parkland Hospital in Dallas one day after he was shot in the back while trying to aid two robbery victims.
Palermo and TERENCE MANN, a former football player at Southern Methodist, were shot early Sunday trying to stop the robbery in the parking lot of Campisi's Egyptian Restaurant, a spot popular with sports figures.
The two men did not know each other.


Bessie Goldman, 95, Co-Founder of a Dairy
Bessie Goldman, co-founder of Farmland Dairies Inc. in Wallington, N.J., died yesterday at her home in Fairlawn, N.J.
She was 95 years old.
She came to this country from Russia with her husband, Max, in 1915.
The couple founded Fairlawn Dairies Inc., which in 1970 was renamed Farmland Dairies of Wallington and is one of the largest privately owned dairies in the country.


Review/Opera; Robert Wilson Puts His Imprint on 'The Magic Flute'
As a creator of astonishing stage pictures, Robert Wilson has been incomparable for 20 years.
His new production of Mozart's "Magic Flute," which will run at the Bastille Opera here through July 19 and be reprised next season, offers scene after scene that is truly visionary.
Amazing images do not always a successful opera production make, though, one that responds sensitively to all the varied aspects of a multi-layered work like this.
Mr.
Wilson's "Flute" will inevitably offend those who wish that directors and designers would slink back to the humble, forelock-tugging role they played in much of operatic history, leaving music theater to the musicians.


I.B.M. Forces a Reshuffling of the Deck
As profitability in the personal computer field has plummeted, there has been a growing realization at the International Business Machines Corporation that the money and growth in that business will increasingly be found principally at the very bottom of the computer business -- chips -- and at the very top -- operating system software.
"We want to be able to control our own destiny," said Jack D. Kuehler, I.B.M.'s president.
"There are two fundamental forces and opportunities to be corralled in the PC marketplace: One is the incredible advances of semiconductor technology. The other is the latest developments in system software. We're really working very hard to reconcile these two forces."


Time Offering Expected Soon
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that it expected the Securities and Exchange Commission's review of its stock offering to be concluded within 10 days.
"I expect that we are coming to the end of the process of the review," a company executive said.
Once the commission completes its review, and if the offering is declared effective, shareholders can begin to exercise their rights.
The offering would be effective for the next 18 business days.
But the company can technically extend the offering for a total period of 40 days.


Duties Sought From Japan On Some Computer Screens
The Commerce Department today proposed levying stiff duties on certain computer screens imported from Japan.
But it also proposed sparing from such penalties the screens that are most commonly used today.
In a closely watched dumping case that has split the American electronics industry, the agency proposed duties of 62.67 percent on flat panels known as active matrix liquid crystal displays.
Such displays are not widely used now but are expected by some industry executives to be the most common type of screen for the laptop and notebook computers of the future.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League


Dollar Drops Amid Worries Over German Interest Rates
The dollar declined against most major currencies yesterday amid worries over German interest rates and a reduction of tensions in Yugoslavia.
Gold was slightly higher.


You Say You Want an Evolution? Mets Furnish One
Their destinations were all different, but the sentiment for the Mets as they packed their bags for the All-Star Game break was singular and shared: They had at last arrived as a team.
The evolution had certainly been fitful, and the Mets were cautious to say that it was by no means permament.
Still, there had been progress -- in coming together as well as moving up in the National League East -- and that meant no small relief for Manager Bud Harrelson, no small surprise for the hard-core doubters and no limits on the optimism among the faithful.


Input/Output Inc. reports earnings for Year to May 31


Henry Koerner, 75, Painter of Portraits And War Posters
Henry Koerner, a Vienna-born painter whose portraits of celebrities like Maria Callas and John F. Kennedy appeared on the cover of Time magazine in the 1950's and 60's, died on Thursday in St.
Polten, Austria.
He was 75 years old and lived in Pittsburgh.
He was bicycling with his wife, Joan, on June 5 when he was hit by a car, his daughter, Stephanie, said, said a report in The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
She said her father's brain was damaged, and he was in a coma until his death in a hospital in St.
Polten, about 30 miles west of Vienna.


For Emigres, A New Land Of Sorrows
Yahya Azizi, an Iranian Jew, finally joined his wife and children in America in November 1988, sick and exhausted after three months of torture in one of the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's prisons.
Ten days later, on a cold night, two men in jeans and sneakers knocked loudly at the door of the Azizis' apartment in Forest Hills, Queens.
They were Secret Service agents, they said, and they wanted to talk to Mr.
Azizi's 21-year-old son, Michael.


Couple Found Dead in Catskills Bungalow
A couple from Brooklyn were found dead in their Catskills bungalow early yesterday morning, apparently the victims of a double homicide, the state police said.
The battered bodies of Lazar Papier, 75 years old, and his wife, Miriam Papier, 67, were found at 8:30 A.M. in their vacation retreat at Ryke Inn on Concord Road in Kiamesha Lake.


Spelling Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Owls Wear Eyeglasses For a Hearing Study
STUDYING baby barn owls fitted with glasses that distorted their vision, scientists at Stanford University have found new evidence that vision plays a crucial role in how animals learn where a sound comes from.
The scientists sutured the tiny eyeglasses onto the heads of three owls when they were 12 to 15 days old, just as their eyes were beginning to open.
As a result, objects directly in front of the owls appeared to be 20 degrees off to the left.


Prices of Treasury Issues Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in light trading yesterday.
For the most part, the strong economic statistics reported last week seemed to have little lasting impact.
Among other reports released last week, June employment data and a sharp improvement in the monthly survey of the nation's purchasing managers provided further evidence to most economists that the recession ended in April or May.


Ex-Ballplayer Gets 8 1/3 Years in Killing of Girl, 9
A former minor-league baseball player convicted of fatally wounding a 9-year-old girl with a stray bullet during a street gunfight in Brooklyn last summer was sentenced yesterday to 8 1/3 to 25 years in prison.
The girl, Veronica Corales, was the first of seven children killed by stray bullets in a 15-day period last summer, a series of deaths that caused fear and anger in the city and put pressure on Mayor David N. Dinkins to come up with a strong response on crime.


Silent Film Series
"Metropolis," Fritz Lang's 1926 science-fiction classic, will open the fifth Summer Silent Film Festival at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street, tomorrow at 8 P.M.
A different film will be shown each Wednesday at the same time through Aug. 7.
They are: "The Black Pirate," with Douglas Fairbanks (July 17); "La Boheme," with Lillian Gish and John Gilbert (July 24); "The Cat and the Canary," with Laura La Plante (July 31), and "Stage Struck," starring Gloria Swanson (Aug. 7).
All screenings will have organ accompaniment by Lee Erwin.
Tickets are $5.
Information: (212) 662-2133.


N.A.A.C.P. Defers Stance on Court Pick
In a sudden change of plans, leaders of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People announced today that they would not take a stand on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court until they could meet with him and conduct an extensive review of his record in public office.
Because the N.A.A.C.P. is the nation's largest civil rights organization, its position on Judge Thomas is important to those who wish to mount a concerted drive against his confirmation.


Slovenia Acts to Underline Independence Despite Pact
Less than 24 hours after Slovenia accepted a compromise to defer its independence from Yugoslavia, the separatist republic Monday night refused to send its delegate to a meeting of the federal presidency in Belgrade and said it was withdrawing its deputies from the national legislature.
Despite such steps meant to underline its insistence on independence, Slovenia complied with an important requirement of the compromise accord by releasing about 200 Yugoslav Army soldiers captured in fighting in the republic.
But the move came after the federal Defense Ministry threatened to "independently carry out battle operations" in Slovenia if it refused.


Farm Costs Up 6.5%
Farmers spent a record $132.2 billion in production costs last year, up 6.5 percent from 1989, according to Agriculture Department estimates.
The previous high was $131.8 billion in 1981, just before expansion stalled in the nation's agricultural sector.
In 1986, annual spending by farmers dropped to less than $106 billion, which reflected large cutbacks in capital investments as land values dropped and debts burdened many farmers.
The latest report showed 1990 expenditures rose for all categories except feed, which showed a decline of six-tenths of 1 percent, and fertilizer, which declined 1 percent.


Chess
To play the game correctly requires that it be treated as total war.
What this means is that there is no such thing as an unworthy object of attack if taking it will win for you.
Moreover, there is no such thing as excessive force if that is what is needed to achieve the objective.


9 Republics Back Gorbachev in Summit Stance
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev won the backing of Boris N. Yeltsin and the leaders of eight other republics today for the case he will make to leaders of major industrial nations at their meeting in London next week.
Details of Mr.
Gorbachev's presentation have not been made public.
But the show of support from republics' leaders, with whom the President is negotiating a new union treaty -- and especially from Mr.
Yeltsin, the politically powerful President of the Russian federated republic -- was intended to convince the Western leaders that Mr.
Gorbachev will be speaking for at least a sizable portion of his country.


White House Called Ready to Lift Trade Sanctions on South Africa
President Bush is likely to order the lifting or suspension of trade and financial sanctions against South Africa as soon as the middle of this week, a senior Administration official said today.
The State Department has concluded that South Africa has met or is in the process of meeting all five conditions specified in 1986 legislation for lifting the sanctions, the official said.
And the State Department has recommended the sanctions be lifted, he added.
Early Action Seen
"The President is reviewing it and will make an announcement about lifting the sanctions as early as midweek," said the official, who insisted on anonymity.


ABC News Plans Layoffs
ABC News confirmed plans yesterday to lay off 80 to 100 employees and to close down two bureaus while scaling back several others.
The reductions are a result of a four-month internal study by the news division to find ways to cut costs in the wake of the huge expenditures caused by the coverage of the Persian Gulf war.
CBS News has cut more than 100 employees, and NBC News is slowly paring staff, though its layoffs should fall well short of 100.


2 Siblings Killed in 2 Weeks
A 6-year-old Trenton boy drowned in a relative's swimming pool -- 13 days after a van struck and killed his 3-year-old sister in Trenton, the police said.
The boy, Kevin Shawn Mack, died Sunday morning after he apparently fell into the deep end of his aunt's pool, the police said.
The sister, Vanessa, was crushed by the van when she broke free from her mother's grasp and ran into the street by their home.


Teaching American History Without Blinders
To the Editor:
"Arguing About America" (news analysis, June 21), on "One Nation, Many Peoples," the blueprint presented to the New York State Education Commissioner for revising how United States history is taught, misunderstands the argument.


Collision of Small Planes Kills Two Couples


New Board At Prudential Securities
In a continuing shake-up at the top of Prudential Securities, the firm has established a new governing board that will give an even greater role to executives of its parent, the Prudential Insurance Company of America.
Under the arrangement, which was announced to employees in a memorandum dated July 1, eight executives from Prudential Insurance will serve on the governing board, along with 11 executives from the securities firm.
The board will meet six times a year to review the firm's business and to oversee new strategies.
Chief Executive's Memo
The memorandum, written by Hardwick Simmons, the firm's president and chief executive, said the new governing board was part of a plan to improve communications between the firm and its parent.


Careers; Innovations For M.B.A. Candidates
ABOUT a year ago, Scott S. Cowen, dean of the Weatherhead School of Management at Case Western Reserve University, spoke about an innovative, even radical, new program at the school to be introduced that fall.
Under the program, as soon as they arrive, M.B.A. candidates take assessment tests to determine their writing and speaking ability and other skills.


Topics of The Times; Early Warning on Smoking
Children don't like to be told what's good for them.
On the other hand, they're a lot more willing to listen if the message is coming from other children.
That's the charm, and value, of a new picture book titled "Kids Say Don't Smoke." Sure, the recipients might read the hard-hitting (and occasionally heavy-handed) text.
But they're more apt to heed their peers' pictorial warnings.
Those warnings are posters, entries in last year's New York City Smoke-Free Ad Contest.
The winner -- a skeletal cowboy riding through a graveyard under the slogan "Come to where the Cancer is" -- is familiar to New York subway riders.
It's in the book as well, along with Snoopy, supine on his doghouse and dreaming of "a world without cigarettes," and a bird, also supine, over which is written "Cold turkey is better than dead duck." All the posters are the work of New York City students, the youngest of whom was 7 when he turned in his entry.


Fab Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a letter from President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to the United Nations promising to allow nuclear inspections misidentified a White House spokesman.
He is Roman Popadiuk.


Quotation of the Day
"There was never any legitimate scientific study to justify the Alar scare." -- Dr.
Joseph D. Rosen, professor of food science at Rutgers University.  [ A16:3. ]


Digital Communications Associates reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Business and Health; On Approving Generic Drugs
IN a little-noticed move with broad implications for the $40 billion prescription drug industry, the Food and Drug Administration has started a debate on changing the way it approves generic versions of brand-name drugs.
Under one proposal, the maker of a brand-name drug would have to tell the agency more than it now does about what goes into its product.
The F.D.A. would publish standards for the ingredients and for testing them.
Years later, when a drug loses patent protection, other drug makers could refer to the publication, called a monograph, to speed F.D.A. approval of a low-priced generic version.


Credit 'Splendid Little War' to John Hay
To the Editor:
Contrary to Philip S. Foner (letter, June 11), it was Secretary of State John Hay, not Theodore Roosevelt, who called the war with Spain "a splendid little war." Hay wrote to Roosevelt, July 27, 1898:


Cambex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Kemper Insurer Group Sets Succession at Top
Gerald L. Maatman says an insurance agent should be more than someone who takes your money, issues you a policy and occasionally pays a claim.
To succeed in today's cutthroat environment, Mr.
Maatman says, insurers will have to be actively involved in helping policyholders reduce losses.
Now, Mr.
Maatman will get a chance to test his theory.
Yesterday, the Kemper National Insurance Companies, the Long Grove, Ill., insurer group for which Mr.
Maatman has served as president and chief executive, gave him the added title of chairman, effective with the retirement next February of Joseph E. Luecke, who is 64.
It will thus fall to Mr.
Maatman, 61, to chart the future of the nation's 16th-largest insurer.


Corrections
A music review yesterday about the opening concert of the Tanglewood Festival misidentified the orchestra Leonard Bernstein conducted in his last public performance.
It was the Boston Symphony, not the Tanglewood Music Center Orchestra.


Citicorp Considers Further Job Cuts
Citicorp may eliminate up to 10,000 jobs in addition to the thousands of jobs it has cut in the last six months.
Bank Letter, an industry newsletter, reported that Citicorp's chairman, John S. Reed, announced the possible layoffs at a recent meeting with summer interns.
Some of the cuts might be offset by hiring, and there was no figure available for the overall cutbacks, a Citicorp spokeswoman said.
The bank began reducing expenses in December and has already cut 7,000 jobs, some offset by hiring.
The bank had 95,000 employees at the end of 1990.


North Coast Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hollywood Shakes Off Box Office Doldrums
Led by Arnold Schwarzenegger's "Terminator 2: Judgment Day," the movie business burst explosively out of the doldrums over the Fourth of July holiday.
Audiences spent a record $100 million at the box office during the five-day weekend, with "Terminator 2" accounting for more than half of all the tickets sold across the country.
Said to be the most expensive movie ever made, at a cost of more than $85 million, "Terminator 2" took in $54 million at 2,274 theaters, decisively sweeping past competitors ranging from "Backdraft," from Universal, to "The Rocketeer" (Disney).
Only "Batman," which went on to make $251 million, has ever had a more spectacular opening, earning $57 million during its first five days of release in 1989.


Soybeans, Corn and Wheat Slump as Rain Is Forecast
Soybean futures prices sagged to their lowest level in more than three and a half years yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade amid forecasts for beneficial rain in the Midwest and expectations for continued weak export demand.
Corn futures slumped to their lowest point since August 1989 and wheat futures also fell.
Soybean futures settled 9 1/4 cents to 13 1/4 cents lower, with the contract for delivery in July at $5.20 3/4 a bushel, the lowest price for a near-term soybean contract since September 1987.


All-Stars Take Old Rivalry Into New Venue
Sometime during the pre-game festivities for the 62d All-Star Game on Tuesday night, major league baseball will roll back the top of the Skydome, the home of the Toronto Blue Jays, and give the world a good view of the game's most futuristic site.
Then, it will be time to get down to something old-fashioned: another battle in the long-time rivalry between the National and American Leagues.
The undercurrent of competition is always there, and never more so than when one league is riding a winning streak.
That has been the case of late, since the Nationals have not won an All-Star Game since 1987.
That could be why a player so mild-mannered as Howard Johnson of the Mets, was led to say during the All-Star workout today, "I want to win, I want to stick it to the American League."


100 People Are Left Waiting As Amtrak Trains Don't Stop
About 100 people were left stranded at the Amtrak station in Kingston for several hours on Sunday when the 11:20 A.M.
Yankee Clipper failed to stop, officials said today.
Several stranded passengers complained that despite their frantic waving, other Amtrak trains from Boston to New York also zipped by.
About 80 people who stayed at the station were able to catch a train about 2 P.M.


Review/Television; The Quintessential 'Pre-Woman'
Recipe for sitcom aimed at young audiences: hip pubescents, dumb parents, cool fashions.
Among the better recent examples is "Clarissa Explains It All," which can be seen on Nickelodeon at 12:30 and 6:30 P.M. on Sundays.
Apparently someone once dubbed the show a "cultural revolution." Perhaps that's because the show was created and is produced by Mitchell Kriegman, a former video artist.
But except for some fairly standard electronic graphics, largely confined to the opening credits, "Clarissa Explains It All" is not very revolutionary.
Played chirpily by Melissa Joan Hart, 14-year-old Clarissa embodies the cliches of Primal Teen.
She is very much into junk food, cute rock stars and accessories.
Her health-conscious mom fusses over yucky concoctions such as cauliflower ice cream.
Dad is largely a fringe character who seems to spend most of his time in a state of helpless agitation.
Then there is younger brother Ferguson, called Ferg Face, the bane of Clarissa's rather pampered life.
In sum, Clarissa "conveys the essence of teen life through the eyes and words of a modern pre-woman," as Nickelodeon puts it.


800 More Jobs Are Cut by Digital
The Digital Equipment Corporation sent layoff notices to 800 employees in its sales and sales support operations today, in a continuing effort to cut costs and reduce the size of the company.
The computer maker, which cut 8,000 jobs last year, has said it will likely cut at least that many employees in its 1992 fiscal year, which began on July 1.
Digital's shares soared $3.625, closing at $63.25 today on the New York Stock Exchange.
Two analysts, Barry F. Willman of Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company and Joseph Payne of Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, recommended that investors buy Digital.
Mr.
Willman said Digital's earnings for 1991, which are scheduled to be announced on July 22, would be better than anticipated.


Monitek Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dow Up 29.52 Despite Big Tokyo Selloff
Stocks stood up strongly yesterday against another big selloff in Tokyo.
While the Nikkei index of 225 stocks plunged 722.17 points, or 3.15 percent, to close at 22,176.17, in Tokyo earlier yesterday, the Dow Jones industrial average managed to shake off a 27-point drop and ended ahead by 29.52, at 2,961.99, for a gain of 1 percent.


Re-creating U.S. First Editions, Typos and All
The limited first-edition printings of American classics and their prohibitive prices have meant that few readers have ever seen original copies of novels like "The Sound and the Fury" by William Faulkner or "Winesburg, Ohio" by Sherwood Anderson.
And those who have acquired these works have not only paid hundreds if not thousands of dollars for the editions but also must now watch the acid in the paper slowly eat away their investment.


Barger Leaves Pirates
CARL BARGER resigned yesterday as the Pittsburgh Pirates' president to take the post of president with the Florida Marlins, one of the National League expansion teams.
Under a unique arrangement, however, Barger will virtually run both teams indefinitely.
Baseball's conflict of interest rules bar a major league club employee from working for another team, but Barger will begin staffing the Marlins' front office while running the Pirates until his successor is chosen.


Pact for Westminster
The Westminster Kennel Club, which has been holding dog shows in New York every year since 1877, has renewed its contract with Madison Square Garden for the next five years, according to an announcement by CHESTER COLLIER, the club's president.
There were reports that Westminster would follow the lead of the National Horse Show and move to the Meadowlands.


Student Pleads Guilty in Virginia Raid
Saying he somehow became involved with drugs in the "general confusion" of college life, a University of Virginia sophomore pleaded guilty in Federal Court today to selling marijuana to undercover officers during a major campus narcotics raid here this spring.
The student, Timothy Matthew Evans, was sentenced to six weeks in prison and four and a half months of supervised house confinement.


Sky's the Limit for Ripken As He Clouts 12 in Contest
Cecil Fielder received the pre-game kudos, and the bows of his teammates, but it was Cal Ripken Jr. who reigned as the real power king in major league baseball's annual home-run hitting contest today.
With the top rolled back at the Skydome, Ripken cranked out 12 home runs in 22 swings to lead the American League to an insurmountable lead.
The American League also benefited from other contributions, including four home runs from Fielder, and routed the Nationals, 20-7.


Leader Says Austria Must Face Its Nazi Past
Chancellor Franz Vranitzky today made one of the most explicit acknowledgments of Austrian complicity in the crimes of the Nazis, telling his people that they could not ignore moral responsibility for their past.
"We acknowledge all the facts of our history and the deeds of all sections of our people, the good as well as the evil," the Chancellor told Parliament.
"And just as we take credit for the good, we must also apologize for the evil to survivors and relatives of the dead."


Teaching American History Without Blinders; Goal of Education
To the Editor:
The report of the panel of scholars and teachers that recommends changes in New York State's mandated social studies curriculum (news article, June 21) makes it clear that setting educational goals is too important to be left strictly in the hands of academia.
It is certainly true that the American experience has always been enriched by diverse cultures.
However, American education has been and, it appears, will continue to be impoverished by blurring its focus on core skills, like reading, writing and mathematics, with misguided efforts to build self-esteem among the children of minority groups.


Del Monte Debt Financing Sought
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and Citicorp Securities Markets said yesterday they were trying to privately place $350 million of Del Monte Corporation debt.
The financing is expected to replace about $100 million of Del Monte's bank debt and most of the company's increasing-rate notes, which now pay 16.5 percent interest.


U.S. Doubts Iraq's Accounting of Nuclear Material
The Bush Administration believes that Iraq has secretly enriched enough uranium into weapons-grade quality to build at least one nuclear device, Administration officials said today.
This is considerably more than the pound of enriched uranium that the Iraqis conceded today that they had made clandestinely.
The uranium, which was enriched through a cumbersome technique known as electromagnetic isotope separation, is in addition to the estimated 100 pounds of highly enriched uranium that is under international safeguards and that has been sealed by United Nations officials for disposal under terms of the cease-fire resolution passed after the Persian Gulf war.
It is believed that a bomb can be made from about 55 pounds.
An Iraqi scientist who defected recently said that Baghdad had hidden about 90 pounds of such material.


Texscan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Critics Fear Time Bombs In Dinkins Budget Tactics
In the scramble to limit the deep service cuts in New York City's $29 billion budget, the Dinkins administration found hundreds of millions in savings that will reduce costs now but increase the burden on future taxpayers.
Tucked away in the budget are plans to sell an $87 million city-owned mortgage on a middle-income apartment complex, even though city taxpayers will continue to pay off the bonds sold to build the project for years to come.
And there are other plans: to refinance bonds to save $100 million in debt-service payments, to give bonuses to teachers who retire early, to sell assets including 1,000 city-owned apartments and to spend surplus cash in city-owned corporations.
Shifting Cost of Upkeep
For example, when a painting crew descends on the Williamsburg Bridge in September for its first maintenance painting in years, it will mark the start of an ambitious new maintenance plan for the city's rusted and decayed bridges.
But it will also mark the inauguration of a less-heralded city fiscal maneuver: the sale of bonds to pay for routine bridge work.


Music in Review
Maitrise Gabriel Faure  St. Bartholomew's Church
Only duty kept this listener in place for the second half of the concert by the Maitrise Gabriel Faure (Gabriel Faure Choir) on Sunday afternoon, but steadfastness was rewarded.
The chorus of 18 women from Marseilles, France, closed its program with a variety of a cappella material ranging from Monteverdi and Mozart to folk songs of France, Italy and Hungary, and the performances had a sharpness of attack and a rhythmic profile that those before intermission had lacked.


South Korea Seeks Jets
South Korea has asked to buy and co-produce 120 American F-16 jet fighters in a deal worth $3.81 billion, the Pentagon said today.
The Government had indicated that it planned to buy the jets, built by the General Dynamics Corporation, and the Defense Department said that Congress had been officially notified of the proposal.


Almost Chanel, But 100% Polyester
The world of baseball is designed to exist outside of fashion and its restless trendiness.
In some respects, its very unfashionableness constitutes its allure.
Ideally, in the realm of homers, peanuts and Cracker Jack, nothing ever becomes obsolete or passe.
Everything is time-honored, inveterate and immemorial.
Every ballplayer in his uniform is like Miss Havisham in her ancient wedding gown: timeless, frozen in the archetypal adolescent moment.
Think of Babe Ruth in his bulging pinstripes or Ty Cobb wearing the Tigers' gothic "D."


Official Tells of Tip in Bank Fraud
A British Government official told Parliament today that a new officer of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International had told the Bank of England early this year that there were signs of problems at the bank.
The statement suggested that the Bank of England, Britain's central bank, might have known about potential problems at B.C.C.I. earlier than it indicated on Friday, when it announced that it and regulators in six other countries had that day seized control of most of the bank's global operations.
The seizure was ordered after an investigation for the Bank of England by Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm, found evidence of widespread fraud aimed at concealing large losses.


Water Running Low
To the Editor:
We visited Tannersville and Haines Falls, N.Y., in the Catskill Mountains last weekend.
Last year when we visited, the falls were gushing with water, and the streams were full and rapid.
Last weekend, there was scarcely a trickle.
Notices are displayed in the store windows asking people to conserve water.


New Delhi Journal; The Kitty Kelley of Delhi Scandalizes the Nabobs
Imagine Kitty Kelley's acid portrait of Nancy Reagan, but in an Indian setting.
Couple it with Julia Phillips's scabrous "You'll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again," but shift the locale from Beverly Hills to New Delhi.
The result is the most talked-about book in years in the capital, "All These Years," an instant best seller by Raj Thapar, a member of the city's social elite.
She meticulously kept a diary over two decades and wrote down her candid, if often devastating, views of everyone from Indira Gandhi to Satyajit Ray to Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and John Kenneth Galbraith to Congress Party and Communist politicians.


Beach Loss: Outer Banks Are Offering A Test Case
WHEN Jack Gray was a small boy on the Outer Banks of North Carolina, his father was one of the men who kept the Cape Hatteras Light.
"We went up every day with him when he had to carry the oil up to the big wick tanks," said Mr.
Gray, who is 64 years old, recalling his childhood in the 1930's.
"It's the most wonderful view of the island. You can see right across the island, the Pamlico Sound. It would make you aware of how narrow a strip of land we call our home."


Software Star Hits the Media Road
Pardon the managers of Broderbund Software Inc. if they feel like celebrity parents these days.
Their favorite daughter is about to become a media star.
Broderbund recently announced that Carmen Sandiego, the red-haired grand larcenist who is to personal computer games what the Mario Brothers are to Nintendo, will become the first software character to make the leap to other media.
Under license, she will star beginning in September in books, puzzles and a weekday quiz show on the Public Broadcasting Service.


How Japan Feels About the Persian Gulf
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb's thoughtful June 23 column on Japan-bashing in the United States ("Whining, Excuses, Hysteria") includes one bit of Japan bashing of his own.


Bank of Granite reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


William M. Callaghan Dies at 93; Headed Logistics Service for Navy
William M. Callaghan, a retired vice admiral of the United States Navy who organized the Military Sea Transportation Services after World War II and later commanded American naval forces in the Far East, died yesterday at Bethesda Naval Hospital in Maryland.
He was 93 years old and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
He died after a stroke, his family said.


Corrections
A chart on the sports statistics page yesterday listing the standings after the second stage of the Tour de France bicycle race misidentified one team taking part.
It is Motorola, not 7-Eleven.


U.S. to Begin Reviewing Claims Of Children Rejected for Benefits
The Government said today that it would begin notifying more than 500,000 children who were denied Social Security disability benefits over the last 12 years that their claims would be reconsidered.
The decision was a result of a Supreme Court ruling last year that the Government had unfairly limited benefits for poor, disabled children under the Supplemental Security Income program by applying tougher eligibility standards than those for adults.


Corrections
A sports article on July 4 about the Henley Royal Regatta misstated the location of St.
Andrews School, which competed in the schoolboy races.
It is in Middletown, Del.


Electro-Catheter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Judge Permits Bidding for New Fare System
A Federal judge yesterday refused to block the Metropolitan Transportation Authority from seeking new bids today on an automated fare-collection system for its subways and buses.
The company that has submitted the lowest bid to build the $200 million system had sought an injunction to stop the new bid-letting, arguing that the authority's decision to seek new bids was unfair and subverted procurement guidelines.
Lawyers for the authority have dismissed the claims as "premature," and said the company, Cubic Automatic Revenue Collection Group of San Diego, had waited until the last possible minute to try to stop the new bidding.


Hamlin G. Tobey, 85, Presbyterian Educator
The Rev.
Hamlin G. Tobey, a retired religious educator, died July 1 at Hartford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 85 years old and lived in Lakeville, Conn.
He died of kidney failure, his family said.


For Both New Yorks: A Way Out
Hope, perhaps even relief: For the first time since Lurch Week last October, New Yorkers can now see evidence of decisive leadership out of their city's financial travail.
Mayor David Dinkins and Gov.
Mario Cuomo have agreed to appoint a joint panel to restructure some of the ways both New Yorks are managed.
The plan is still tentative but the fact that the two leaders have agreed to it bespeaks the cooperation on which all else depends if both governments are to avoid huge, recurring structural deficits.


Federal Paper Board reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


Man Shot Dead in Brooklyn
A 22-year-old man was shot in the stomach and killed early yesterday inside a building in the East New York section of Brooklyn, the police said.
Robert Pulley, of 66 Pennsylvania Avenue in the Sheepshead Bay section, was found dead in a stairwell of 100 Crystal Street at 3:21 A.M., said Sgt.
Grace Ridley, a police spokeswoman.


On My Mind; Sword and Shield
Strange, but in all the talk in the West about massive aid to the Soviet Union, three important words are missing -- Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti.
Strange and quite dangerous, because the K.G.B. is now probably the most important, powerful organization in the Soviet Union.
And as things stand it could have a great deal to do with how aid is distributed -- and for which political purposes.


Talks Begin on Arms Sales to 3d World
Fearful that the end of the Persian Gulf war may set off a new arms race in the Middle East, the United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain and France today began their first effort to negotiate limits on weapons sales to volatile regions of the world.
The talks, described by a French official as "the beginning of a long, complex and subtle process," followed an American call for a ban on weapons of mass destruction in the Mideast, France's proposal for arms control worldwide, and Britain's idea of an international arms-sales register.


W. J. Hornibrook, 74, Chemist and Manager
Walter J. Hornibrook, a research chemist who supervised the development of new products for E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company and the Stauffer Chemical Company, died on Tuesday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Newburgh, N.Y.
He was 74 years old and lived in New Windsor, N.Y.
He died of prostatic and liver cancer, a family spokeswoman said.


Hands-On Approach for Acting Queens Prosecutor
In the month since he took over as Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown has plunged into the job aggressively.
He has dropped charges in a controversial police case and has said that his office would be aggressive in investigating organized crime and suspected illegal activity at the city's two airports.
He has also accompanied police officers and detectives into the borough's seamy streets, receiving a grittier view of lawlessness than he obtained in the more rarefied world of an appeals court judge.


Couple Are Accused of Beating 2 Children
A Brooklyn mother and her companion were arrested last night and charged with abusing her two young children, the police said.
The mother, Dawn McKenna, and Miguel Calderon, both 23 years old, were charged with assault and endangering the welfare of a minor, said Sgt.
Edward Burns, a police spokesman.


In Croatia, a Feeling of a Nation Fading
After three late-night bomb blasts in three months, Rajko Gojic is closing his billiard parlor.
Mr.
Gojic is one of the few Serbs in this largely Croat city and for most of his 67 years has clung to the notion of Yugoslavia, a place where disparate peoples could live as one nation.


South Africa Hopeful of Re-admittance to 1992 Games
A five-man delegation from South Africa arrived here today to discuss with the International Olympic Committee the possibility of that country's return to Olympic competition after an exile of more than 30 years.
Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the I.O.C., and officials of the Commission on Apartheid and Olympism will receive the delegation on Tuesday.


Bush Sets Up Foundation to Start Model Schools
In a move he described as a milestone in the "educational revolution" he outlined in April, President Bush today announced the establishment of a foundation to foster the creation of model schools.
In a Rose Garden ceremony, Mr.
Bush, who was accompanied by Education Secretary Lamar Alexander, introduced 18 business, education and political leaders as members of the board of the New American Schools Development Corporation, saying they would help "set aside stale preconceptions" about how schools should work and "seek nothing less than a new generation of schools."


BRIEFS
*
GE Aircraft Engines, Cincinnati, a unit of General Electric Co., said its CF6-80C2 engine had been selected by Federal Express to power 25 A300-600F aircraft.
Terms were not disclosed. *
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Co., New York, signed an agreement to sell Bekaert Textiles, its Belgian subsidiary, to Gamma Holdings N.V., the Netherland.
Terms were not disclosed.


Raymond Roesch; Educator, 76
The Rev.
Raymond Roesch, former president of the University of Dayton and of Chaminade University in Hawaii, died at his campus home on Sunday, apparently of a heart attack, the university said.
He was 76 years old.
Father Roesch, who graduated from Dayton in 1936, was president of the university from 1959 to 1979.
He was president of Chaminade from 1982 to 1989, when he returned to Dayton to work as a special assistant to the University of Dayton president, Brother Raymond Fitz.


Wenzel Plans to Stay As Coach for Rutgers
Rutgers University basketball coach BOB WENZEL turned down an offer yesterday to coach at South Carolina.
"I think I have a very good job," said Wenzel, a Rutgers graduate who has been coach of the Scarlet Knights since 1988.
"I'm happy here."


Schering-Genetics Drug Venture
Genetics Institute Inc. and the Schering-Plough Corporation announced an alliance to register and market two compounds that stimulate the growth of platelets and white blood cells.
Schering-Plough will register and market two of Genetics Institute's compounds in Europe, Africa and Latin America.
One compound is a protein that stimulates white blood cells, while the other is Interleukin 11, a platelet growth factor.
Schering-Plough, based in Madison, N.J., will have exclusive rights to register and market the compounds overseas in return for an initial payment and subsequent payments to Genetics Institute, based in Cambridge, Mass., which will continue marketing and developing the compounds in the United States.


Hallwood Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 2


International Absorbents reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Knicks May Charge That Warriors Tampered
Responding to the game of hardball being played by Patrick Ewing and his agent, David Falk, the Knicks are exploring the possibility of filing tampering charges with the National Basketball Association against the Golden State Warriors.
A person close to the Ewing contract situation said yesterday that the Knicks were outraged with Golden State over a possible role in the undermining of the Knicks' negotiations for a contract extension with their star center.
The talks collapsed in late June, with Ewing filing for arbitration, contending that a clause in his contract entitles him to be a restricted free agent and seek offers this summer from other teams.


Puzzled Auto Insurers Find No Pattern in Filing of Suits
As insurance executives, regulators, politicians and consumer groups all struggle to control skyrocketing automobile insurance costs, a new study suggests that they may have the wrong focus.
Insurance premiums are high in Los Angeles and Philadelphia not mainly because of congestion, car theft and break-ins, as commonly thought, the insurance industry-sponsored study says.
A bigger reason is that drivers involved in accidents in those places tend to file injury claims and lawsuits for pain and suffering far more often than do drivers elsewhere.
Rates go up in those areas as insurers try to stay ahead of the higher frequency and amount of payouts for medical costs and other expenses.


Cinderellas of Soviet Retailing Doubt Glass Slipper
Marina Zayakina says she hates the people she works with at Malysh children's store in downtown Moscow.
"They are conservative and entrenched in the old ways of doing things," she said.
She also hates the cheap vinyl shoes she sells to customers who are forced out of desperation and deficit to buy the hideous wares.
And she hates the store's shabby, dank interior, which she describes as being more conducive to selling tombstones than tricycles.


Shock Lingers as Happy Land Trial Starts
An unemployed Cuban refugee went on trial in a Bronx courtroom yesterday, charged with committing the largest mass murder in American history: the arson fire that killed 87 people at the illegal Happy Land social club in the Bronx nearly 16 months ago.
Even before jury selection began yesterday, the judge agreed to admit into evidence three admissions made to the police by the defendant, 37-year-old Julio Gonzalez.


Accident Forces River Closing
A Burlington Northern freight train derailed today, sending five cars into the Mississippi River and forcing officials to close the river to barge and other traffic.
The railroad said several carloads of lumber and a car filled with butter caught fire after the 29-car train ran off the tracks near here.


Sports of The Times; Dear Mets: Get On Line For 'Stars'
YEAR by year, the All-Star Game has evolved into baseball's summer festival.
Since the players began arriving here Sunday night, this Canadian metropolis has been aflutter with All-Star logos.
What modestly identifies itself as the "world's greatest entertainment centre" -- the $583 million Skydome, which displays the world's largest retractable skylight -- has become even more of a tourist attraction.
More than 35,000 were there yesterday to watch an oldtimers' game, batting practice for the American League and National League teams, and a home-run derby that Cal Ripken Jr. dominated.
Ripken drilled 12 homers, but Cecil Fielder cleared the center-field restaurant with shots of 457 and 458 feet.


Beirut Seeks Full P.L.O. Withdrawal
The Government here is seeking the early removal from all of Lebanon of the Palestine Liberation Organization's guerrillas and their weapons.
It is the next stage in the newly invigorated Beirut administration's campaign to dismantle fighting forces.
Security officials said 97 percent of the P.L.O.'s heavy and medium weapons have been handed over to the Lebanese Army in the southern part of the country and stored in a suburb of the port of Sidon.
Multi-barreled rocket launchers, mortars and anti-aircraft batteries were the last arms to be delivered to the regular troops late Sunday night by the Fatah faction of Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman.


Clinical Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


4 Brokerage Houses Penalized in Japan
Seeking a quick end to a widening stock-market scandal before an economic summit meeting next week, the Japanese Government announced a series of what appeared to be modest sanctions against its four largest brokerage houses.
The most severe one requires the securities houses to show self-restraint in conducting business with their largest customers for four days, beginning tomorrow.


'New Eastern' Is Planned
An Atlanta financier and a group of pilots, mostly former employees of the bankrupt Eastern Airlines, said today that they planned to start a new airline in November using the Eastern name and some of its assets.
The financier, John R. Mitchell, who is the group's chairman, said the airline would begin operating in November or early December under the name "the New Eastern." The group, currently called the Airline Acquisition Corporation, said it expected to close on a $550 million capital package on Oct. 15.


Sallie Mae Prices $650 Million Issue
The Student Loan Marketing Association yesterday priced $650 million of short-term floatng-rate notes, due Jan. 9, 1992, through various securities dealers.
Sallie Mae, a federally chartered, stockholder-owned corporation, which is the country's major source of financing for student loans, generally issues these types of notes on a monthly basis.


Slashings in El Salvador Evoke Early Days of War
In an episode reminiscent of the early and most violent days of the Salvadoran civil war, a couple working as caretakers in the office of a slum dwellers' organization were slashed mercilessly with knives today and left for dead.
The woman survived, and those who found her said she had told them the attack before dawn in the heart of the city had been carried out by two men in what appeared to be military uniforms.


Observer; Let 'Em Eat Photo Ops
Washington's serenity is amazing.
What do these Bush people take?
They'd faint if offered pills or smoke, and you can't get Peruna anymore unless you know somebody with a great cellar.
So how do they manage to stay way out in space treating the wrack and ruin with this magnificently cool indifference?
Whole states are going broke, cities bankrupt, booming unemployment -- boy, there's a dull word -- and Washington's response?
Jim dandy, double-peachy photo ops: President at Mount Rushmore.
President at good, old-fashioned, salt-of-earth, Middle Western Fourth of July parade.
President saluting heroes of gulf war.
President setting up 10-second spots for next year's Monster Battle of TV Commercials, a.k.a. the 1992 Presidential campaign.


Reef Coral Wiped Out
A species of reef-building coral is believed to be extinct and the range of another has been severely reduced, perhaps because of a sharp rise in ocean temperature, scientists say.
An unnamed species of Millepora, which lived only in the Gulf of Chiriqui, off western Panama, has not been seen since 1983.
Another species, M. platyphylla, has disappeared from the gulf but still lives in a few other regions of the Pacific Ocean.


SPI Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Panel in Beating Said To Avoid Issue of Fault
The panel investigating police practices after the beating of a black motorist will issue a report on Tuesday that is said to address broad management issues but that neither exonerates nor finds fault with Police Chief Daryl F. Gates.
"It deals with management issues, not directly with the chief of police," said an official, who spoke about the commission's work on the condition of anonymity.


A.T.&amp; T. Confirms Headquarters Shift
A.T.&amp; T., as expected, said it would lease its headquarters building in Manhattan to the Sony Corporation of Japan.
In May, real estate executives said the American Telephone and Telegraph Company had tentatively agreed to lease the building.
The telephone company plans to move its executive offices from the eight-year-old building on Madison Avenue between 55th and 56th Streets to another Manhattan site, which has not been selected.
Terms of the agreement with Sony were not disclosed.
Sony has been looking for a headquarters for its growing United States operations, which include CBS Records and Columbia Pictures.
A.T.&amp; T. said it would return to New York City about $14 million in tax incentives.
The phone company said it would vacate the building by Jan. 1, with nearly all of the 1,100 employees moving to the new headquarters.





BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Bush is likely to order the lifting or suspension of sanctions against South Africa as soon as the middle of this week, a senior Administration official said.
The State Department has concluded that South Africa has met, or is meeting, all five conditions specified in 1986 legislation for lifting the sanctions.  [ Page A1. ]


A New President and Chief For Oglethorpe Power Corp.
As the new president and chief executive of the Oglethorpe Power Corporation, Tom D. Kilgore will preside over a growing electric-generation utility in the face of an Internal Revenue Service investigation.
Mr.
Kilgore was named to his new post late yesterday after F. F. Stacy, 49, resigned.
In an Oglethorpe statement, Mr.
Stacy, who had held the job for 17 years, said he had quit "to take some time off to reflect before deciding what other interests to pursue."


Nathra Nader Is Dead; Restaurateur Was 98
Nathra Nader, a Lebanese immigrant who became a restaurant and bakery owner in Winsted, Conn., and who was the father of Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate, died on Sunday at his home in Winsted.
He was 98 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


CHRONICLE
Richard E. Schermerhorn, a former Republican New YorkState senator from Orange County, has been released from a Federal prison after 10 months.
He will serve the rest of his 18-month sentence at the Brooklyn Community Corrections Center.
Mr.
Schermerhorn, 63 years old, was released from the prison camp at Maxwell Air Force Base in Montgomery, Ala., last Tuesday.
In October 1989, he was convicted of income tax evasion, obstruction of justice and making a false statement on a loan application.
After his sentence ends on Sept. 30, he will be on probation for two years.
He served in the senat for 18years before he lost a bid for re-election in 1988 after his indictment.


Deal by NEC, Bull Reported as Near
Compagnie des Machines Groupe Bull, France's largest computer manufacturer, is planning to announce that the NEC Corporation, the Japanese electronics company, will buy a stake of about 5 percent, officials close to the talks said.
An announcement is expected on Tuesday, the officials said, but no other details were provided.
Earlier this year, Groupe Bull planned to exchange NEC's 15 percent share in its foreign operations for a 5 percent stake in the parent company.
NEC, which makes the largest mainframes Groupe Bull sells, obtained the stake in 1987.
But France's Prime Minister, Edith Cresson, has hinted since taking office two months ago that she may block a sale, saying "such an agreement must not prevent Bull from forming other alliances."


3 Men Hurt in Grenade Attacks At Grocery and Bar in the Bronx
A Bronx man who tried to fling a live grenade out of a grocery store Sunday night was in critical condition last night, his hands virtually blown off.
Two other men were also injured in the attack on the store, one critically.


Iran Arms Case Given New Life In Plea Bargain
The independent prosecutor investigating the Iran-contra affair may be making a final sprint this month toward the original and unrealized goal of his inquiry: determining whether wrongdoing in the scandal can be traced to the top echelons of the Reagan Administration.
The latest development is an imminent plea bargain with a former senior officer in the Central Intelligence Agency, Alan D. Fiers.
It suggests that the inquiry could yet threaten a number of Reagan Administration officials, some of whom now serve in the Bush Administration.
Plea Bargain Expected Today
The Iran-contra investigation has recently been brought to a virtual standstill by adverse legal judgments and has been widely assailed for its length.
Its central achievement, the conviction of Oliver L. North on three felony charges arising from his role, has been tarnished by appeals court reversals that leave the conviction in doubt.
The prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, began his investigation more than four and a half years ago, and it has already cost more than $25 million.


Florio Defiantly Vetoes Softer Assault-Rifle Ban
In a direct challenge to the gun lobby, Gov.
Jim Florio vetoed a bill today that would have significantly weakened the state's tough ban on assault rifles.
Standing in the sweltering sun with a line of uniformed police officers and other law enforcement officials behind him, Mr.
Florio denounced attempts to alter the assault weapon law as the work of moneyed "special interests" trying to thwart the public will.


Bowl Officials Meet on Title
The missing link to a four-bowl lineup that could give college football a national championship game may be filled Tuesday when representatives of the Cotton, Orange and Sugar bowls meet with four other bowls and officials of the Big East and Atlantic Coast conferences and Notre Dame.
The plan envisioned by the three bowls is to create a situation where as many conference champions as possible can be paired in the post-season, possibly creating a national title game in one of them.


Consumer Borrowing Fell in May
Americans reined in their borrowing at a 1 percent annual rate in May -- the fifth pullback in six months -- because of a 14.1 percent plunge in automobile loans, the Government said today.
The Federal Reserve said consumer credit fell by a seasonally adjusted $626 million after increasing at a 1.9 percent rate in April.
The April gain, originally estimated at a 2.8 percent rate, was the first since installment credit advanced last November at a 4.5 percent rate.


Dance Benefits for Women
Eleven choreographers and dance companies are to perform in "Full Circle," two benefit programs for Women in Need, an organization that seeks to help homeless women and their families, at 8 P.M. tomorrow and Thursday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street.
The performers include Jawole Zollar's Urban Bush Women, Molissa Fenley, Bebe Miller and Liz Lerman.
The tax deductible tickets are $50, $100 and $250.
Information: 695-4758.


Columbia Gas
The Columbia Gas System, which has said high-priced contracts for natural gas may force it into bankruptcy, missed a $14 million debt payment yesterday.
The latest default brings the total of Columbia's defaults to $39 million since the regional gas pipeline company said last month that it was in financial trouble.
Columbia, based in Wilmington, Del., said it was negotiating with its creditors and suppliers to avoid a bankruptcy filing.


Drexel Worker In Settlement
The Securities and Exchange Commission has accepted an offer of settlement from a former employee of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., Lisa A. Jones, who was convicted of giving false testimony to a grand jury.
The commission barred Ms.
Jones, a member of Drexel's "junk bond" department from 1981 to last year, from associating with any broker, dealer, investment adviser, investment company or municipal securities dealer.
She settled the case by consenting to the order, the commission said.


Glendale Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ontario Town May Get Mill
The Kimberly-Clark Corporation and The New York Times Company may give a paper mill they own in the remote Canadian town of Kapuskasing, Ontario, to the town and four nearby hamlets that rely on it for their economic livelihood, Darwin E. Smith, Kimberly-Clark's chairman and chief executive, said yesterday.
Like a previous proposal to give the mill to an employee-led group, the offer is contingent on the willingness of Ontario Hydro, the power company owned by the province, to proceed with an earlier agreement to buy the venture's Smoky Falls hydroelectric plant for $136 million.
The utility has balked at completing the purchase because it has no assurance it will receive environmental permits to expand the hydroelectric plant, which is 50 miles north of Kapuskasing.


Book Contract for Raisa Gorbachev
Raisa Gorbachev, the first lady of the Soviet Union, signed a contract with HarperCollins to publish her autobiography after the publisher's owner, Rupert Murdoch, personally intervened in Moscow to clinch the deal.
The book, "I Hope: Reminiscences and Reflections," is to be published simultaneously in the United States and Britain in September, HarperCollins said in a statement yesterday.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed, but one literary agent in New York, Michael Carlisle, suggested that she would probably receive $2 million to $3 million.


Fishermen Find a Sick Whale
A sick eight-foot pygmy sperm whale was found on a stone jetty here on Sunday.
The whale was taken to the Mystic Aquarium in Mystic, Conn., by members of the Okeanos Ocean Research Foundation.
The executive director of Okeanos, Sam Sadove, said fishermen found the whale around 4:30 A.M.
He said the whale was packed in ice water and taken to the aquarium.
Mr.
Sadove said the whale appeared to have a live fluke infestation or an obstructed bile duct caused by parasites.
George Donnelly, a spokesman at Mystic Aquarium, said the whale, weighing 484 pounds had been given steroids and was in critical condition.


CHRONICLE
RICHARD E. SCHERMERHORN, a former Republican New York State senator from Orange County, has been released from a Federal prison after 10 months.
He will serve the rest of his 18-month sentence at the Brooklyn Community Corrections Center.
Mr.
Schermerhorn, 63 years old, was released from the prison camp at Maxwell Air Force Base in Montgomery, Ala., last Tuesday.
In October 1989, he was convicted of income tax evasion, obstruction of justice and making a false statement on a loan application.
After his sentence ends on Sept. 30, he will be on probation for two years.


Gunman Kills Token Clerk In Harlem Subway Ambush
A subway token clerk reporting for work at an isolated Manhattan station early yesterday was ambushed and shot dead by a gunman who seized the momentary advantage of an unlocked token booth and, with an accomplice, escaped with more than $11,000 in cash and tokens.
It was the third murder in four days and the 12th this year in a city subway system plagued with robbery and violence.
But the victim was the first token clerk slain in the system in three years amid what transit officials called tighter security at token booths.


Arthur John Rees, 92, A Contractor and Pilot
Arthur John Rees, a retired commercial plumbing contractor who was the oldest licensed pilot in New Jersey, died on Friday at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
He was 92 years old and lived in Essex Fells, N.J.
Mr. Rees died of complications resulting from a stroke, his granddaughter Joanna said.


Little-Known Doctor Who Found New Use For Common Aspirin
DOCTORS have long tried to find new uses for old drugs, and in this quest centuries may pass before someone discovers hidden benefits in standard medications.
Yet even when important new uses are found, it may be decades before the benefits are confirmed and widely recommended.
A case in point is aspirin, which is one of the oldest and most commonly used drugs.
In a new use documented only in recent years, aspirin is now recommended for millions of Americans who are at risk for the prevention and treatment of heart attacks and strokes.


Doubts Raised on License Renewal For Oldest Nuclear Plant in Nation
After a two-and-a-half hour visit today to Yankee Rowe, the nation's oldest nuclear power plant, the chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission declared that determining its condition was his agency's most pressing business.
The plant is the nuclear power industry's favored candidate for demonstrating that old plants can win license renewal.
But the statement by the new chairman of the commission, and comments from skeptical members of Congress who accompanied the chairman on today's tour, seemed to put new obstacles in its path.


2 Sign With Raiders
The Los Angeles Raiders signed reserve quarterback STEVE BEUERLEIN and second-round draft choice NICK BELL, a running back from Iowa, as training camp opened yesterday in Oxnard, Calif.
Beuerlein skipped camp last year in a salary holdout and then did not play in a regular-season game.
The Raiders' first-round draft pick, quarterback TODD MARINOVICH, who left Southern Cal after his sophomore year, remained unsigned. (AP)


Settlement For Boesky
Lawyers for Ivan F. Boesky and partners in a Boesky enterprise have agreed to settle a longstanding lawsuit, resolving nearly all litigation against the former speculator, people close to the deal said yesterday.
They said Mr.
Boesky's main law firm, Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson, and a defunct auditing firm agreed to pay $11.2 million to the 46 partners in Ivan F. Boesky &amp; Company to settle charges that the law firm had misled them.


Wimbledon: No Place For the Weak of Heart
In the end, it was Boris Becker, and not the weather, who had the final word on Wimbledon 1991.
The loser of the men's final uttered his conclusion as the sun, truant for most of the tournament, glittered on the golden chalice Becker had won three times before but never came close to touching Sunday.
"Not everything that shines is gold," he said ominously, just after succumbing in straight sets to his underestimated countryman Michael Stich in the first all-German final in the tournament's 114 years of lawn tennis.


Syracuse's Feline Lobbyists Thwart Proposed Cat Limits
A lot of people here agree there is a cat problem.
It was just the proposed solution that, well, got the fur flying.
"The problem is these cats are just multiplying all over the place," said Neil Driscoll, the director of intergovernmental affairs at Syracuse City Hall.
And so city officials took on what the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals says is a growing problem across the country: stray cats making a nuisance of themselves in typically feline fashion -- and begetting even more cats along the way.


Russian Seeks U.S. Buyer For World's Biggest Rocket
DR.
BORIS IVANOVICH GUBANOV is the designer of the world's most powerful rocket, a 20-story giant with eight engines that can hurl more into orbit in one stroke than 100 small launchings did at the start of the space age.
He is also a salesman, forced by circumstance to wander the globe with a battered suitcase, trying to drum up business.


CHRONICLE
WOODY ALLEN, whose films distill the essence of New York, is directing his first television commercials -- not for New Yorkers, but for Italians.
COOP, Italy's biggest supermarket chain, has hired him at a fee of $2 million.
Mr.
Allen, who says he does not make enough money from the films he produces, told a news conference in Rome yesterday that, "I have a big family, and I thought the offer was interesting."


Total System Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Designers for Women Give Men's Wear a Try
Fashion designers have long made relaxed versions of men's clothes for women.
Now the flow of ideas may be heading the other way.
Three designers known for their women's wear, Donna Karan, Calvin Klein and Michael Kors, have recently announced their entry -- or re-entry in Mr.
Klein's case -- into the men's wear business.
"Body suits for men are coming," said Ms.
Karan, who introduces her first men's collection at Barneys New York this fall.
"The 70's were all about putting women in men's clothes. Now I want men to feel absolutely luxurious and comfortable the way women do."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.66
5.76
8.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.58
7.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.71
5.71
7.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.20
8.21
8.57
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.49
8.49
8.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.53
9.50
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.19
7.18
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Patterns
Fashion Lunch
A glittery gang of about 30 fashion designers, editors and retailers got together over lunch yesterday and, amazingly, agreed on something.


McDonnell Confirms Job Shift
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation confirmed that it would move 1,600 jobs from its California plant to St.
Louis to offset recent layoffs.
The move, which was reported over the weekend by The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, will bring the production of cargo doors, cargo ramps and other assemblies for the C-17 to St.
Louis from Long Beach, Calif.
McDonnell has lost almost 10,000 jobs in the St.
Louis area in recent months because of company and Pentagon cutbacks.
The General Dynamics Corporation, another military contractor based in St.
Louis, recently selected Northern Virginia as the site for its new headquarters, moving about 115 workers.


Flood Toll in China Nears 1,000
Unusually heavy downpours have caused some of the worst flooding in years in eastern and central China, with more than 800 people estimated to have been killed and with heavy damage to several big industrial centers and crops, especially wheat, news reports say.
This is the rainy season, but the inundations are worse than usual.
Rains are swelling the Yangtze and the Yellow Rivers, and the flooding is taking a toll in a number of eastern and southern provinces, disrupting transportation, industry and other services.


Letting Couturiers Run: Plaid, Lattice, Leotards
When designers in New York and Paris were recently asked to reassess the baseball uniform, one asked, "What season, spring or fall?"
But the possibilities are unlimited, especially if professional fashion designers got into the act.
Sequins for night games?
Stretch tights for stealing bases?


Some Sound Advice On Taking It With You
FOR anyone who has ever considered buying a laptop or notebook computer, or who has done so and is now trying to cope with all the little quirks that accompany portable computing, we enthusiastically recommend "The PC Magazine Guide to Notebook and Laptop Computers," by Bill Howard ($29.95 from the Ziff-Davis Press , Berkeley, Calif.).
It is the most enlightening, practical and comprehensive book on DOS-based portable computing we have seen.
The category of laptops and notebooks is one of the fastest-growing segments of the computer industry and perhaps the fastest-changing.
New chip and manufacturing technologies have allowed portable PC's to get smaller and lighter while nearly matching the power of desktop systems.
This guide helps the reader find the best laptop or notebook computer for his or her needs, at the best price.


Walgreen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Soviet Player And Rangers Agree on Pact
The Rangers agreed in principle yesterday to a one-year contract with Sergei Nemchinov, the captain of the Wings of the Soviet Elite League, who is expected to be the first Soviet player to appear with the Rangers.
Neil Smith, the general manager of the Rangers, said the agreement would not be completed until Nemchinov was cleared by the Soviet hockey authorities, who customarily receive payments for players leaving the country.
"I don't foresee any problems," Smith said.


Cut Off in Slovenia: A Yugoslav General's Story
To be a virtual prisoner in his own headquarters has been a baleful experience for Maj.
Gen.
Mico Delic, area commander of the Yugoslav Army, but it has not changed his readiness to renew war against Slovenia.
"If necessary, we will fight again," he said in an interview in his office.
He added, though, that the decision was not his but would be made by a higher command in Zagreb, Croatia, or in Belgrade, the national capital.


Recovery Gauged in Baby-Formula Deficiency
CHILDREN who as infants were fed chloride-deficient formula appear to have recovered from initial growth failure and attained normal mental development, but some may be at risk for language impairment, a Government study has found.
The study, published in the June issue of the journal Pediatrics, was conducted by scientists at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, the National Cancer Institute and the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in Piscataway, N.J.


New Budget Returns Maine Workers to Jobs
Maine's Governor signed a new budget yesterday, sending thousands of state workers back to their jobs for the first time in a week, but budget impasses continued in Pennsylvania, where state workers' paychecks have been held up, and in California, Illinois and North Carolina.
Gov.
John R. McKernan Jr. of Maine signed a $3.2 billion budget, but state employees still face uncertainty because the budget could be canceled.
The Republican Governor made a deal with Democratic lawmakers that he would sign the legislation, but that it would become null on Wednesday if the Legislature failed to cut benefits under the workers' compensation program.


Raymond Brand, 69, Law Firm Chairman
Raymond Manning Brand, chairman and senior partner of Brand &amp; Brand, a Garden City, L.I., law firm, died June 29 at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.
He was 69 years old and lived in Jericho, L.I.
Mr. Brand died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Frederick's of Hollywood reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Jury Selection Begins for Trial of a Defrocked TV Evangelist
Jury selection began today in preparation for the trial of a defamation lawsuit against Jimmy Swaggart, the defrocked television evangelist.
The suit, by Marvin Gorman, a former television evangelist who helped topple Mr.
Swaggart by providing photographs of him with a prostitute, accuses Mr.
Swaggart of conspiring to destroy Mr.
Gorman's television ministry in New Orleans.


12 to Receive Arts Medal
Isaac Stern, Kitty Carlisle Hart, Roy Acuff and Richard Diebenkorn are among those who are to receive the National Medal of the Arts this year, the White House announced today.
The medals will be presented at a White House ceremony on Tuesday followed by a luncheon for the 12 being honored for exceptional contribution to the cultural life of the nation.
The recipients will be Maurice Abravanel, conductor emeritus of the Utah Symphony; Mr.
Acuff, the country singer and band leader; the architect Pietro Belluschi of Portland, Ore.; J. Carter Brown, director of the National Gallery of Art; the tap dancer Charles (Honi) Coles; John O. Crosby, founder and general director of the Sante Fe Opera in New Mexico; Mr.
Diebenkorn, the painter, and R. Philip Hanes Jr., a founder of the American Council for the Arts.


Our Towns
Here's how serious the municipal budget crunch is in one small town: Pearl River quintupled parking fines and was considering hiring two meter maids to rigidly enforce regulations.
Here's how serious Pearl River's residents are about preserving their small town flavor: They dropped that idea.


Nicholas P. Dallis; Comic Strip Creator, 79
Dr.
Nicholas P. Dallis, a psychiatrist who created the "Judge Parker," "Rex Morgan M.D." and "Apartment 3-G" comic strips, died Saturday.
He was 79 years old.
The cause of death was not immediately disclosed.


Marriott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 14


IRAQ NOW ADMITS A SECRET PROGRAM TO ENRICH URANIUM
Facing mounting international pressure and even the possibility of a military attack, Iraq admitted today that it has been running three clandestine programs designed to produce enriched uranium, which could be used as explosive in an atomic bomb.
In a statement issued here and in Vienna, the United Nations commission charged with destroying Iraq's most dangerous weapons said Baghdad today submitted a new list of its nuclear sites and material that contained information it had not given earlier.


South Carolina National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oregon Peyote Law Leaves 1983 Defendant Unvindicated
As a drug and alcohol abuse counselor for American Indians in Oregon, Galen Black said he thought it was important to learn the ancient Indian art of spiritual healing.
He took in sweat-lodge ceremonies and sun dances, and he even smoked the occasional pipe filled with sacred herbs.
Then one day in 1983, Mr.
Black attended one of the most sacred healing rituals of all: As a guest, he and others ingested a small amount of peyote, a cactus containing the hallucinogen mescaline, in a ceremony of the Native American Church.


Apple Growers Bruised and Bitter After Alar Scare
Four generations of the Bernath family tended a small apple farm in the foothills of the Cascade Mountains, surviving drought, winter cold and the vagaries of the market.
Last month, a bank foreclosed on them, forcing the Bernaths to give up their 54 acres and move to the city.
What brought them down, they say, was the most unlikely of storms.
The Bernaths awoke one morning two years ago to hear that apples, the very embodiment of healthy food, were being called potentially cancerous if sprayed with Alar, a chemical that regulates growth.


Leon Hershaft; Manufacturer, 83
Leon Hershaft, chairman emeritus and founder of Paxar Corporation, a manufacturer of labels and label systems for the apparel industry, died on Saturday at his home in Rye, N.Y.
He was 83 years old and also had a home in Boca Raton, Fla.
Mr. Hershaft died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


INSIDE
New Tensions in Yugoslavia
Despite a compromise delaying its independence, the separatist republic of Slovenia declined to take part in Yugoslavia's Government.
Page A8.
Germany on Soviet Aid


State Financial Service Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


John V. Bickford; Coal Executive, 56
John V. Bickford, president of the Westmoreland Coal Sales Company of Philadelphia, died June 28.
He was 56 years old and lived in Devon, Pa.
He died of a heart attack while driving home from his office, a company spokesman said.


Some Housing Is Better Than None
Andrew Cuomo, founder of HELP for the homeless, wants to build affordable housing on East 13th Street in Manhattan.
He has a detailed plan that qualifies for available public funds and has won community backing.
Ordinarily, it doesn't make sense to build subsidized housing on prime Manhattan real estate.
But this plan warrants approval by the Dinkins administration.
Generally, the city is better off selling valuable property and using the proceeds and the taxes to build more low-income housing on less costly land.
That's what the Koch administration tried to do with this city-owned site that runs from 13th to 14th Streets, between the old Luchow's restaurant and the Palladium.
But the city failed to sell it even when the economy was booming.
It has been occupied by a parking lot and vacant buildings since the early 80's.


Richard Kaufman; Executive, 49
Richard Kaufman, an accounting executive and a community volunteer, died on Wednesday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 49 years old and lived on Roosevelt Island.
He died of an embolism, his family said.


Topics of The Times; Guadalcanal Gulf
"Guadalcanal. The name will not die out of the memories of this generation. It will endure in honor." So proclaimed an editorial in this paper in October 1942 as American forces were fighting a fierce battle to wrest the strategic island from Japan's grip.
The Japanese had honeycombed the island with miles of interlocking tunnels.
Rooting them out took a horrendous toll.
Some 15,000 Japanese died; 6,000 Americans were killed or wounded.
Later, the memory of Guadalcanal fell victim to the generation gap.
In the mid-1950's, marines in a training exercise stormed Guadalcanal's beaches and took its high ground.
But when correspondents asked how it felt to re-enact a famous battle they drew blank stares from young marines who had been in kindergarten at the time of the actual campaign.


Kohl, in Shift, Is Reported to Favor Indirect Economic Aid to Moscow; Tokyo Seeks Clarification
Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu called on the Soviet Union today to clarify its plans for economic reform if it wanted help from the world's industrial democracies.
In an interview with a small group of American and European correspondents, Mr.
Kaifu echoed the skepticism toward Moscow shown by the United States and Britain, saying that the scope and direction of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's economic plans remained murky.


Hearing Set in Suit on Pennsylvania Election
The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit will hear arguments next Monday on the legality of a special election in November for the United States Senate seat of the late John Heinz, a clerk for the court said today.
The hearing will be on an appeal filed by the state after a Federal district judge ruled unconstitutional a Pennsylvania law permitting elected representatives in political parties to nominate candidates for special elections.


Canonie Environmental Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bethlehem Raising Some Prices 4%
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, the nation's second-largest steel producer behind the USX Corporation, said it would raise the prices on some sheet steel products by 4 percent, beginning on Sept. 29.
The company said its proposed increase would be as much as $10 a ton lower than price increases announced last week by the LTV Corporation and the Wheeling Pittsburgh Corporation.
Analysts have said the increases, which affect products that go into everything from automobile parts to appliances, are unlikely to hold and that the action by the steel company, based in Bethlehem, Pa., would mean continued price competition among steel producers.
The Inland Steel Company and Armco Inc. said they were studying the price rises but had not decided whether to match them.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, the Credit Markets column in Business Day yesterday misattributed a pessimistic assessment of the housing sector.
It was David H. Resler, chief economist at Nomura Securities International, not Richard B. Berner of Salomon Brothers, who spoke of a renewed slowdown in housing and said, "You can't rule out a return to recession, especially if long-term interest rates remain at these levels."


Lending Unit Formed
The World Bank's International Finance Corporation unit and Banque Nationale de Paris are establishing an operation to provide hard-currency loans to small- and medium-size businesses in developing countries in Africa and Asia, the World Bank said today.


Big Belmont Weekend Lacks Proper Crowd
They tried hard to get you to go to the race track in New York over the Fourth of July weekend.
They imported champion horses.
They staged landmark races.
They matched Meadow Star against Lite Light in the battle of the royal fillies.
They printed 25,000 lapel buttons bearing pictures of the fillies looking like politicians.
They even matched their owners like heavyweight contenders in newspaper ads, Carl Icahn against M.C.
Hammer, the financier against the rap singer.
They even had the Hammer dancing in the aisles en route to the winner's circle.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-11
Iraq said it had a nuclear program and admitted to clandestinely producing enriched uranium, which is used in atomic bombs.
The disclosure came under threat of possible military attack.
Page A1
Iraq has enough enriched uranium to build at least one nuclear device, the Bush Administration believes.
This would require more than the pound of it that the Iraqis conceded that they had made.
A11


Dekalb Genetics reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


By Design; The Silly Hats of Summer
Summer is the season for hats, especially silly ones.
Perhaps it's the heat, or maybe summer makes people feel frivolous.
Whatever the reason, right now amusing hats are acceptable.
Those with brims help to shade the face, but with or without brims, hats add just the right light touch to an outfit.
If money is not a major concern, visit the hat departments at Bergdorf Goodman and Henri Bendel.
Bendel's has a black straw number with a round crown and large brim decorated with beige soutache braid.
It is by Gabriella Ligenza and costs $475.
At Bergdorf's there are somewhat mad hats from Lola .
A purple straw one with a large bouquet of purple flowers in front is $340.


U.S. ARMS REQUEST BACKED BY MOSCOW
The White House said today that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had swiftly agreed to President Bush's request that he send his Foreign Minister to Washington this week in an effort to conclude a new nuclear arms treaty in time for signing at a summit meeting in Moscow in late July.
Arms analysts said that since Mr.
Bush told Mr.
Gorbachev in a cable that he should not send Foreign Minister Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh unless he was empowered to make the final deals needed to complete the treaty on long-range arms, the decision to send the Soviet team was probably the most positive signal yet that both leaders were finally serious about finishing the negotiations, which began in 1982. 'Plenty of Time'
For the first time, Administration officials are also saying they really do believe that the talks should be able to conclude the treaty.


Kent VanHorn Faulkner; Executive, 69
Kent VanHorn Faulkner, a retired corporate sales executive with I.B.M., died on Thursday at his summer home in New London, N.H.
He was 69 years old and a lifelong resident and civic leader of Montclair, N.J.
He died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a family spokeswoman said.


Books of The Times; A Dictionary to Offend No One but a Purist
Random House Webster's College Dictionary Illustrated. 1,568 pages. Random House. $20.
The press releases announcing the publication of the Random House Webster's College Dictionary herald the volume as "the first dictionary for the 1990's," a "reader-friendly," "even-handedly nonsexist" reference work that is "accessible, authoritative, absolutely up-to-the-minute."


Typing, for Absolute Beginners and Others
THE ubiquitous John C. Dvorak, who seems to have regular columns in about half the computer publications on the newsstand and his name on a couple of popular computer books, now has his byline and face on a box containing a piece of software.
Dvorak on Typing is an entertaining and handsome program designed for both beginners and intermediate and advanced typists.
The program starts with a test to determine your level.
I foolishly imagined I would be classified as an advanced typist, but Mr.
Dvorak easily exposed me.
"Beginner," he said. (Rationalization: Anyone who writes on a keyboard, rather than retyping other people's stuff, tends to go in fits and starts; also, mistakes made on a computer are so readily corrected that you don't much mind them.)


Fund-Raiser for Particle Accelerator Resigns
The head of the state commission in charge of raising money for an $8.2 billion particle accelerator in Texas has resigned, saying the project has serious financial problems.
As chairman of the Texas National Research Laboratory Commission, J. Fred Bucy had the responsibility of raising the state's $1 billion share of the cost of the superconducting supercollider.
Texas is raising the money through the sale of bonds.


High-Tech Dinosaur Prey Detector
SOME of the large marine dinosaurs that plied the world's oceans almost 200 million years ago may have been guided to their prey by a unique hydrodynamic control system, according to British scientists.
Examining the fossil skulls of plesiosaurs, the researchers said they believe small holes in the upper mouths of the creatures connected with openings atop their heads to create a system for sensing food and navigating toward it.


NCNB Grows (but Profits Don't)
The NCNB Corporation's Hugh L. McColl Jr., hailed as a savvy regional banker who is reshaping the industry, has an impressive track record at invading and succeeding in new markets, but his record at generating profits in some of these conquests has been unimpressive lately.
The McColl formula is to buy banks, convert them to NCNB's aggressive sell-sell-sell sales culture and get the troops out there scrambling for market share.
Along the way, profits can take a back seat for a while.


Steinway Lectures
Two free lectures are planned by Steinway &amp; Sons Pianos at Steinway Hall, 109 West 57th Street.
The first, "Historic White House Concerts: The Steinway Legacy," is to be given by Elise K. Kirk, a writer and musicologist, on Thursday at 6:30 P.M.
It will be illustrated by slides and musical examples.
On July 25, also at 6:30, Arnold Michaelis, a television producer and commentator, is to speak on "Mainly Mozart." Information and reservations: (212) 246-1100.


Kohl, in Shift, Is Reported to Favor Indirect Economic Aid to Moscow
As a result of his talks with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Chancellor Helmut Kohl has decided against urging Western leaders to provide direct financial aid to the Soviet Union when they meet next week in London and instead will seek a consensus on granting Moscow some kind of "special status" that could lead to eventual assistance from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, German officials say.
Faced with opposition from several Western governments to large-scale money grants to the Soviet Union, the Chancellor is instead hoping to win approval for the idea of indirect aid channelled through the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.
Such aid is likely to be given only if the Soviets adopt sweeping economic reforms.


Four Firms Penalized By Japan
In an effort to quickly end a spreading stock market scandal before an economic summit meeting next week, the Japanese Government today announced a series of sanctions against the country's four biggest securities houses and apologized to the international financial community.
But the sanctions themselves appeared modest.
The most severe one ordered the brokerages to show restraint in conducting business with their largest customers for four days, beginning Wednesday.
The action effectively bars the firms from conducting most types of market transactions.


Biologists Seek the Words In DNA's Unbroken Text
AMERICANS are generally inept at foreign languages, but they have a particularly hard time mastering Chinese and Russian.
Many Chinese say they feel the same about English, while even the most nimble European polyglot may be stymied by the intricacies of Navajo.
But for biologists, no language is more complex or more daunting than the language of the DNA molecule: the genetic instructions inscribed in every cell that tell a young body how to grow, an older body how to survive, and a fertile body how to reproduce.


CHRONICLE
NANCY REAGAN celebrated her birthday in an uncharacteristically low-key way at a family dinner on Saturday at Chasen's, the Hollywood restaurant.
Since the publication in April of KITTY KELLEY's book, "Nancy Reagan: The Unauthorized Biography," which says, among other things, that Mrs.
Reagan is 70 and lies about her age, the former President's wife has been seen in public only for occasions like having her picture taken with Gen.
H.
NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF.
Mrs.
Reagan "celebrated her birthday the way she wanted to," said her publicity agent, Bill Garber, who said he did not know which of the Reagan children attended the gathering.


Bonn Offers Nicaragua $60 Million in Aid
Germany has decided to revive its aid program to Nicaragua after a 10-year lapse, and plans to send more aid to Nicaragua this year than to any other country in Latin America.
"We always said that when democracy was back in place in Nicaragua, we would provide large amounts of help," said Volker Ducklau, spokesman for the Ministry of Economic Cooperation.
"It has been a long wait, but now that a freely elected Government is in power there, we are making good on our promise."


A Lone Naturalist Defends Secret Places Of the Falklands
THE extremities of earth can be a naturalist's paradise.
And this barren grouping of islands in the South Atlantic, 800 miles north of Antartica and 300 miles east of Argentina, is such a place.


Q&amp;A
Ozone, Good and Bad
Q.
Why do I hear about ozone pollution in the cities when dwindling ozone is considered a threat?


Infiniti, Lexus Lead Consumer Survey
The two newest Japanese luxury car divisions, the Nissan Motor Company's Infiniti and the Toyota Motor Corporation's Lexus, tied for the highest ranking in a consumer satisfaction survey for 1990 by J. D. Power &amp; Associates, a leading automotive market research company.
The ranking is widely regarded as an unbiased assessment of how cars and trucks perform.
Manufacturers with high quality ratings aggressively use the survey in advertising and marketing in the United States.
The highest-rated American car line was the Cadillac, in eighth place in this year's listing.
Mercedes-Benz was third, Acura and Honda tied for fourth, Toyota sixth and Audi seventh.
The survey showed the Lexus and Infiniti divisions tied at the highest level of dealer and product satisfaction since the survey was created by J. D. Power in 1986.


Mercury Finance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Hartford, Back to Work, But No Budget
As 20,000 state workers returned to their jobs today for the first time in a week, the tone of Connecticut's budget debate soured further, with lawmakers and Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. exchanging insults and state employees and residents wondering when the budget crisis would end.
House members debating a temporary budget bill called the partial shutdown of state services "an abdication of responsibility" and "plain stupidity." Mr.
Weicker, in turn, said lawmakers lacked wisdom and courage to pass a budget he would sign.


Teaching American History Without Blinders; Regressing on Race
To the Editor:
One of your June 21 excerpts from the "One Nation, Many Peoples" report states that "students need to see race as a cultural phenomenon, not a physical description." How a reputable group of scholars at the end of the 20th century could endorse this oldest of racist myths is astonishing.


EXECUTIVES
*
Avondale Mills Inc., Sylacauga, Ala., a textile manufacturer, appointed John Dragonetti president of its international division. *
Microdyne Corp., Alexandria, Va., a maker of radio frequency equipment, named Philip T. Cunningham president and chief executive.
Mr.
Cunningham was the founder and president of Federal Technology Corp., which last month merged into Microdyne.


Along the Banks of the Volga, a City With No Fish (and Little Else) for Sale
There are touches of midsummer nightmare in the tattered marketplaces of this ancient Volga city.
People must begin lining up soon after midnight in some neighborhoods to have a chance at the morning's supply of milk, which is critically scarce, and even then they often are not successful.


CHRONICLE
Taking the opposite approach, GIAN CARLO MENOTTI celebrated his 80th birthday onstage on Sunday, in a surprise appearance in one of his own operas during the Spoleto Festival of the Two Worlds in Italy.
He founded the festival 34 years ago.
After his cameo appearance in "Goya," Mr.
Menotti went to a dance where 700 people sang "Happy Birthday."
RINGO STARR, who will be 51 on Sunday, bought a house in Beverly Hills, Calif., with his wife, the actress BARBARA BACH.
They paid $3.3 million -- in cash -- for the three-bedroom, 5,500-square-foot house, The Los Angeles Times reported.


How Japan Feels About the Persian Gulf
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb, in "Whining, Excuses, Hysteria," an otherwise rational column on United States-Japan relations (June 23), makes a totally erroneous statement about the policies of Ronald Reagan's Presidency.
Mr.
Gelb contends that the United States is telling Japan "to go on a consumer binge and increase government deficits, or, in effect, to adopt the self-destructive polices of the Reagan Administration."


Market Place; I.C.I. Drawing Mixed Reviews
AFTER Hanson P.L.C. bought a 2.8 percent stake in Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C. in mid-May, the price of I.C.I.'s stock and American depository receipts soared by about 20 percent in the next four weeks.
Investors bet that I.C.I., Britain's third-largest company and one of the world's five biggest chemical concerns, was going to become the next prey of the acquisitive Hanson.
But with Hanson not taking any action, the stock has fallen 4.1 percent since its peak in early June on the London International Stock Exchange, where it closed yesterday at $:12.80 ($20.85).
On the New York Stock Exchange, the A.D.R.'s closed at $84, down 7.5 percent from their peak.


Yount Returning
ROBIN YOUNT of the Milwaukee Brewers could return to action tomorrow after being hospitalized for tests that confirmed that he had passed a kidney stone, the team said. (AP)


Behind B.C.C.I., a Sheik With Power and Wealth
Sheik Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahayan, who has come into the limelight in the last week as the principal shareholder of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which is suspected of laundering drug money and engaging in widespread fraud, is not accustomed to being questioned about his wealth or businesses.
Last week, the British Government froze the bank's $20 billion in assets, and there are many questions about the liability of Sheik Zayed, the president of the United Arab Emirates, for the bank's losses.
He has pumped at least $1 billion into the bank since 1989, and he took control of it in 1990 when losses began to mount.


Technique for Early Prenatal Test Comes Under Question in Studies
A TECHNIQUE experts had predicted would revolutionize prenatal diagnosis has faltered in recent studies, leading some doctors to turn back to an older, established procedure, amniocentesis.
Last month, a large randomized European trial showed that patients who used the new technique, chorionic villus sampling, experienced almost 5 percent more fetal and neonatal deaths than women who chose amniocentesis.
Weeks before, British researchers reported an unusually high number of limb deformities in the children of a small group of women who had opted for the new technique.


Caution on Helping Soviet Economy Is Emphasized by Industrial Nations
When leaders of the seven leading industrial nations meet with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev here next week, they almost certainly will promise him aid that will not necessarily cost a lot of money but will signal the West's intent to play a constructive role in helping the Soviet Union become a free-market democracy, American and European officials say.
The immediate things they might give include a big increase in expertise to help the Soviets draw up and put into effect plans for changing their economy and overhauling specific sectors, especially oil and gas and agriculture; an easing of trade restrictions, and perhaps an increase in providing financing to buy goods.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE term a la nage ("swimming") refers to seafood cooked in a court-bouillon, an aromatic liquid made of fish stock, wine or vinegar, herbs, spices and vegetables.
Poaching a fish in a seasoned stock made from its own bones imbues it with a savory flavor.
Frequently shellfish, like lobster or crayfish, are served a la nage from stock made with their shells.
In the recipe below for rolled fillets of sole, begin by trimming the zucchini and cutting it into spaghetti-like strands.
The stock is made with fresh mussels.
The mussels are steamed briefly; then the meat is removed, reserving the cooking juices.
Next, carrots are cooked until tender.
In the meantime, the sole fillets are rolled and secured with a toothpick.


Fund Questions Time Warner
Providence Capital Inc., an investment bank representing the California Public Employees Retirement System, has sent the Securities and Exchange Commission a letter objecting to the structure of the rights offering of Time Warner Inc., according to a Time Warner executive and an investment banker involved in the transaction.
An executive at Providence Capital declined to comment.


Summer Menus: Light Soup, Heavy Reliance on the Grill
SOUP is almost always on our menus at home.
In summer, the sturdy soups of winter are replaced by light vegetable or fruit soups, some of which, like the leek soup in today's menu, can be served cold.
Grilled food is often part of our daily fare in summer, too, both because we like the way it tastes and because grilling takes the heat of summer cooking outdoors.


Era, but Not Tension, Ends for Boston School Panel
When Gov.
William F. Weld signed a bill on Friday to replace Boston's elected School Committee with a smaller appointed one he ended an era for public schools here.
The 13-member committee, the oldest elected school board in the nation, has become infamous for its internal squabbling, frequent racial tension and poor management of the school system.
Starting in January, it will have only seven members, all appointed by the Mayor.
Some contend that such a board will disenfranchise parents; others argue it will take the politics out of school management and allow it to improve.


No Shortcuts for Knicks No Matter Where Ewing Stands
Patrick Ewing didn't give up on Bernard King.
He didn't trade Rod Strickland for Maurice Cheeks.
He didn't relinquish first-round draft picks for stop-gap veterans Kiki Vandeweghe, Gerald Henderson and Jawann Oldham.
He didn't hand Johnny Newman over to Charlotte.


Review/Film; The Attitude Adjustment of a Bullet in the Brain
Henry Turner is a rich, successful Manhattan lawyer and a thorough sleaze ball.
He speaks roughly to his little girl, but stops short of beating her when she sneezes, which may be the only decent thing that can be said for him.
He's ambitious and callous in his career.
At home he's rudely outspoken, even about interior decoration.
He loathes the new dining room table in his Fifth Avenue apartment, telling his wife that it looks like a turtle, which, in fact, it does.


Suicide Bid Reported
Former New England Patriots running back TONY COLLINS, whose National Football League career was shortened by drug use, drove his car into a lake in Orlando, Fla., early Tuesday in a suicide attempt, the police said.
Collins, 32 years old, was treated at a hospital and released about an hour later.
Collins, a starting wingback for the Orlando Predators of the Arena Football League, could not be reached for comment. (AP)


Japanese Put Compensation In Scandal 3 Times as High
Japan's four leading brokerages said today that they had paid big investors nearly $863 million to compensate them for stock market losses, almost three times the amount previously reported.
Many investors have pulled out of the market to protest the action by the firms -- Nomura Securities, Nikko Securities Daiwa Securities and Yamaichi Securities.


Review/Theater; Bygone Love's Shocks and Sorrows
Sex isn't what is unsafe in "Body and Soul" by John Glines; friendship can be, and love definitely is.
But most of the characters in what is billed as a romantic comedy at the Courtyard Playhouse crave all three.
The one who doesn't supplies the mysterious soulfulness every romance needs, and he has enough for several sequels.
Mr.
Glines borrows plot and situation from the timeless-romance handbook: Sky Eliot (David Boldt), who teaches religion and art at a university, had a brief affair years ago with a young photographer, Denny (Randall Denman), but walked away from it when it became too intense.


More Federal Charges Filed In $50 Million Fraud Claims
Expanding on an indictment unsealed last month, Federal prosecutors said Monday that 12 people had collected more than $50 million by filing bogus insurance claims.
A 175-count Federal indictment unsealed Monday charged that two brothers, Michael and David Smushkevich, both Soviet emigres, set up the ring at least as early as the mid-1980's that used mobile diagnostic services and clinics to lure thousands of patients with promises of free tests.


And Now, the Pressure to Catch Up
The decision of the International Olympic Committee to readmit South African athletes to Olympic competition was greeted here today with excitement mixed with trepidation over whether the country's athletes, after decades of isolation from international competition, can rise to international standards in time for the 1992 Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain.
The decision seemed bound to make President F. W. de Klerk more credible with white South Africans who have been awaiting some reward for the steps taken to eliminate apartheid.
They want readmission not only to the Olympics, but also to world matches in rugby and cricket, two of the most popular sports here.
National Education Minister Louis Pienaar, whose Cabinet portfolio includes sports, said the decision to readmit South Africa to the Olympics proved the world was taking seriously President de Klerk's progress in dismantling apartheid, the system of racial segregation.
Swimmers Overseas
"The doors to the readmission of South African sport to international competition have swung open," Pienaar said.
But some sports officials, in interviews with the South African Press Association, predicted problems for South African athletes in catching up after three decades of isolation from the international sports community.
Martin Bezuidenhout, chairman of the South African Swimming Board, said the country would have to lure back some of its swimmers who are on scholarships at universities in the United States and elsewhere to have any impact at the Olympics.
"Comparing times set by South Africans overseas and our local swimmers shows how far behind world standards we have fallen, all because of isolation," Bezuidenhout said.
Arno Combrinck, president of the South African Cycling Federation, said its cyclists would go to Barcelona, "but we'll be there merely to learn," because they are lagging behind world standards.
Johnny Halberstadt, a veteran South African marathon runner, said: "The trouble is that our top runners have been training without really knowing which event for. Now that the green light has been given, we can focus on the Games both mentally and physically."
Halberstadt warned that South African runners should be careful not to burn themselves out before the Olympics in Barcelona.
"The thrill over running overseas could easily overcommit the guys," he said.
Rehearsals Are Needed
But Walker Valentine, another seasoned long-distance runner, said the South Africans should enter the world track and field championships in Tokyo next month as a rehearsal for the Olympics.
"What we need to do now is to send those athletes over to see how they fare against the world's best," Valentine said, "but more important, we need to send an accompanying group of sports specialists, like team managers, physiotherapists, doctors, dietitians."
A few South African athletes have managed to perform close to world standards: Willie Mtolo, for instance, has run the marathon here in 2 hours 8 minutes 15 seconds.
Mtolo's manager Ray de Vries, said Mtolo would go to Tokyo next month to watch but not to compete.
The strongest criticism of the decision today came from the South African Council on Sport, a faction that is at odds with other sports federations here in opposing readmission.
The council, which represents some athletes of mixed-race and Indian descent, refused to send a representative to Lausanne.
"We still have a situation where 70 to 80 percent of people do not have the vote," the council's president, Joe Ebrahim, told the South African Press Association.
"Millions of people do not have the rights which flow from citizenship, and the I.O.C. is in effect perpetuating apartheid," Ebrahim said.
The African National Congress, which has long supported the Olympic boycott, did not immediately respond.
But at the group's national conference in Durban last week, when Nelson Mandela was elected as its new leader, the congress accepted a strategy of a phased lifting of sanctions, recognizing that the sports boycott would be among the first to go.
South Africa has asked to be readmitted to the International Amateur Atheletic Federation in time for the world track and field championships in Tokyo next month.


Yugoslav Marriage Needs a Trial Separation; Looking Backward
To the Editor:
"After 7 Centuries, Slovenia Is Free" by Peter Millonig (Op-Ed, June 26) is a distressing and depressing apology for Balkanization, the process by which small ethnic groups seek to restore some real or imagined era of "national" sovereignty and glory from long ago.
Where the West increasingly seeks reassurance in the future, the Balkan nations steadfastly look to the past, eternally seeking to return whence they came.
But when medieval ideas and institutions are applied to modern situations, conflict and tragedy are the likely results.


Superintendent in Boston Has Troubles of Her Own
For Boston's new school superintendent, the recent wrangling over the makeup of the local school board is only one of several hurdles that greeted her last week.
Not only will Superintendent Lois Harrison-Jones be serving with a board appointed by the Mayor instead of the 13-member elected School Committee that chose her, but she has already run into budget and contract problems.


Connecticut Budget Slugfest: Will Veto Be Vetoed?
Propelled by a wave of anger, frustration and desperation, Connecticut's legislature moved today to try to override Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s veto of the legislature's budget plan.
If the lawmakers succeed, it would be yet another counterblow in the five-month tussle with the Governor over an income tax.


EX-C.I.A. AIDE SAYS HE MISLED INQUIRY ON AID TO CONTRAS
In a potential breakthrough for the Iran-contra prosecution, a former Central Intelligence Agency official admitted in Federal Court today that he told his superiors about the diversion of Iran arms-sale profits to the Nicaraguan rebels months before the dealings were publicly disclosed.
The former official, Alan D. Fiers Jr., who directed the agency's covert operations in Central America from 1984 to 1986, also told prosecutors that one superior ordered him not to tell Congress about the C.I.A.'s knowledge of the efforts to support the Nicaraguan rebels, or contras.


SENATE CRIME BILL HITS A NEW SNAG
Senate Republicans and Democrats are trying to resolve several disputes over the anti-crime package that threaten to revive debates on gun control, prisoners' rights and deportation of foreigners suspected of terrorism.
The anti-crime bill seemed close to passage after the Senate approved the gun control provisions shortly before the Fourth of July recess, but it became bogged in details this week.


Galoob Game Genie To Ship in 90 Days
Lewis Galoob Toys Inc., fresh from a victory over Nintendo in a copyright suit, said it plans to resume shipping its Game Genie video game enhancer within three months.
Galoob also plans to pursue the $15 million bond that Nintendo of America Inc. had been forced to post to compensate the company if Nintendo lost the suit.
A Federal judge had ordered Nintendo of America Inc., based in Redmond, Wash., to post the bond when a preliminary injunction forced Galoob to suspend sales of Game Genie in June 1990.


The Begetter of Shakespeare's Epitaph
To the Editor:
In "Turned Over in His Grave" (editorial, June 20), you mention the four lines of doggerel on Shakespeare's grave that end with the phrase "And curst be he that moves my bones" -- and you state flatly that it is "the playwright's work." This is not at all certain.


Judge Rules Warmus Case Can Be Retried
Carolyn Warmus, whose first trial in the killing of her lover's wife ended with a hung jury, can be tried again on murder charges, a judge ruled today.
Prosecutors are expected to press for a speedy retrial of the case.
But the new lawyer hired by Ms.
Warmus to handle her appeal said he would not be ready for a new trial before mid-October.


Ftorek, Ex-Ranger, Hired As Aide to Devils' Coach
Robbie Ftorek, who played four seasons for the Rangers, was hired today by the Devils as Coach Tom McVie's top assistant.
"We're delighted to have Robbie," said Lou Lamoriello, the president of the Devils.


Villagers Vote No on a Plan For a Nuclear-Waste Dump
In the first referendum of its kind in New York State, residents of this rural community in western New York voted tonight against becoming home to a low-level nuclear-waste dump despite waste generators' offers of a $4.2 million package of benefits that would double the town's current tax revenues.
But the fate of the generators' offer remained unclear tonight after at least three of the five members of the Town Board said the nonbinding vote was close enough -- 702 against the dump and 533 for it -- that they did not feel compelled to follow its results in making their own official decision on whether to accept the offer.


American League All-Stars Gain 4th in a Row
Baseball fans have come to expect nothing less than dramatics from Cal Ripken of the Baltimore Orioles after his two very memorable days of All-Star baseball festivities.
The Orioles shortstop did not disappoint during the 62d annual All-Star game, putting on yet another display Ruthian-like power in Toronto's Skydome.
Ripken followed up a magical home-run derby performance in which he homered 12 times on Monday, with a game-winning three-run homer tonight to lead the American League past the National League, 4-2.


AFN Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Wine Talk
SWALLOWS, it would appear, are not the only thing returning to Capistrano.
According to a recent report in The Los Angeles Times, the mission grape is back.
The people in charge of the rebuilt Mission San Juan Capistrano are hoping to recreate a vineyard similar in every way but size to the one that supplied wine to the Franciscan friars and the Indians in California 200 years ago.
Almost certainly of Spanish origin, although no grape like it can be found in Spain today, the mission -- originally known as the criolla -- became the mainstay of the Spanish missions from Baja California to Sonoma.
It was the backbone of the California wine industry from the dissolution of the missions in the 1830's until the 1870's.
Today there are still more than 3,000 acres of it planted in California, much of it in San Bernardino County.


Tasty Yogurt
To The Living Section:
Your taste testing of yogurts,  [ "Frozen Yogurt: Tasty, but No Health Food," June 26 ] , was based on vanilla flavor; my own was based on chocolate.
On that score, Elan seems to me by far the most chocolaty of the yogurts I've sampled.
I agree, however, that Elan's vanilla is not very exciting and needs to be drowned in chocolate sauce.
JEAN H. BANKIER New York, N.Y.


Conversion Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bush Is Said to Approve Military Base Closings
President Bush has decided to approve a Federal commission's recommendation to close 25 military installations and consolidate or reduce 48 others, Administration and commission officials said today.
The President has invited members of the commission that decided on the base closings to come to the White House for a ceremony on Wednesday morning.


Rise in Tuberculosis Forces Review of Dated Methods
An epidemic of tuberculosis, an infectious disease that was once thought to be suppressed in this country, is forcing hospitals across New York City to turn back the clock and consider methods largely abandoned decades ago, including the use of sanitariums.
With hundreds of patients now hospitalized with tuberculosis across the city, hospitals are scrambling to set up ventilated isolation rooms, once common, to stop the spread of infections within hospitals.
At least three such outbreaks have been reported.


Foreign Affairs; The Dark Side of Disunity
Americans seem fated to ignore the dark shadows of idealism in foreign policy.
Yugoslavia is the most recent case in point.
Some of America's finest essayists and talk-show artists are doing a devilishly effective job of selling a cleverly unshaded argument.
Their pitch is that America's basic choice in Yugoslavia (and the Soviet Union) boils down to this: self-determination, freedom and democracy versus order, stability and dictatorship.


Carl Tiller, 75, Dies; U. S. Budget Executive
Carl W. Tiller, a retired official of the United States Office of Management and Budget and a former associate secretary of the Baptist World Alliance, died on Saturday at his home in Mars, Pa.
He was 75 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Davis Water &amp; Waste reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A Living Room on 42d Street
The lawn won't be finished till next week, nor the entire renovation until March.
But a few hundred white plastic chairs have been set out on the paved area, and on a hot day last week almost all were occupied.
In New York a park, and Bryant Park in particular, is precious as an oasis.
In theory, Bryant Park -- six or so acres behind the main branch of the New York Public Library at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street -- is one of the city's glories.
In fact it has long been a home to drug dealers and a blot on an already dismal landscape.
But not anymore.


Jacob Wendroff, 68, Queens Village Rabbi
Jacob Wendroff, rabbi of the Queens Jewish Center of Queens Village for the last 32 years, died on Sunday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 68 years old and lived in Queens.
Rabbi Wendroff died of complications from diabetes, his daughter, Mara, said.


Community Service Measure
The New Jersey State Senate is considering a bill that would require all high school students to perform at least 40 hours of community service over four years to graduate.
If enacted, the measure would make New Jersey the first state in the country with such a requirement.
Mandatory community service programs exist in certain individual school districts, including Atlanta, Detroit, Bethlehem, Pa., Rye, N.Y., and Princeton, N.J.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9
President Gorbachev's plea for aid at the summit meeting of leading industrial nations next week will emphasize Western investment rather than outright grants, he said.
Page A1


Corrections
A chart in Business Day Monday titled "Growing Trade in the Developing World" misstated export statistics in some copies.
From 1980 to 1989, the average annual growth in exports was as follows: 4.9 percent for Chile, 5.6 percent for Ghana, 11.4 percent for Turkey, 12.8 percent for Thailand and 13.8 percent for Korea.


2 G.M. Divisions Expand Incentives
The General Motors Corporation's Pontiac and Chevrolet divisions revised their incentive programs to add rebates on certain 1991 models.
The Pontiac program includes rebates of $1,500 on the Bonneville, $1,000 on the Firebird and Grand Prix and $750 on the Trans Sport.


Warriors Considered an Effort to Woo Ewing
The Golden State Warriors said yesterday they considered restructuring Chris Mullin's contract for the purpose of pursuing Patrick Ewing as a free agent.
"We took a look at revising Chris's contract and decided not to participate," Dan Finnane, the Warriors' president, said by telephone from Oakland, Calif.


Kinark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Synovus Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


L'eggs Makes Big Switch: From Plastic to Cardboard
One of the best-known packages in consumer-products history, the ubiquitous plastic eggs that hold L'eggs panty hose, will soon disappear.
Next year, L'eggs will be sold in a kind of art-school depiction of an egg, a small cardboard box with an ovoid peak.
Analysts say the new package is an important innovation in the slow-growing panty hose business.
Sales have been hurt by panty hose's increasing durability, which means fewer purchases.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Richard Kaufman, a New York advertising executive and community volunteer, misstated the status of his father, Federal Judge Irving R. Kaufman.
Judge Kaufman is a senior judge of the United States Court of Appeals in Manhattan; he is not retired.


Vegetarian Diets
To The Living Section:
I especially appreciated Marian Burros's Eating Well column of May 22.
The findings reported by Dr.
David Levitsky, while very interesting, are not new.
In the ongoing clinical research that my colleagues and I are conducting, we are finding that a low-fat vegetarian diet reduces not only coronary atherosclerosis but also waistlines.


U.S. WEIGHS MOVES ON CHINESE TRADE
On the eve of a vote on the issue in the House, the Administration is still trying to decide whether to make a series of concessions to persuade a hostile Congress to extend normal trading privileges to China for another year.
The House is now expected to vote overwhelmingly to renew the so-called most-favored-nation status for China, but with conditions for future renewal, such as the improved observance of human rights, that the White House has promised to veto.
Instead, the Administration is leaning toward making a series of promises, including a possible major shift on United States policy toward Taiwan, that would satisfy some Congressional objections without being set in legislation.


Food Notes
Mood Food
Lincoln Center is combining cuisine with concerts during this season's Mostly Mozart Festival.
Before seven of the concerts, from 5:30 P.M. to 6:45 P.M., concertgoers will have an opportunity to meet some of the festival performers at an informal supper tasting held in the Helen Hull room of Avery Fisher Hall.


14 Scientific Groups Warn Senate About Money Drain of Space Lab
The presidents of 14 scientific professional societies expressed concern today that building a proposed manned space station might be so costly that it would drain funds from other science and technology programs.
The societies, in letters to all senators, said, "Serious questions have been raised concerning the cost and the scientific, technological and educational merit of the currently planned station." The societies said they supported a "balanced space program."


Net Off a Bit At Dow Jones
Dow Jones &amp; Company, the publisher of The Wall Street Journal, said yesterday that its second-quarter profits fell marginally compared with the period last year.
Dow Jones said it earned $34.7 million, or 34 cents a share, in the three months that ended on June 30, compared with $34.9 million, or 35 cents a share, a year earlier.
Its revenues totaled $442.9 million, up slightly from $441.6 million.


Far From Home Plate, Baseball Caps Take Over
As baseball's All-Star break winds up today, let us put on our thinking caps, with the bills worn frontward, backward or off to the side, rapper style.
Let us ponder why 7 out of 10 hats made in this country are baseball caps.
Why everyone from football and basketball coaches to movie stars and babies wear them.
And why the trend shows no sign of peaking.
Baseball intellectuals will give you a metaphysical answer.
But before talking about the cap, they must talk about the game.
For them, a baseball cap, any baseball cap, is a magical object invested with unspoken powers because of its link to the mythic activity called baseball.
Dr.
Stuart Ewen, a professor of media studies at City University of New York, whose cap collection includes minor league teams like the Madison Muskies, is one such intellectual.


Dust From Philippine Volcano May Obscure Eclipse in Hawaii
A dust cloud hurled into the stratosphere by the volcano on Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines is threatening to spoil the greatest opportunity astronomers have ever had to study a total eclipse of the Sun.
On Thursday morning the path of totality of what has been billed as the eclipse of the century will pass directly over the summit of Mauna Kea mountain, the site of eight of the world's largest telescopes.
Of the observations astronomers hope to carry out, the most important will try to record subtle details in the Sun's outer corona, the luminous outer shell of gas surrounding the Sun that remains visible even when the Sun's face is completely obscured by the Moon.


Kleinert's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Real Estate; A 4-Story Underground Office Building at Texas Capitol
THERE is a lot of empty space in this city's overbuilt office market, but Texas state legislators, who badly need more space, are not buying.
Instead, they are building a $60 million underground office structure adjacent to the Capitol in downtown Austin.
This will not be just any office building.
The four-story structure is to sit beneath a landscaped public green and will have six atriums to provide natural illumination.


Support for Pretoria Sanctions Weak
Congress will probably not try hard to stop President Bush from lifting a wide range of trade and investment sanctions against South Africa, Administration and Congressional officials said today.
Several Democratic lawmakers were strongly critical of the President's move, which is expected to be formally announced on Wednesday, but the critics were skeptical that anything could be done to block it.


In Land of Death Penalty, Accusations of Racial Bias
On Wednesday morning, 619 miles to the north, a House subcommittee will hear the death penalty denounced, not as inherently cruel and unusual, but as unfair and racially discriminatory as applied.
And the evidence it will hear will come from here.
The history of race relations in this city of 180,000 people has not made the history books or documentaries.
The municipal buses and the luncheonettes along Broad Street were integrated by agreement, without the sit-ins and boycotts that rocked and immortalized Montgomery or Birmingham.


Marcade Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


Daimler Confirms Talks With Sogeti
Daimler-Benz A.G. said it was in talks to buy 34 percent of Sogeti S.A., a company that controls Europe's largest computer services group, by purchasing part of a stake from shareholders and paying 1.3 billion to 1.5 billion francs, or $210.2 million to $242.6 million, for new capital.
No other terms were disclosed.


INSIDE
New York Gun Bill Delay
The gun lobby's power appeared to have made itself felt as a City Council vote on a bill to ban the sale of assault weapons was delayed.
Page B1.


Cardinals' Guerrero Suffers Leg Fracture
The St.
Louis Cardinals put first baseman PEDRO GUERRERO on the 15-day disabled list yesterday but he could be out for six weeks.
He suffered a hairline fracture of his right leg when he collided with catcher TOM PAGNOZZI on Sunday.
Guerrero was hurt while catching a foul ball in the ninth inning of the 8-7 Cardinals' 12-inning victory over the Chicago Cubs.
He remained in the game and drove in the tying runs in both the ninth and the 12th innings and scored the winning run.


Some Differences Between Guns and Cars
To the Editor:
"Rifle Association Becomes a Scapegoat" (letter, June 13) argues that blaming the National Rifle Association for gun deaths is like blaming the American Automobile Association for car deaths.
The automobile is indeed a deadly instrument, but the A.A.A. does not oppose regulation and licensing requirements that make it harder to drive a car than to own a gun.
It is the N.R.A.'s opposition to regulating gun owners that draws a frightened public's ire.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.81
5.91
8.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.60
5.58
7.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.70
5.71
7.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.23
8.20
8.59
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.52
8.49
8.56
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.55
9.53
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.19
7.19
7.47
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Postmaster Defends Bonuses To Managers Despite Deficits
Postmaster General Anthony M. Frank met with a Senate subcommittee today and defended the practice of awarding bonuses to managers of the Postal Service even when the agency loses money.
"We're not being profligate with the public's money," Mr.
Frank told the Senate Governmental Affairs Subcommittee on Federal Services, Post Office and Civil Service.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The music and consumer electronics industries are close to reaching a landmark agreement that calls for the electronics industry to pay royalties to compensate for sales lost to digital home recording.  [ Page A1. ]
Fed policy makers voted last week not to change their target range for money supply growth next year, signaling that recovery is at least as high a priority as reduced inflation.  [ D1. ]


Chrysler Car Loans Back A $631 Million Offering
A $631 million asset-backed offering by the Chrysler Corporation was priced yesterday through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The asset-backed certificates are being sold via a Select Auto Receivables Trust 1991-2, with the certificates backed by Chrysler car loans.
Underwriters priced the 7.65 percent certificates at 99 59/64, to yield 7.821 percent, or about 87 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
The spread over Treasury securities was what many dealers had expected before pricing.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Patriots Drop Mowatt
Tight end ZEKE MOWATT, who was one of three players accused of sexually harrassing female sportswriter LISA OLSON in the locker room last September was waived yesterday by the New England Patriots.
An independent investigation by the National Football League later found that Mowatt had participated in the incident and fined him $12,500.
Mowatt was not effective afterward, catching just 6 passes for 67 yards. (AP)


Late Start on Part of Democrats Is Called Big Edge for Bush in '92
The late start of the Democratic Presidential campaign is a big advantage to President Bush, who is already fortified by the war in the Persian Gulf and begins his re-election campaign stronger than his predecessor, Ronald Reagan, was at this point in the 1984 cycle, a top Republican poll taker said today.
Richard B. Wirthlin, who was President Reagan's poll taker, said the lack of a strong, focused and persistent voice of Democratic opposition is a great help to the Republicans.
At this point in 1983, Walter F. Mondale, the former Vice President, was leading a pack of Democratic candidates for the nomination; today, the field of declared candidates consists of Paul E. Tsongas, former Senator of Massachusetts.


Review/Television; Looking at the Excesses In New York City Traffic
People who do not have to drive in New York City may get a kick out of "Driven to Extremes," tonight's edition of "48 Hours" at 10 on Channel 2.
New Yorkers may feel that the kick in the report on Manhattan traffic is to where they live, but they are famous for bearing the unbearable when they aren't shooting one another over a parking space.
The program moves a lot faster than the 880,000 vehicles that it notes enter New York every day, bringing the total to four times as many cars, vans and trucks as parking spaces.
The vignettes are well chosen and sharply delivered.
Viewers find themselves with a woman whose morning commute takes an extra half-hour because an oversize tractor-trailer has to be backed off a bridge, which diverts traffic to the tunnel she depends on to enter Manhattan; with a brown-uniformed traffic officer who writes 45 tickets a day ("They hate us with a passion," he says of his fellow New Yorkers); with busy tow trucks ("All of New York City is a tow-away zone," says an official, and one tow jockey boasts he would tow away his momma).


KREMLIN TO LOOK FOR INVESTMENTS AT LONDON SUMMIT
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that he would be seeking Western investments in the Soviet economy rather than outright financial aid in his lobbying for help next week at the summit meeting of leading industrial countries.
The Soviet leader will also be offering a specific plan at the meeting on July 17, a plan that will focus on basic Western concerns like demilitarizing the Soviet economy, making the ruble convertible on the open market with other currencies, and suggesting some initial investment possibilities for foreign countries, his spokesman said.


Court Nominee Gives Credit To Civil Rights Movement
Judge Clarence Thomas, who early in his career began to espouse hard work and individual initiative as the road to successfor black Americans, today credited the civil rights movement with helping him rise out of poverty to become a nominee for the Supreme Court.
"I've been extremely fortunate," Judge Thomas said during a visit to Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, the senior Republican on the Judiciary Committee.


Washington Federal S&amp;L -Seattle reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 10


Most Airlines Are Hesitant To Lift Fares
Last week, with little fanfare or advance notice, Continental Airlines said that on July 24, it would raise all its domestic fares by 5 percent.
The industry's response has been even more modest than Continental's announcement.
So far, only Pan American World Airways, which is in even worse financial shape than Continental, which is operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, has said it will match the increase.


The Pop Life
The Indies Are Back


Review/Opera; A Rarity From Strauss At Munich Festival
The Munich Opera Festival may have opened this year with a flashy novelty, Krzysztof Penderecki's "Ubu Rex," but the festival is best known for its conservative espousal of Mozart, Wagner and Richard Strauss, a native son.
For three decades, a connoisseur's special delight has been Strauss's otherwise rarely heard "Intermezzo," and the performance on Sunday night showed that Munich has preserved its Strauss tradition in admirable estate.
The opera's title refers not only to an uncomfortable interlude in the composer's married life, but also to a break in his relationship with his favored librettist, Hugo von Hofmannsthal.
Between their "Frau Ohne Schatten" and "Aegyptische Helena," Strauss fashioned his own text based on an undisguised domestic incident.
As the composer of "The Domestic Symphony" and the autobiographical "Hero's Life," he was never shy about airing the family laundry, but here he outdid himself.


Jackson's Brother Shot
An older brother of Knick guard Mark Jackson was wounded in a drive-by shooting in front of his home in Queens early yesterday, the police said.


Britain to Cut Forces by 20% Over 3 Years
Britain said today that it would reduce its armed forces by about 20 percent under defense cuts aimed at reaping a peace dividend from the end of the cold war.
Defense Secretary Tom King said that with the collapse of the Warsaw Pact, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization faced one million fewer troops than it did two years ago.
"Our determination is to produce forces which, while smaller, are well-equipped, properly trained and housed, and well-motivated," he said.


United-Guardian Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


West Urges Bulgarians to Shut Reactors
Alarmed by leaks in emergency equipment and by the danger of flooding and fires, Western experts have urged Bulgaria to shut down its Soviet-made nuclear reactors for repair as soon as possible.
The specialists, who inspected Bulgaria's sole nuclear-power-generating complex last month on behalf of the International Atomic Energy Agency, said in a report that four of the six reactors there were so full of hazards that "continued operation would be imprudent."


Metropolitan Diary
A FELLOW we know, estranged from his wife, returns to have dinner in the Upper East Side marital apartment for the first time in 18 months of separation.
He is greeted warmly by the doorman who says how happy he is to see him again, adding that his wife is a wonderful woman and that he hopes our friend will soon be coming home.
There is the briefest of pauses and the doorman speaks again.
"And we're getting all new windows," he says.
. . .
Dear Diary:
I live in Florida but frequently go to New York.
One of my usual stops is Bloomingdale's, as much for the sport of dodging atomizer-wielding sales clerks in the cosmetics obstacle course as for the actual merchandise.
This day I needed something simple: a cord to keep my ever-disappearing sunglasses around my neck.
I found the leather cord I wanted and presented it to the young woman behind the counter.
She looked me up and down, her eyes stopping on the glasses propped atop my head.
"Well, O.K.," she said, "but you really need new sunglasses, 'cause the ones you're wearing are totally out."
"But I just bought them at the Bloomingdale's in South Florida and they told me they were totally in," I said.
Defeated, but unbowed, she shrugged, rang up the sale and installed the cord on my totally out shades. -- JUDITH WILLIAMSON
. . .
Dear Diary:
One afternoon in early summer, my fiancee and I return home to our brownstone apartment.
As we open the door we hear loud scraping and thumping inside.
A small bird has wriggled up between the two panes of our double-hung window and is wedged into the narrow space, desperately struggling and beating its wings.
Five minutes later, my fiancee is flipping through the Yellow Pages searching for bird-removal services.
I am precariously perched on a stepladder performing an elaborate and futile rescue operation involving a blanket, a fishing net and a ski mitten.
Just then, the doorbell sings.
In walks a silver-haired woman.
She strides over to the window and squeezes one hand down between the panes.
The woman brings up the bird, which is quiet now, opens the window and the bird is gone like a shot.
Who is this white knight?
She introduces herself as an urban wildlife rehabilitationist.
She was walking down the street when she heard a distress call from the bird's mother.
She realized a chick must be in trouble and scanned the front of the building until she saw it.
As she departs into the sunset down West 30th Street, I am sure I hear a distant "Hi-yo, Silver!" wafting back on the breeze. -- JERRY BEILINSON
. . .
OFF TO CAMP!
Duffel bags are lank and lumpy, Mothers, too, albeit jumpy As the siblings on the scene begin to fuss.
Lists in hand, the counselors question While bus drivers wait.
Congestion Is the keynote in and outside every bus.
Camp Hoo-Ha-Ha, the excitement's Mounting.
Steady, Here they come, a hearty bunch, and Hale, and heady.
Are your sylvan glades and gentle Meadows READY?! -- MAUREEN CANNON
. . .
Dear Diary:
When our '79 Cadillac was stolen last month, Leonard and I felt we had lost a very dear and close friend.
The car was no longer a raving beauty, having fallen prey to thieves who fancied its outer trim, but we knew that beneath its rough exterior there beat an engine of gold.
Imagine our joy, then, when the police asked us to come to a precinct house and identify the car they believed to be ours.
We were grateful it hadn't been cannibalized in a "chop shop," but very concerned when we learned it had been involved in a high-speed chase through the streets of Brooklyn.
We prepared ourselves for the worst, but certainly not for what awaited us.
We could hardly believe our eyes.
On its hood was a brand-new ornament where previously there has been none.
Gleaming strips of metal enhanced heretofore rusty doors and the right front light, no longer smashed in, was perky and new once more.
In the trunk, empty of our possessions, was a steering assembly complete with wheel and chrome horn ring, waiting to replace our old one.
Not only that, but the thief had put in a new air-conditioning system, replaced the automatic window cleaners, the oil and radiator caps, radio knobs and some of the interior decor.
He had tuned up the car, adjusted the brake pedal, tightened the power steering as well as the seat belts.
The car is driving so splendidly that we suspect he also put in new shocks and springs.
The police calculated that one more week in the hands of this thief and we would have had a new car.
I keep thinking there's an obligation on my part to send the thief -- who has been apprehended -- a box of cookies.
But then my husband reminds me of who he is and what he took from us, and I settle for a sigh. -- GLORIA CLYNE


About New York
Rabbi Jacob Twersky's ears still buzzed from the flight across the Atlantic, as he tried not to blurt out to his wife and son what he had experienced, as he tried not to try to make sense of the senseless.
There would be time enough.
He clearly yearned to make small talk, tell jokes, squeeze hands, anything but talk about the immense subject.
"You live through everything," the rabbi finally said. "You live through this too."


Administration Hints at Easing Ban on Abortion Counseling
resident Bush's spokesman said today that it was "possible" the White House might agree to some change in the rules prohibiting federally financed family planning clinics from mentioning abortion to patients.
The spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said the White House domestic policy staff was reviewing the history of the regulations, first issued in 1988 but only this year upheld by the Supreme Court.
He said the purpose of the review was to work with Congress, where opponents of the regulations are working on measures that would allow counseling.


Times Names a Chief Critic
The appointment of Edward Rothstein as chief music critic of The New York Times was announced yesterday by Paul Goldberger, the cultural news editor.
Mr.
Rothstein, who has been music critic for The New Republic since 1984, will succeed Donal Henahan, who will retire from The Times later this summer.
Mr.
Henahan, who is 70 years old, became chief music critic of The Times in 1980.
A graduate of Northwestern University and a fighter pilot in Europe during World War II, he joined The Times in 1967 after serving as chief music critic for The Chicago Daily News.
In 1986, he was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for distinguished criticism for his writings in The Times.


Chase Names President For Investment Unit
J.
Peter Benzie was named president of the investment-advice subsidiary of the Chase Manhattan Bank yesterday.
The unit, Chase Manhattan Investment Services, advises clients about investments but leaves the selection of stocks and bonds to outside investment firms it hires.


Spanish or Portuguese, The Play's the Thing
The two remaining productions of this summer's New York Shakespeare in the Park Festival will be performed in Portuguese and Spanish.
From July 30 to Aug. 11, the Teatro do Ornitorrinco from Brazil will perform "A Midsummer Night's Dream." The Compania Rajatable of Venezuela will perform "The Tempest" from Aug. 27 to Sept. 8.
Neither will have simultaneous translation, but English synopses will be available for those unfamiliar with the plays.
The festival, organized and produced by Joseph Papp, opened this month with "Othello," directed by Joe Dowling and starring Raul Julia in the title role and Christopher Walken as Iago.
It will run through Sunday.


Excerpts From Statement on Former C.I.A. Aide
Following are excerpts from the Government's statement of the basis for the guilty plea today in the United States of America v.
Alan D. Fiers Jr., defendant, United States District Court for the District of Columbia Circuit: Count One
From October 1984 through Nov. 25, 1986, Alan D. Fiers Jr., was the chief of the Central Intelligence Agency's ("C.I.A.") Central American Task Force, which managed C.I.A. operations in Central America.
Mr.
Fiers worked closely with Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North on Central American issues and, in particular, on matters relating to the activity of the Nicaraguan resistance fighters, known as the contras.


Olympics Committee Ends Its Ban On Participation by South Africa
Satisfied that South Africa has committed itself to abolishing discrimination in sports, the International Olympic Committee today lifted a 21-year-long ban on the nation, allowing its athletes to compete in the 1992 Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain.
The decision was announced here this afternoon by Juan Antonio Samaranch of Spain, president of the I.O.C., who said, "I have decided today to proclaim the outright recognition of the National Olympic Committee of South Africa." Ripple Effect?
The move formally clears the way for South Africa to participate in all Olympic events and is expected to lead to renewed international participation by South Africa in other, non-Olympic sports, like rugby and cricket, from which it has been banned because of its past policies of racial segregation.


Mental Tests for Spira
HOWARD SPIRA, who was convicted of trying to extort money from GEORGE STEINBRENNER, was ordered yesterday to undergo a psychiatric evaluation.
United States District Judge LOUIS L. STANTON declined a prosecutor's request that he jail Spira before his Sept. 19 sentencing.


Europeans Propose Cut In Farm Output and Aid
The executive commission of the European Community today approved a farm proposal that could restart world trade talks that have been stalled since last December.
The plan, which must still be acted on by the 12 member nations, would revamp the community's agriculture program by slashing production and cutting subsidies to farmers.


Quotation of the Day
"The people in our republics are watching very closely what's going on in Yugoslavia." -- President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  [ A8:2. ]


Phillips Sees Profit Drop
Depressed prices of natural gas and decreased returns from sales of petroleum products and chemicals will lead to lower second-quarter earnings for the Phillips Petroleum Company, officials said.
C.
J.
Silas, the chairman and chief executive, said on Monday that Phillips expected a substantial reduction in earnings compared with the period last year, when net income was reported at $105 million, or 43 cents a share.
Second-quarter earnings will be released in two weeks, the company said.


France Lets NEC Buy 4.7% of Groupe Bull
Despite past tough talk about Japan from France's Prime Minister, Groupe Bull said today that the NEC Corporation of Japan would be allowed to acquire 4.7 percent of the state-owned computer maker.
The case has been considered a test of the new French Government's attitude toward Japan.
Although the Prime Minister, Edith Cresson, had earlier expressed hesitation, the Government will allow NEC to swap a 15 percent stake in Bull's international affiliate for 4.7 percent of the parent company.
Groupe Bull, formally known as Compagnie des Machines Groupe Bull, is 93 percent owned by the French Government.


2 Court Rulings On Monarch Life
A Massachusetts court has issued two seemingly contradictory rulings about the fate of the Monarch Life Insurance Company, which was placed in receivership last month just before its former parent, Monarch Capital, filed for bankruptcy protection.
A group of investors, led by Private Capital Partners Inc., had said it wanted to buy Monarch Life.


Cats and Clout
Any cat owner knows how it happens.
You see this tabby all wet and shivering in an alleyway and you can't stand the sight of so much misery so you bring him indoors.
Next a neighbor arrives and says, "Esmeralda sneaked out before I had a chance to get her spayed and now she's got the cutest kittens and won't you please,
please
take one."
Then your child comes in with the calico she saved from drowning and asks, "Can you imagine anyone being horrible enough to get rid of this cat?" Finally the ginger tom who was the tabby's best friend takes to mewing piteously at your back door and . . .
There!
You have just exceeded the maximum number of cats or dogs that the Syracuse, N.Y., City Planning Commission would allow.


BASEBALL: Midseason Reflections on the Good, the Bad and the Mediocre; National League: The Effect of Free Agents
The Chicago Cubs spent $25 million on three free agents and instantly became the favorite to win the National League East championship.
The San Francisco Giants outdid the Cubs, committing $33 million for three free agents who they believed would help them finish first in the National League West.
Given the developments in the first half of the season, no one should expect to see the Cubs and the Giants play for the pennant in October.
The Los Angeles Dodgers, on the other hand, could wind up in the pennant playoff, in spite of one expensive off-season acquisition and to the delight of another.


Dow Jones &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Page America Group reports earnings for Year to March 31


Word of Iraqi Nuclear Effort Is a Mixed Blessing for Bush
Iraq's disclosure that it has embarked on a secret program to enrich uranium that could be used to make a nuclear weapon has left the Bush Administration both heartened and dismayed.
President Bush and some other senior officials initially interpreted the admission as a positive indication that Iraq was responding to American threats of renewed military strikes and capitulating to the stringent terms of the United Nations cease-fire that requires the destruction of Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and long-range ballistic missiles.


Dinkins Bill On Guns Is Delayed By Council
The power of the gun lobby appeared to have made itself felt in City Hall yesterday as the Councilman sponsoring a bill to ban the sale and possession of assault weapons in New York made a highly unusual, last-minute maneuver to delay further consideration of the bill.
The Councilman, Joseph F. Lisa of Queens, made his request two hours after hundreds of hissing and booing pro-gun lobbyists filled City Council chambers for a hearing on the bill.
But Mr.
Lisa said the timing was coincidental.
Dinkins administration officials, however, raised the question of whether the Council leadership had succumbed to the powerful gun lobby, which has opposed similar legislation in other cities and at the Federal level.


Public &amp; Private; Strong Man Weeps
This is not Cheryl Tiegs in Lycra and lipliner.
The cover of Sports Illustrated is a photographic portrait of Lyle Alzado, former N.F.L. defensive end and current chemotherapy patient.
What's left of his bushy hair is hidden beneath a bandanna with skulls printed on it.
Someone made fun of the bandanna when Mr.
Alzado drove into a gas station with his wife not long ago.
"I wanted to beat him up," recalls the man who once looked as if he ate live badgers for breakfast, "but Kathy reminded me I wasn't strong enough."
The cover line is "I Lied," and the sad story inside is about a body made bigger, stronger and tougher with steroids and human growth hormone.
The drugs gave him a career, and now, Mr.
Alzado believes, they've given him brain cancer.
It turns out that professional football uses special effects just as surely as "Terminator 2" does.


Appeal Court Upholds Ex-Judge's Conviction
A Federal appeals court upheld the Senate's impeachment conviction of former Federal District Judge Walter L. Nixon Jr. today, rejecting his effort to gain reinstatement.
Mr.
Nixon, of Mississippi, was convicted by the Senate in November 1989 of lying to a grand jury.
He contended that the Senate had failed to give him a full hearing.


LEBANESE TROOPS FLUSH OUT REBELS
Lebanese troops cordoned off neighborhoods in this southern Lebanese port today and stormed suspected hideouts in a search for arms and guerrillas after they dismantled the Palestine Liberation Organization's major stronghold in southern Lebanon.
Hundreds of Sidon residents turned up at arms-collection centers and handed in their weapons.
Thousands of machine guns and other weapons were collected.


Schulman (A.) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Communications World International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Economic Scene; More Fishing, Fewer Fish
IN medieval European villages the common pastures belonged to everyone -- and thus, economists love to explain, to no one.
Overgrazed and poorly drained, the land was far less productive than privately held acreage.
This "tragedy of the commons" has an obvious modern parallel in the perilous neglect of the world's tropical rain forests.
But according to Eleanor Dorsey, a staff scientist at the Conservation Foundation of New England, common ownership also explains an economic and environmental mess that is closer to home.


Andover Togs reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Scott's Hospitality reports earnings for Year to April 30


James Franciscus Is Dead at 57; Played Lead Roles on TV Series
James Franciscus, who starred in the television series "Naked City," "Mr. Novak" and "Longstreet," died on Monday night at the Medical Center of North Hollywood.
He was 57 years old.
He died of emphysema, his press agent, Phil Paladino, said.


Leonard Harris, 68, Who Headed Corporate Relations at The Times
Leonard R. Harris, retired director of corporate relations and public affairs for The New York Times Company and a former executive in book and encyclopedia publishing, died yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart arrhythmia, his family said.


Cesar Ortiz Tinoco, U.N. Official, 75
Cesar Ortiz Tinoco, a senior information officer for the United Nations for 30 years, died on June 17 at his home in Ealing in west London.
He was 75 years old.
His death of a hemorrhage from a gastric ulcer became known in New York yesterday from a family member.


George P. Hunt, 72, A Top Time Inc. Editor
George P. Hunt, an artist and writer who was a former managing editor of Life magazine, died on Saturday at his home in Hobe Sound, Fla.
He was 72 years old.
He died of cancer, a spokesman for Life said.


How Much to Uncork a Wine? You Can't Afford Not to Find Out
A YOUNG Manhattan lawyer called Le Cirque recently to ask if one of his guests could bring two special wines to dinner and pay a corkage fee.
The restaurant agreed, and the three dined that evening with their own wines, a 1970 Chambertin and a 1971 Chateau Latour.
It was a resplendent experience -- until the bill came.
"I looked at the corkage fee and it was $100!" said the lawyer, who said he was so embarassed by the incident that he would speak only on the condition of anonymity.
"I almost fell off my chair."


Building an Electric Car: New Battery May Do It
Battery manufacturers, who have long been working with traditional lead-acid batteries to develop electric cars, have found that other chemical combinations might provide greater range.
Researchers have predicted that batteries made from several other formulas -- like sodium and sulfur, or lithium, aluminum and iron sulfide -- could have a range of more than 300 miles on a single charge, or twice that of lead-acid batteries.


Los Angeles Issue Leads Calendar
A $240 million offering of tax and revenue anticipation notes by the Los Angeles Unified School District highlighted yesterday's competitive calendar of new issues.
In the bidding for the notes, a group of underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation was awarded the bulk of the issue, about $120 million, with a group led by J. P. Morgan winning $70 million and group led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company winning $50 million.


South Africa Is Most Competitive in Track
If South Africa were to compete in the Olympics tomorrow, there is little doubt that its biggest impact would be in track and field.
South African athletes, although away from the international spotlight and competition for several decades, have managed to maintain world-class levels in a number of running events and may figure as medalists at the world championships in Tokyo next month or the Barcelona Olympics in 1992.


Of Ebinger's . . .
To The Living Section:
What wonderful memories Molly O'Neill's article on Ebinger's  [ "The Cake Box From Heaven (Brooklyn, of Course,) Is Back," June 5 ]  brought back to me.
I moved to Westchester over 30 years ago, but when I made my forays back to Brooklyn to visit my parents, my car somehow was filled with dozens of Ebinger's cakes (mostly blackout) requested by my friends.


TRW Sued on Ratings Unit
Six states have sued TRW Inc., contending that its credit-rating subsidiary secretly judged consumers on their bill-paying ability and sold confidential information from its data base on 170 million Americans.
"TRW is masquerading as a mere library of credit histories, when in fact it is secretly rating the creditworthiness of consumers," Attorney General Robert Abrams of New York said yesterday.
"TRW has a legal obligation to disclose to consumers its true role in the credit-granting process."


Indian Parliament Opens in a Bleak Mood
Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao being greeted as he arrived yesterday for the opening of Parliament in New Delhi.
Among the problems facing the 71-year-old Mr.
Rao, who is ailing, are: the most severe economic crisis in the nation's 44-year history; the worst religious strife in years; violent separatist movements in the Punjab, Kashmir and Assam; unceasing and crushing poverty and illiteracy, and a vote of confidence Friday on his minority Government. (Associated Press)


IP Timberlands Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
France's Prime Minister, EDITH CRESSON, who recently caused a stir by suggesting that English men do not appreciate women because one in four of them is homosexual, has struck a more conciliatory note, conceding that women in England enjoy greater freedom than those in France.
"The English have always been more advanced in recognizing the rights of women," she told reporters on Monday.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Top-Seeded Lundgren Beats Brown Peter Lundgren of Monte Carlo, seeded No. 1, served 14 aces on the way to a 6-2, 6-0 victory over Jimmy Brown yesterday in the first round of the Hall of Fame Tennis Championships at Newport, R.I.
Fifth-seeded Cristo van Rensburg of South Africa defeated Simon Youl of Australia, 6-1, 3-6, 6-3, and No. 7 Javier Frana of Argentina downed a qualifier, Tom Mercer of Pittsburgh, 7-5, 6-2. (AP)


Of Ebinger's . . . and Blackout Cake
To The Living Section:
When I turned to the front page of The Living Section I gasped.
Alarmed, my 6-year-old son asked, "What's the matter, Mom?"


Educational Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Electronics and Music Companies Near Accord on Digital Recording
The music and consumer electronics industries are close to reaching a landmark agreement on digital home recording that is likely to broaden the market for one of the most advanced technologies in the music business.
Under the agreement, the electronics industry for the first time would pay royalties to the music industry, including songwriters, music publishers and record companies, to compensate for sales lost to recordings made at home on digital audio recorders.


Kellogg Cereal Has New Name
The Kellogg Company said today that it was changing the name of its Heartwise cereal to Fiberwise at the urging of the Food and Drug Administration.
The agency's policy discourages the use of the word "heart" in brand names, and Federal regulators have questioned the safety of consuming the primary ingredient, psyllium, in breakfast cereal.
Psyllium, grown in India, is 80 percent soluble fiber, compared with 10 percent for the other ingredient used in the cereal, oat bran.
Psyllium is used as a laxative in several products.


Bridge
One of the saddest moments in the game occurs when a defender does something truly brilliant and his partner fails to play his part.
An expert who produces a remarkable number of brilliant plays, and is therefore very sensitive on the matter, is the Brazilian Gabriel Chagas, who has won two major world titles in the last two years.
He used this as the theme of his winning entry in the 1990 Bols Bridge Tips contest, and offered the diagramed deal as an example.
West is defending three no-trump, reached after South has opened one spade and North has bid and rebid diamonds.


Housing the Poor, Sensibly
Low-income housing is in short supply, and state and local governments are in no shape to help.
That makes vital today's vote by a Senate subcommittee on HOME, a new low-income housing program.
HOME authorizes block grants to states and localities on a matching basis.
And it gives authorities great flexibility to use the money for rehabilitation, construction or rental assistance.
The question before the committee is how much to spend on HOME.
The House has approved $500 million, barely enough to get started.
Rehabilitation can cost $25,000 or more per unit; new construction $60,000 or more.
Even after state and local authorities chip in their share, the House allocation won't make much of a dent.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 5
June 28
July 6
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.2
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.9
3.1
Gasoline stocks
216.2
219.2
213.6
Distillate stocks
112.9
113.6
112.7
Crude imports, daily
5.6
6.7
6.2
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.4
2.3
Crude stocks
350.2
349.1
380.6
Crude production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
88.4
89.6
92.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Condiment Explosion Causes Embarrassment of Mustards
ROBERT ROTHSCHILD, a former engineer from California, has been growing raspberries on a 176-acre farm in Urbana, Ohio, for 15 years.
Since the early 1980's, he has been turning them into an assortment of sweet and savory condiments.
This year he has added a new flavor to his line of mustards, raspberry crunch.


Edward Murray, 75, A Claims Judge in Troy
Edward W. Murray, a retired judge of the New York State Court of Claims, died on Sunday at the Lahey Clinic in Burlington, Mass.
He was 75 years old and lived in Troy, N.Y.
Judge Murray died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


B.C.C.I. Liquidation Hearing Is Set
Britain's High Court today moved up the hearing date for liquidation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, whose units were shut down on Friday amid allegations of widespread fraud.
Touche Ross &amp; Company, the accounting firm the court appointed as liquidator, said the Bank of England had petitioned the court to move the hearing up from October.
The court set a hearing date of July 22.


Ballard Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Where Seltzer Once Thrived, A Few True Fizzes Remain
IN the world according to seltzer connoisseurs, this is the year 20 A.P.
Two decades have elapsed since plastic bottles with screw caps began to replace the blue or green glass bottles with hand-operated siphons that are to a lively seltzer what a flared cork is to a proper bottle of Champagne.
In the years B.P. (Before Plastic), sales held their own.
After Plastic (A.P.), sales of sparkling water geysered.
There are now high-priced imports.
There is orange, lemon, lime and raspberry seltzer.


CHRONICLE
BETTY SHABAZZ is suing a New York publisher on grounds of copyright infringement, charging improper use of the writings of her late husband, Malcolm X. The suit, filed Monday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, names Writers &amp; Readers Inc. and ABDUL ALKALIMAT, the author of "Malcolm X for Beginners," which Writers &amp; Readers published this year.
Dr.
Shabazz, director of communications for Medgar Evers College in Brooklyn, who holds the copyright, and Pathfinder Press, a division of 408 Printing and Publishing , which has exclusive publishing rights to Malcolm X material, contend that Mr.
Alkalimat's book includes writings by Malcolm X used without permission.


Big Oil Find in Colombia
A consortium of three foreign petroleum companies has discovered a giant deposit of crude oil and natural gas in central Colombia, the state oil company, Ecopetrol, has confirmed.
The company did not estimate the petroleum reserves at the Cusiana 2 field, 93 miles northeast of Bogota, but Colombian news reports have quoted oil officials as saying that the field could contain as many as one billion barrels of recoverable oil and gas.
Until now, the biggest Colombian petroleum discovery has been the Cano Limon field on the border of Venezuela.


Rehabcare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Hess, Homosexuality and the Third Reich
To the Editor:
In "British Files Hide Truth About Hess Plot" (letter, June 21), Wolf Rudiger Hess, the son of Rudolf Hess, alleges that ascribing homosexuality to his father was one of the K.G.B.'s "last-ditch efforts to humiliate the Third Reich."


Carom Capital Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Oneok Inc. reports earnings for 12mos to March 31


Excerpts From Report on Los Angeles Police
Following are excerpts from a report today by an independent commission harshly criticizing the Los Angeles Police Department for excessive force and overt racism and urging replacement of Chief Daryl F. Gates:
The commission found that there is a significant number of officers in the L.A.P.D. who repetitively use excessive force against the public and persistently ignore the written guidelines of the department regarding force.
This finding is documented and confirmed, from several perspectives, by the detailed analyses of documents and statistics performed by the commission.
Our computerized study of the complaints filed in recent years shows a strong concentration of allegations against a problem group of officers.
A comparable study of the use of force reports reveals a similar concentration.


Safety-Kleen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


Dollar Increases Slightly; Gold Declines Moderately
The dollar edged higher yesterday as traders expressed some optimism in advance of this week's meeting of Germany's central bank.
Gold fell moderately, dropping $1.50 an ounce, to $369.40, on New York's Commodity Exchange.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $369.00 an ounce, off $1.20 from late Monday.


Brooklyn Murder Suspect Flees Jail a 2d Time
A murder suspect escaped from a maximum-security cell in a Brooklyn jail after making a dummy of wadded-up clothes and leaving it under the tattered woolen blanket on his cot, prison officials said yesterday.
It was the second time that the 26-year-old inmate, Edward (Donny) White, had escaped from custody.
The last time he did, he killed a man during a robbery, the police said.


Lima Journal; Bars Do Not a Prison Make, but What of Dogma?
The line forms early Sunday morning outside Lima's maximum-security prison, Canto Grande.
It is visiting day.
After passing three checkpoints, getting fingerprinted and searched, friends and relatives of the inmates pass through a labyrinth of corridors that reek of human waste and are filled with male prisoners, many in tattered clothes, shouting catcalls and begging for handouts.


Yugoslav Marriage Needs a Trial Separation
To the Editor:
In "Psychodrama in Yugoslavia" (Op Ed, June 27), Srdja Popovic portrays the popular movement in Slovenia and Croatia as a manifestation of dangerous and irrational needs of adolescent nations.
In his view, these movements must be repressed or contained by force of more mature statesmen.
He fails to address the question of whether or not these psychological needs have roots in serious and justifiable grievances.


Lawsuit Dismissed On Discrimination In Housing on L.I.
Finding that the statute of limitations had expired, a Federal judge has dismissed a suit filed by a Hispanic resident of Island Park, L.I., who charged that he was rejected for a Federally subsidized house because of discrimination.
The plaintiff, Richard Rodriguez, filed the suit after The New York Times reported in June 1989 that a Department of Housing and Urban Development audit had accused Island Park officials of rigging the selection to favor politically connected villagers and to keep out minorities.


Hilton Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mother and Companion Charged in Beating of Boys
Two small boys who had apparently been severely beaten lay in a Brooklyn hospital yesterday with head injuries, bruises and burns, while their 23-year-old mother and her boyfriend were arraigned on charges of child abuse, the police said.
One child, a 1-year-old, was in critical condition in the intensive-care unit of Woodhull Hospital with a wound to the back of his skull, the police and hospital officials said.
His 2-year-old brother was in serious condition.
The police did not identify either child by name.


Faulty Software Code Is Cited in Phone Disruptions
A manufacturer of telephone call-routing computers said today that a defect in three or four lines of computer code, rather than a hacker or a computer "virus," apparently caused a spate of breakdowns that disrupted local telephone service for 10 million customers around the country in late June and early this month.
In Congressional testimony today, an official of the manufacturer, DSC Communications of Plano, Tex., said all the problems had been traced to recent upgrades in its software, which had not been thoroughly tested for hidden flaws.


What the West May Offer
The summit nations are likely to promise the Soviet Union aid that would not be costly but would foster a free-market democracy.
Page A8.


Sports of The Times; With a Grin, Morris Foils 'Star' Hex
Jack Morris got up smiling.
Later, when the X-rays of his right foot showed only a bruise, his smile was even wider.
But for about two hours last night, the 36-year-old right-hander and the Minnesota Twins wondered if he had joined Ted Williams and Dizzy Dean as All-Star Game casualties.
Morris, the American League's starter pitcher with a 11-6 record for the West Division leaders, was struck on the outside of his right foot by Bobby Bonilla's run-scoring line-drive single in the first inning.
Morris tumbled to the Skydome's artificial turf, but arose with a smile.
He continued to pitch through the second inning of the game, which the A.L. went on to win, 4-2, on Cal Ripken's three-run homer off Dennis Martinez.


Health Dept. Has Data Analysis by ZIP Code
To the Editor:
According to your interview with New York City's Health Commissioner, Woodrow A. Myers Jr., on his departure from the Department of Health and the city (news article, June 10), Dr.
Myers said that his agency has not computerized medical records, nor could it readily answer how many tuberculosis cases have come from a certain ZIP code.


BRIEFS
*
British Airways P.L.C., London, said it would resume flights to Tehran on July 21. *
Cyprus Minerals Co., Englewood, Colo., said Mitsubishi Corp., Tokyo, had bought 15 percent of its Cyprus Orchard Valley Coal Corp. unit.
No price was disclosed.


Yugoslav Army Threatens Truce, 2 Republics Say
Leaders in Slovenia and Croatia expressed deep doubts today over whether the Yugoslav Army would respect a European Community-brokered compromise under which the two separatist republics agreed to suspend their moves for independence.
Citing new troop movements and tension in Serbian-populated areas of Croatia, the separatist leaders expressed their concerns about the army's role as Slovenian legislators prepared for a vote on the compromise accord Wednesday.


Corrections
A picture caption Friday about a plan to transform People's Park in Berkeley, Calif., into a more traditional park misidentified, in some copies, the site shown.
It was an empty lot near the park, where banners were being hung announcing Fourth of July events at the park.


Goodyear's Celeron To Furlough 48
The Celeron Corporation, the crude-oil pipeline subsidiary of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, said it would furlough 48 workers, more than one-fifth of its work force of 218 people.
George Hargreaves, president and chief executive of Celeron, said the reductions were part of what the company called "an intense evaluation of every department." He added that the move wouid result in "a substantial cost savings that is essential as the company moves toward profitability."


Colt Is Favored To Win Pace
Artsplace, who has won all five of his starts this season, was installed as the even-money favorite today at the draw for the $1 million Meadowlands Pace on Friday night.
Artsplace, the top 2-year-old pacing colt in 1990, will be an entry with Nuclear Legacy in the race for 3-year-old colts and fillies.
Both horses are trained by Gene Riegle.


Officer Quits Nomura Unit
Michael A. Berman has resigned as head of the government trading and sales operations at Nomura Securities International Inc.
The 40-year-old executive had been one of the highest- ranking American executives at the New York firm, which is owned by the Nomura Securities Company, the Japanese brokerage house currently involved in a scandal.


Personal Health
DO you come home from work physically or emotionally drained with little energy or enthusiasm left for dealing with family or personal matters?
Do you find it hard to get out of bed in the morning knowing what you face at work that day?


International Paper reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Moscow Festival Opens With U.S. Film
More than 2,500 Muscovites and foreign film buffs attended the opening of the 17th Moscow International Film Festival Monday night at the Rossiya Entertainment Center, the Soviet press agency Tass reported.
A total of 21 films from 20 countries were submitted in the competition, although only two American films being shown here because of a boycott by the Motion Picture Association of America to protest the pirating of American films in the Soviet Union.


House Acts On Radio Channels
The House of Representatives voted unanimously today to approve a bill that would transfer a large swath of frequencies on the crowded radio spectrum from Government and military uses to new commercial technologies like pocket telephones and computers that transmit over the air.
A similar bill has strong support in the Senate and is considered likely to pass this year.
But the White House has threatened a veto, principally because the Administration insists that any newly liberated frequencies should be parceled out through auctions to the highest bidders.


Clean Needles and AIDS
Free distribution of clean needles to drug addicts is limiting the spread of AIDS in big Canadian cities without raising illegal drug use, a new report indicates.
The study was conducted by the Addiction Research Foundation.
Its view contrasts with United States policy, where needle distribution has been opposed or abandoned by officials who fear increased drug use and where activists who give out clean needles have been prosecuted.


Teaching History So That Cultures Are More Than Footnotes
Rami Muth's eighth graders in Benicia, Calif., learn that George Washington was an American hero -- and so were Mercy Otis Warren, Sacajawea, and Absalom Jones.
If those names sound unfamiliar, that is because they are only now being taught to American schoolchildren, as part of a fast-spreading and controversial movement known as multiculturalism.
The idea is to change what children learn by including the contributions, perspectives, and sufferings of diverse ethnic and racial groups.


Bush's Message to Kremlin
Hoping to gently deflate any lingering expectations Mr.
Gorbachev might have about collecting signficant Western aid at the London economic summit next week, President Bush plans to tell the Soviet leader before the meeting that the United States and other Western countries cannot come to the rescue of the stagnant Soviet economy, an Administration official said today.
Mr.
Bush is planning to communicate with the Soviet leader in the next few days, the official said, most likely by letter, so that the United States position is clear before the two men have their lunch in London on July 17, at the close of the economic summit talks.


Stocks Gain in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices were higher at the close of trading today.
The Nikkei index of 225 stocks rose to 23,121.30, up 512.34 points, or 2.27 percent.


Stocks Mixed as Dow Declines by 14.76
Stock prices turned mixed yesterday as investors seemed to shy away from the blue chips and concentrated on some of the smaller high-technology stocks.
Trading picked up just a little.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 14.76 points, to 2,947.23, and the broader Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks fell 1.83, to 376.11.
But the Nasdaq composite rose 4.13, to 483.64, as big money continued to pour into the little over-the-counter stocks.


Doctor Loses Bid for Retrial
A Federal judge has denied a petition for a new trial for a Green Beret doctor convicted more than a decade ago of killing his wife and two daughters.
In a ruling late Monday, Federal District Judge Franklin T. Dupree Jr. said the new evidence presented by the doctor, Jeffrey MacDonald, would not exonerate him.
Mr.
MacDonald is serving three consecutive life terms for the slayings on Feb. 17, 1970.


5 Powers Will Seek Ban On Major Mideast Arms
The United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain and France committed themselves today to the goal of eliminating all weapons of mass destruction from the Middle East.
The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, who are themselves the main arms suppliers to the Middle East, also pledged to observe "rules of restraint" when transferring conventional weapons to their allies in the region.


Burnup &amp; Sims Inc. reports earnings for Year to April 30


Burlington Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Eating Well
WHEN the Center for Science in the Public Interest opened its doors in 1971, it was dismissed by some as a repository of radical hippies who wore long hair and blue jeans and didn't have their facts straight.
But it didn't take long for the food industry and the Federal Government to realize that the center, a Washington-based consumer advocacy group that monitors nutrition and health policy, was making an impact on the public's perception of what it eats.


Bid by United For Pan Am Routes Seen
United Airlines is expected to make a proposal today to buy Pan Am's Latin American and Caribbean routes as well as some of the carrier's European routes in which Delta Air Lines has already expressed an interest, industry executives said yesterday.
The offer could touch off a bidding war between United and Delta.
Delta has said that it is not interested in the Latin American and Caribbean routes but that it wants Pan Am's European routes, shuttle service and 45 airplanes.
Delta currently serves some major European cities and is particularly strong in Germany.


David H. Wright Dies; New York Saddler, 81
David H. Wright, a former New York saddlery owner, died on Monday at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 81 years old.
Mr.
Wright died from an infection, the cause of which was not yet known, his daughter Bonnie said yesterday.


Structural Dynamics Research reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Benefit of the Young, the Mean Streets Are Tamed


Guilty Plea May Harm C.I.A. Pick
In 20 minutes of courtroom time, the independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair today punctured a barrier of silence that had insulated three of the Central Intelligence Agency's senior officials from the scandal's taint for five years.
The question now becomes who else in the top ranks of the C.I.A. and the Reagan Administration might have known of the affair, and who else might have concealed it.


EXECUTIVES
*
Cambrex Corp., East Rutherford, N.J., a chemicals company, named Burton M. Rein president of its fine chemicals group. *
Carolyne Roehm Inc., New York, a fashion company, named Kitty D'Alessio president and chief executive.


Reeds Jewelers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Big Losses At Sabena
Sabena S.A., the troubled Belgian airline, today posted huge losses for last year and for the first four months of this year, but said it finally made a profit in April.


Grave of Boy Who Led Fight On AIDS Bias Is Vandalized
For the fourth time in a little more than a year, vandals have desecrated the grave of Ryan White, the 18-year-old AIDS victim who gained worldwide recognition by fighting discrimination against those with the disease.
The police said Monday that Ryan's 6-foot 8-inch gravestone at the Cicero Cemetery was toppled sometime Friday night or Saturday morning.
Previously, vandals had used paint or uprooted flowers, the police said.


Violence and Racism Are Routine In Los Angeles Police, Study Says
A little more than four months after a videotaped beating of a black motorist by Los Angeles police officers stirred national outrage, an independent commission today issued a harsh indictment of the Los Angeles Police Department as an agency that has tolerated excessive force and overt racism among its officers.
The commission also called for the replacement of the police chief, Daryl F. Gates, but stopped short of asking for his immediate ouster.
It said the department should begin the "transition" to a new chief, but Chief Gates, who has led the 8,450-member force for 13 years, quickly rebuffed the suggestion that he retire soon.  'Illusory' Citizen Control
While the report said most of city's police officers worked efficiently and without excessive force, it found "a significant number" who "repetitively use excessive force against the public and persistently ignore the written guidelines of the department regarding force."


CHRONICLE
Mayor JEAN DORE of Montreal, and his New York City counterpart, DAVID N. DINKINS met in New York yesterday to discuss a meeting of mayors from 27 of the world's major cities in October in Montreal.
The mayors are to draw up an environmental strategy for urban issues like air and water pollution, waste disposal, mass transit and new energy sources, detailing financial and social impact.
The findings are to be presented to the United Nations Conference on the Environment and Development, to be held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.
The theme of the Montreal talks will be sustainable development, Mr.
Dore said.
"Urban issues are inseparable from environmental issues," he said at a news conference.


Fed Decides Not to Trim Money Targets
Signaling that a strong recovery from the recession is at least as high a priority as reduced inflation, Federal Reserve policy makers voted last week not to change their target range for growth in the nation's money supply next year.
The decision, made behind closed doors at a two-day meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on July 2 and 3, was confirmed today by Government officials.


Low-fat Diets
To The Living Section:
Marian Burros reports in her Eating Well column of May 22 that women who eat low-fat diets lose weight without restricting calories, and that this disproves the set point theory of weight.
We all need to remember that this dietary change lasted less than three months.
Even the planned six-month study will not be sufficient to disprove the set point theory.


Texas Refunding Tentatively Priced
A $72.6 million refunding by the Texas Municipal Power Agency was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The maximum yield was 7.125 percent for a 6.75 percent bond due in 2012 that was priced at about 95.933.
The shorter-maturity refunding revenue bonds are priced to yield from 4.75 percent in 1992 to 6 percent in 1996, 6.5 percent in 2001 and 6.9 percent in 2005.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE INDIAN OCEAN -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Amid Protest, Kuwait Seeks To Bolster Its Royal Family
With a call for cooperation among rival political factions, the Kuwaiti Government convened a national council today whose deliberations are meant to provide legitimacy to the ruling royal family as it struggles with divisive social, economic and national security decisions.
Even before the council convened, opposition groups rejected the Government's approach out of hand.
Defying a ban on political meetings, they held a protest rally on Monday night to declare the national council fraudulent, insisting again on an immediate return to the constitutional parliamentary system that the royal family abolished by decree five years ago.


Dinkins Plans to Visit South Africa in Fall
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he would visit South Africa in late September or early October, returning the visit of Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, to New York City last year.
Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch said an itinerary remains to be worked out.
He said tentative plans called for the Mayor and a delegation of labor, business and government leaders to make about a 10-day trip to South Africa and perhaps other African countries, with a stop in Rome on the way back.
The trip is to be financed with private money.


New Sewage Culprits In New York Found In the Public Sector
Hidden along the muddied banks and rotting piers of New York City's miles of shoreline, city officials have discovered dozens of storm pipes illegally spewing millions of gallons of raw sewage a day into local waterways.
And behind the pollution, city and state officials say, are some unlikely culprits.
Among them: the United States Army, the New York Power Authority and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


Book Notes
Vacancies Aplenty
Looking for a senior job in publishing on the editorial or marketing side?
Try Penguin USA, a somewhat beleaguered house.


Condo Workers Win Bias Case On Ethnic Slurs
Three Egyptian-Americans who worked as elevator operators at a luxury condominium building in Manhattan have been awarded $10,000 each for suffering "almost daily ethnic slurs" from a supervisor, officials of the New York City Commission on Human Rights said yesterday.
The workers were called "camel jockeys," told that Muslims are "dirty people" and were regularly threatened with deportation, the panel said.
One of the complainants testified that the supervisor ridiculed his Arabic speech, saying, "Akala hakala." The abuse continued over several years.


Suntrust Banks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Tiniest, Kindest Cut of All
Tiny video cameras, scissors, staplers and other instruments small enough to slip through quarter- and half-inch incisions are not only revolutionizing surgery, but also bringing major savings.
Removing an inflamed gallbladder by traditional methods can require $10,000, a six-inch incision through the stomach and four or five days in the hospital, followed by weeks of painful recovery.
Thanks to the new instruments, tens of thousands of patients have gone home from the hospital after one night with only a few tiny cuts to heal, often returning to work in a few days.
The cost often drops to $5,000.


William Marvel, 81, Judge in Delaware's Bias Cases of 1950's
William Marvel, a judge in the Delaware Court of Chancery who ruled in several important racial cases in his 28 years on the bench, died on June 28 at his home in Wilmington, Del.
He was 81 years old.
He died of complications from Parkinson's disease, said his daughter, Cary Mabley.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL National League ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Placed Pedro Guerrero, first baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
FOOTBALL National Football League CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Agreed to terms with Antoine Bennett, cornerback.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Tyrone Braxton, cornerback, to a series of one-year contracts.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed Buford Jordan and Bobby Morse, fullbacks, to one-year contracts; Hayward Haynes, guard, to a two-year contract; and Kirk Maggio, punter, to a one-year contract.
GOLF T.C.
JORDAN TOUR -- Named Eric Gerdes assistant tournament director and Skip Roach operations director.
HOCKEY National Hockey League NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Named Robbie Ftorek assistant coach.
COLLEGE JAMES MADISON -- Named Christy Morgan men's field hockey coach.
JERSEY CITY STATE -- Named John Stallings sports information director.
RUTGERS-NEWARK -- Named Don Weibel wrestling coach.


Yugoslavia Advances Suit Against Drexel
The central bank of Yugoslavia won an important battle in a lawsuit against Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and some of its top executives in a court ruling that appears to expand the scope of Federal securities laws.
The ruling, reached late Monday by Federal District Judge Louis L. Stanton, clears the way for the securities fraud suit against the present and former officers of Drexel.
The ruling denied a motion to dismiss the case that argued that an investment by the bank with Drexel was not a security, but rather a short-term note governed by other laws.


Vivigen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr o June 30


Senator Danforth and the Snipers
Slicing through all those White House slogans about racial quotas, Senator John Danforth at last makes clear what's at stake in the fight over the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1991.
The Bush Administration wants to let employers insist on job qualifications that have nothing to do with one's ability to do the job.
A company could require a janitor to have a high school diploma.
Or an employer could refuse to hire single parents.
In the Missouri Senator's words, the Administration's competing bill "would create an opportunity for businesses to screen out blacks, to screen out women, to screen out other minorities," without leaving a trace of intentional bias.


Airline Entrepreneur Faces Daunting Task
As he sets out to create a new airline from the scraps of the bankrupt Eastern Airlines, John R. Mitchell acknowledges that he is contending with heavy skepticism.
"If everyone could see the heart of the deal and could know everything we know, they wouldn't be so skeptical," Mr.
Mitchell said yesterday, one day after announcing plans to invest $550 million to start up an airline to serve 12 East Coast cities from Atlanta beginning in November.


Regulators Examining Global Bank's Crash
Banking regulators in Britain and the United States are trying to assess the wreckage left behind by the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
In the United States, senior banking regulators are considering whether to oust Clark M. Clifford and Robert Altman from the management of First American Bankshares, the Washington bank holding company controlled by B.C.C.I.
Mr.
Clifford, a prominent Washington lawyer, has been chairman of the company since 1982, when Middle Eastern investors bought control of First American, which has banks in five states and the District of Columbia.
Mr.
Altman is Mr.
Clifford's law partner.


G.M. Speeds Airbag Introduction
The General Motors Corporation said today that it was stepping up its program to install airbags and anti-lock braking systems in its North American-built vehicles.
G.M. plans to offer driver-side airbags by the fall of 1994 and anti-lock brakes by the mid-1990's on all its vehicles sold in North America, Lloyd Reuss, G.M.'s president, said at G.M.'s test track here.
They will be phased in for mini-vans by the fall of 1993, Mr.
Reuss said.


Willis Corroon To Shift Bases
The London-based insurance broker Willis Corroon P.L.C. plans to move its American headquarters and the global base for two of its main businesses from New York to Nashville, the company said today.
Nashville will become world headquarters for Willis Corroon's retail brokerage unit and for W. F. Corroon, the group's benefits, consulting and specialty sales operation, the company said in a statement.


New York Losing Weapons Against Poverty
New York City's new budget means that Ethany E. Watley, an 80-year-old widow who uses a wheelchair because of arthritis, no longer has a daily lunch delivered to her home in East Harlem.
It means that Trina McNair, a young mother who lives in Brooklyn, lost the caseworker who helped her get prenatal care and who would have found day care for her newborn twins.


Market Place; On NCNB's Bid, a Waiting Game
As merger battles go, the NCNB Corporation's effort to acquire the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation seems to be taking place in slow motion.
In the two weeks since NCNB's merger overtures became public, there has been little public response from the target corporation, and little news from the would-be acquirer.
The stock market, meantime, has settled down to a waiting game, with C&amp;S/Sovran shares trading at discounts of about 10 percent to 15 percent from the value of the NCNB shares being offered.


Pathe Files Countersuit
The Pathe Communicatons Corporation has filed a counterclaim in a Delaware court aginst Credit Lyonnais Bank Nederland N.V., seeking to restore the management role of Giancarlo Parretti at the MGM-Pathe Communications Company, the company's Hollywood studio subsidiary.
In April, the bank successfully sued to impose restrictions on Mr.
Parretti, The bank, a large creditor, contends that Mr.
Parretti is still involving himself in MGM-Pathe.


BASEBALL: Midseason Reflections on the Good, the Bad and the Mediocre; American League: Blue Jays Break Away
Until the last couple of weeks, it was difficult to understand why the Boston Red Sox and the Toronto Blue Jays had not broken away from the rest of the American League's weaker Eastern Division and established a scintillating two-team race.
Now, at the All-Star Game break, it is clear that the Blue Jays have broken away from the rest of the division and created a dominance, which won't make for much excitement at all if they increase their lead in the two weeks after the break as much as they did in the two weeks before it.


Cotton Prices Drop Sharply; Slight Rises Posted for Oil
Prices of cotton futures fell sharply yesterday on the New York Cotton Exchange as new data supported perceptions of rising supplies.
Cotton futures settled 1.1 cent to the permitted daily limit of 2 cents lower, with the contract for delivery in October down 2 cents at 70.53 cents a pound.
The July contract expired at midday at 70.35 cents, representing a 26 percent decline from the 10-year high of 94.45 cents reached seven weeks earlier on May 21.


Enron Subsidiary In British Venture
The Enron Power Corporation, a unit of the Enron Corporation, and Eastern Generation Ltd., a unit of Eastern Electricity P.L.C. of Britain, signed an agreement to develop and operate a 380-megawatt, gas-fired power plant in England.
The project, valued at more than $300 million, is to begin by early next year, pending Government and regulatory approvals, the companies said.


Prices of Treasury Securities Fall
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday and long-term bond yields moved back above 8.5 percent for the first time since mid-November, as dealers began to position themselves for an auction today of a record $9 billion worth of new seven-year Treasury notes.
"There have been some bad seven-year auctions in the past, and it looks like the market is trying to build in some sort of a cushion to protect against that," said Joseph Liro, a senior vice president and money-market economist at S. G. Warburg &amp; Company.


Incumbent's Edge
To the Editor:
Norman Ornstein's "Reforming Campaign Reform" (Op-Ed, June 25) misses one piece.


Yields Mixed On C.D.'s and Bank Funds
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were mixed for the week ended yesterday.
According to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest-rate publication, fewer financial institutions are lowering rates.
For example, last week the New York, Chicago, San Francisco and Boston market averages for six-month certificate were unchanged from the week before, while movements in other markets were only one basis point up and down.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Review/Television; 50 Years of Channel 2: More Than Lights And Wires in a Box
Celebrating its 50th anniversary, New York City's Channel 2 has put together its own birthday card in the form of an hourlong documentary.
"50 Years Together: Channel 2 and You" can be seen tonight at 9 o'clock.
This is a celebration, no doubt about it.
Touchy moments in the station's history are either skimmed over lightly or just ignored.
But the collection of highlights, packaged with time-capsule skill, encompasses an often fascinating review of both television and New York City.
Channel 2 first went on the air in July 1941, just five months before the United States would enter World War II, with the call letters WCBW.
Only 400 New Yorkers had television sets to receive the station's 15 hours of programming each week.
The first broadcast, lasting 15 minutes, offered glimpses of paintings from the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
In 1948, William S. Paley purchased the station to launch the CBS Television Network.
Television as we know it today began to evolve.
And as Jim Jensen, co-host with Michele Marsh for tonight's program, puts it: "Rembrandt it is not."


Simon &amp; Schuster to Absorb Prentice Hall Press Division
Simon &amp; Schuster announced yesterday the elimination of Prentice Hall Press as a separate imprint for general interest books.
Charles E. Hayward, the president of Simon &amp; Schuster's trade, or general interest, publishing division said that as of Jan. 1, 1992, all books acquired as Prentice Hall Press titles would be published under the Simon &amp; Schuster name.


Catskills Bungalow Killings Shock a Secluded World
The hermetic and ordered life of Lazar and Miriam Papier revolved around their religious faith: reading daily from the Torah, keeping their home kosher and observing religious holidays.
Even on vacation, they stayed in their own world, joining a summer migration of Brooklyn Hasidim to a bungalow community in the Catskills.
It was there that they were bludgeoned to death, their bodies discovered on Monday after Mr.
Papier did not appear for morning prayers.
Another summer resident had gone to find him to fulfill the Jewish requirement that a minyan, a quorum of at least 10 men, be present for the morning service.


Intermetco reports earnings for Year to April 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Arlington, Tex., is offering $30 million in independent school district building loan bonds through Rauscher Pierce Refsnes.
Yields range from 5.5 percent in 1994 to 6.7 percent in 2005.
The bonds are rated triple-A by both Moody's and S.&amp; P. *
Inglewood, Calif., tentatively priced $33 million in certificates of participation yesterday with a maxmum yield of 7.32 percent for an certificate due 2019 through J. P. Morgan.
Shorter maturities yield from 5.1 percent in 1992 to 7.05 percent in 2003.
Other long maturities were priced to yield 7.25 percent in 2011 and 7.27 percent in 2021.
The financing is rated A by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Review/Dance; Royal Ballet Returns With 'Swan Lake'
One thing about the Royal Ballet is that whatever the circumstance, it always musters the pomp to put on a good show.
In this instance, the show is a grand spectacle -- a new "Swan Lake," positively reeking of Art Nouveau decadence, fantasy and eccentricity -- to mark the British company's return to New York on Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
It is no secret that America's favorite ballet troupe from London went into something of an acknowledged decline since its last local appearance in 1983.
But the open secret so blazingly revealed at the beginning of a two-week season with this New York premiere of Anthony Dowell's 1987 production of "Swan Lake" is that it is also now a company renewed.
The dancing, especially by the men and the corps, has fresh vigor, and those who saw the Royal Ballet at the Kennedy Center in Washington in March can look forward to an exciting group of young dancers in this engagement's three programs.


Flowers Indicted
LARRY FLOWERS, a former Giant and Jet, was indicted yesterday along with two policemen and three other men on charges of operating a cocaine-distribution ring out of a bakery in Lodi, N.J.
The alleged conspiracy began in August 1986, prosecutors said.
Flowers's last N.F.L. season was 1985 and prosecutors said there were no allegations that other players were involved in the alleged drug ring, either as sellers or users.


The Other Henderson Finally Gets a Salute
Since baseball insists on measuring what it values in dollars, then the American League boasted the only millionaire player with a $10 million smile when its All-Star team took the field last night.
You know the guy.
He routinely lights up the sky with his personality and lights up American and National League pitchers alike during what seems to be his annual pilgrimage to post-season play.


Yugoslav Marriage Needs a Trial Separation; The Croatian Bulwark
To the Editor:
I am a Croatian-American looking at how the Bush Administration deals with the Croatian independence movement.
I see historical ignorance and foreign policy inconsistency.
Since the Slavic tribes took over the region 1,300 years ago, the Croatian people have been independent or, until the Versailles Treaty, under Austrian or Venetian hegemony.


Safeway Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


Young Woman Seemed Drunk, Witness States
A former St.
John's University lacrosse player, who lived in a house where a young woman was taken after she claimed she was sexually abused, testified yesterday that the woman looked 'drunk" and "dazed" and was "like a dead weight."
"By the way she was, I thought she was on drugs," said Todd Miller, 22 years old, who has since graduated.


Hasbro Will Take $59 Million Charge
Hasbro Inc., the toy maker, said it would take a $59 million charge against earnings in the second quarter for restructuring costs incurred partly because of its acquisition of the Tonka Corporation.
The company said the one-time charge would lower second-quarter earnings by $41 million, or 71 cents a share.
It did not project what those earnings might be when they are released in two weeks.


Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 11


Review/Music; 'A Little Night Music' Opens 47th Season Of City Opera
During her tenure as general director of the New York City Opera, Beverly Sills sought to erode the boundaries between opera, operetta and musical theater, and brought a good many frothy pieces of theatrical ephemera into the company's repertory.
Her successor, Christopher Keene, has said that he takes a different view of the relationship between musicals and opera, and has jettisoned the less durable comedies that flourished at the New York State Theater during Miss Sills's reign.
But Mr.
Keene has not banished musicals entirely.
This year's schedule includes a new production of Frank Loesser's "Most Happy Fella" and a revival of Lerner and Lowe's "Brigadoon." And to open the company's 47th season, on Tuesday evening, Mr.
Keene revived last year's production of "A Little Night Music," Stephen Sondheim's musical based on "Smiles of a Summer Night," the Ingmar Bergman film.


Nissan North America Gets a New President
The Nissan Motor Company yesterday named Haruo Ohno as president of Nissan North America, the Los Angeles-based umbrella of Nissan companies in the United States and Canada.
Mr.
Ohno, 56 years old, replaces Yoshikazu Hanawa, who was promoted to executive vice president of the parent company in Tokyo.
He will be one of four executive vice presidents reporting to Yutaka Kume, the auto maker's president and chief executive.


United, Delta Seek Pan Am Assets
United Airlines proposed yesterday to buy numerous assets from Pan American World Airways, including its profitable Latin American routes, some European routes and 21 of its most modern planes, the Airbus A310's.
Not to be outdone, top executives of Delta Air Lines, including its chairman, Ronald W. Allen, also came to New York to make their pitch to Thomas G. Plaskett, Pan Am chairman.


Harleysville National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ruth Frankenthaler Feldon, Congregation Trustee, 73
Ruth Frankenthaler Feldon, the first woman to become a trustee of Congregation Emanu-El in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 73 years old.
She died of cancer, her daughter said.


Keeping Silver Lustrous
Thome Silversmiths Inc.
49 West 37th Street, Suite 605, New York, N.Y. 10018; (212) 764-5426.
The best way to care for silver is to use it, said Robert Routh, president of Thome Silversmiths Inc.
Silver used frequently has a soft, lustrous patina.
And the more it is washed, the less it needs to be polished.


Bush Defends Rights Record But Says He Fears Distortion
President Bush today defended his civil rights record, from the 1988 Presidential campaign to his nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, but conceded that he was concerned that "pounding" criticism of that record might misinform blacks about him.
"I'm going to take my case every chance I get to black Americans," Mr.
Bush told a news conference, "and say, 'Hey, listen, we got a good record on civil rights, and we're going to continue it, and you ought to be rejoicing that we have a very able judge to be elevated to the Supreme Court.' And similarly on civil rights -- we got a good civil rights bill. Don't listen to all these people out there that say it's bad."


Greenspan Named for New Term As Chairman of Federal Reserve
President Bush announced tonight that he would nominate Alan Greenspan to another four-year term as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.
The announcement was expected here and on Wall Street.
But with Mr.
Greenspan's current term expiring Aug. 11, mild jitters developed in the financial community in recent weeks when no word from the White House was forthcoming.


13 Killed and 4 Are Hurt in Alabama Plane Crash
A commuter plane crashed into a house and burned in a heavy thunderstorm today, killing 13 people on the plane and injuring four on the ground, the authorities said.
The pilot and one passenger survived, hospital officials said.


Conagra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


We Have to Occupy Iraq to End the War
To the Editor:
"To Bomb Iraq Again," Leslie H. Gelb's column for June 30, is one more piece of evidence that warfare as a whole is no longer understood in this country, and Mr.
Gelb's recommendations in general and his continued use of terms like "surgical air strikes," "pinpoint bombing attacks" and "limited air strikes," in particular, show a pronounced lack of understanding.


South Korea Seeks Return Of Its Artworks From Japan
Last year Kim Soo-hong, a South Korean antiques dealer, went to Japan, broke into the home of a well-to-do collector and at knifepoint stole nine valuable porcelains he said had been taken by the Japanese colonial authorities during their long occupation of Korea.
He returned the vases to South Korea, where he was arrested and pleaded for the pieces to be kept in his country.
Kenichi Higasa, the Japanese collector, promised to donate several of the objects to a museum if they were returned to him.
A year later the porcelains are back in Japan, but no donations have been made or are planned, said Mr.
Higasa's wife, who insisted the porcelains had been acquired fairly in private transactions.


Small Towns Grow Lonelier as Bus Stops Stopping
Until the strike came, the silver and blue Greyhound Americruisers rumbled in from St.
Louis and Kansas City and helped keep this shrinking city of 19,800 connected to the world outside.
About 50 people a month boarded the bus at the two-room brick station that Jim and Rita Fairfax built four years ago.
Today, the bus station is a laundromat.
Mary F. Pummill, a widow who is legally blind, once could walk to the station and get a bus any day of the week.
Now she has to rely on a twice-a-month shuttle bus primarily for elderly people when she wants to see her doctors in Columbia, about 60 miles away.
Charlotte Williams, who retired to Sedalia from Chicago three years ago, said she now gets rides from friends to bus and train stations 30 miles away or more or pays high taxi fares.


Knogo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bio-Dental Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Music in Review
Richard Thompson
The Ritz
Love means trouble in Richard Thompson's songs.
For most of his set at the Ritz on Tuesday night, the English songwriter sang about deceitful women and misused men.
Rock is full of such long-suffering testimonials, but Mr.
Thompson takes them to an extreme that is simultaneously droll and unsparing.
It's not every rocker who follows his complaints about lovers -- "I can't live my life as someone else's shishkebab," one concludes -- with a full-scale denunciation of mother love, "Mother Knows Best." When David Byrne joined the band for encores, those, too, were about straying lovers: "Who Were You Thinkin' Of" (a 1980 hit for Dandy and the Doolittle Band) and Question Mark and the Mysterians' "96 Tears."


Vilas Says He Still Has 'the Fire,' but It's Only Flickering in Comeback
To the roar of "Vamos, Willy!" Guillermo Vilas entered the stadium court at the Buenos Aires Lawn Tennis Club earlier this year to begin the arduous and often heartbreaking journey tempting many of the world's great aging athletes.
An exhibition match against his old friend Yannick Noah launched the 38-year-old Argentine in his announced return to the tennis tour, which he had dominated with his heavy topspin ground strokes and retriever tenacity more than a decade before.


Lead Paint Dangers
To The Home Section:
The Home Improvement column by John Warde on June 13, while generally accurate, did not clearly enough warn readers of the dangers of working with paint containing lead.


For Singapore Air, a New Direction
Making long-range plans and meticulously carrying them out are high among the strengths of Singapore Airlines executives and they have used those attributes often in making the carrier one of the world's most successful.
Now they're at it again, laying the groundwork for what could be their biggest challenge yet: the company's first flights from New York to Singapore, scheduled to begin in 1993.


Bridge
To bid or not to bid, that is the question.
And it is not easy to answer.
After an opening bid by an opponent, a cautious player who holds his tongue may miss a makeable contract, or a worthwhile save, or a chance to disrupt the opposing auction.
But an aggressive player who ventures into the auction may find himself in trouble, or mislead his partner, or provide a road map to the opponents when the play starts.
Silence would have been golden on the diagramed deal, from the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams in Atlantic City in March.
A Michaels cue-bid by West, showing length in the major suits, combined with East's ill-judged double of six diamonds, gave the declarer a blueprint of the total distribution.


Stuart Hall Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Calendar: Chelsea, Long Island and the 30's
City Walks
Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1672, extension 206.
On Sunday at 1 P.M., there will be a walking tour of the Chelsea neighborhood, including the General Theological Seminary and the Chelsea Hotel, built in 1884 and once home to Thomas Wolfe and Dylan Thomas.


Biogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thomas Smoked Marijuana But Retains Bush Support; Jackson Assails Thomas
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson today criticized Judge Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee, for first benefiting from affirmative action and now attacking it, but he also cautioned the civil rights movement against being drawn into an all-out fight to block the nomination.
In a speech to the annual convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Mr.
Jackson said the nomination was just another effort by the Administration to distract attention from profound social and economic problems by heightening racial divisions.


Exonerated at Arizona
The University of Arizona took the recommendation of a five-member hearing board yesterday and exonerated sophomore guard KHALID REEVES concerning allegations that he sexually assaulted a coed.
The board said it found the Dean of Students' Office had failed to provide clear and convincing evidence that Reeves had violated the university's code of conduct.
Reeves, an 18-year-old from New York City, had appealed a recommendation by the Dean's Office that he be suspended for a year for allegedly violating the code, based on the accusation by a 23-year-old student that he had raped her in January. (AP)


Business and the Law; Trying to Assess Court Nominee
IF Clarence Thomas is confirmed as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, he will be the only member of the current Court to have worked in a major company.
For two and a half years in the late 1970's, Judge Thomas was an in-house lawyer at the Monsanto Company.
That background is one reason that business groups have high hopes that Judge Thomas, President Bush's nominee to replace Thurgood Marshall, will be a stronger voice for their interests.


B.C.C.I. Once Lent Money To Bank Tied to Iraq Loans
The collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the high-flying private bank that was seized last week amid allegations of fraud, highlighted the financial dealings it had with a large Italian bank whose Atlanta office was implicated in a scheme to provide fraudulent loans to Iraq, Government investigators said yesterday.
The ties, which appear to be transfers of money from B.C.C.I. to keep the Italian bank's Atlanta office afloat, are the first indication of a link between the Banca Nationale de Lavoro, one of Italy's largest banks, and B.C.C.I.
Both banks once had offices in Atlanta and B.C.C.I. had other interests in Georgia.


Boddie-Noell Restaurant reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vons Cos.  reports earnings for 12wks to June 12


CHRONICLE
DEMI MOORE, nude and very pregnant, is on Vanity Fair's August cover.
The 28-year-old actress, who is married to BRUCE WILLIS, is holding her belly with one hand and covering her breasts with the other.
The magazine appeared on New York City newsstands yesterday.
Elsewhere, the cover is dressed in a white envelope with the words, "More Demi Moore." Only Ms.
Moore's eyes appear above the envelope.


Western Bank (Oregon) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Man Who Put Steam in Your Iron
The year was 1936, when television and fax machines and remote-control compact disk players were science fiction, and a Wisconsin manufacturer was puzzling over an easier and quicker way to dry clothes.
The idea was a crude, heated box with a rotary drum that could spin clothes dry.
Brooks Stevens, a rising industrial designer before the world knew it needed one, told the manufacturer there was just one glaring problem.
"You can't sell this thing," Mr.
Stevens said.
"This is a sheet metal box. People won't even know what it is. Who's going to pay $375 for what looks like a storage cabinet? Put a glass window on the door, get some boxer shorts flying around in there, put it in the stores and it'll take off."


Century Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Giza Journal; Insults for a Falling Idol (With Feet of Concrete?)
If the Sphinx could dispense smart rebuttals with the ease of its inscrutable riddles, what it might be saying right now is that reports of its imminent death have been much exaggerated.
Like some aging celebrity too proud to admit time's travesties and too frail to deny them, the great monument guarding the Pyramids on Cairo's ragged fringes has seen glory give way in relatively recent times to all the vagaries of age.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE INDIAN OCEAN -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


"Soviet Voices: Talk of Hard Times"
"Gorbachev serves too many masters and therefore controls nothing." -- Lyudmila I. Tsegankova, black-marketeer.
"We need the West to teach us how to work and to help us with technology." -- Alla A. Kovalova, cashier.
"To make people work, you have to pay them so their work is valued." -- Nikolai I. Vlasov, retired construction worker.
How Muscovites view the problems of the Soviet economy, page A8.


Prices of Treasury Securities Up
Prices of Treasury securities inched higher in thin trading yesterday, buoyed by a successful auction of new seven-year notes.
Bids on the $9 billion issue produced an average yield of 8.26 percent, a bit higher than had been anticipated and well above the 7.93 percent average yield at the last seven-year note sale on April 10.


Mets Searching for Stability in Pitching and Defense to Stay in Race
"A different dynamic."
That's what Frank Cashen promised at the start of the season.
The general manager of the Mets didn't anticipate that he would get a different one about every other week.


New P.&amp; G. Logos
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said it was redesigning its logo, which the company said had prompted false rumors linking it with the Devil.
The logo -- a bearded man in a crescent moon surrounded by stars -- will continue to be the company's registered trademark, the company said, but the curly hairs in the man's beard that look like the number 6 will be eliminated.
The sixes helped fuel the rumors because the number 666 is linked with the Devil in the Book of Revelation in the Bible.
The company also said it was adopting two new corporate logos, a scriptlike "Procter &amp; Gamble" and "P.&amp; G."


Nike Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Subway Rider Foils a Robbery
A fast-acting subway rider yesterday foiled the robbery of a Queens token booth clerk by three armed men who were later arrested, the police said.
The suspects entered the Straiton Avenue station in Far Rockaway shortly after midnight and fired two shots from a .357 Magnum into the token booth window, said Albert O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.


All-Star Image of the Skydome: The Roof That Ripken Raised
National League All-Stars were not exactly slinking back across the border today.
After all, it was just an exhibition game and no one lost a pennant or World Series or anything.
Everybody, in both dugouts and clubhouses, and fans harboring all kinds of allegiances, was fortunate to have seen one of the more impressive power displays provided by Cal Ripken Jr., who followed up a 12-home run performance in the Home Run Derby Monday with a three-run shot in the 62d All-Star Game on Tuesday.


Wal-Mart in Venture With Mexican Store
In its first foreign expansion, Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the nation's largest retailer, joined Cifra S. A., the largest Mexican retailer, to announce the opening of wholesale clubs in Mexico starting later this year.
While Wal-Mart would not elaborate, other American retail executives said that the chain would be called Club Aurrera, and that about five stores are expected to open this year.
If these stores appear successful after several months, others will be opened in 1992.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about regulations that forbid clinics receiving Federal money to counsel women about abortion summarized a comment by Senator Orrin G. Hatch incorrectly.
The Senator said no one from the Bush Administration had asked him to stop making the case for the regulations.


Legislators Try for a Compromise In Connecticut Budget Deadlock
Lawmakers spent today crunching numbers, hoping to find some new combination that might break the deadlock over the state budget.
And with the last few weeks littered with dead tax plans, there were plenty of options to pick over.
One plan that floated through the Capitol was being pitched as a compromise between the last compromise -- which died in the Senate last week -- and the proposal favored by the Democrats in the Senate, the ones who killed that last compromise.


Anthem Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Official to Meet With Seles
Gerard Smith, executive director of the Women's Tennis Association, said yesterday that he had been unable to solve the mystery of Monica Seles's withdrawal from Wimbledon and her subsequent disappearance from public view.
In St.
Petersburg, Fla., Smith said he had spoken with representatives of the Seles family.
He hopes to meet with Seles, the world's top-ranked player, but probably no sooner than the beginning of next week.
"I've been told she has commitments over the next few days," Smith said.
"I don't think it is going to be a problem. She knows I want to speak with her, and I believe she is anxious to speak with me to resolve the matter."


A Wary Slovenia Accepts Europe-Backed Accord
Despite expressions of deep mistrust of Yugoslavia's Government and national army, the members of Slovenia's Parliament today voted by a large margin to ratify a European Community-mediated peace agreement suspending the republic's declaration of independence for three months.
The 189-11 vote today paved the way for international observers to travel to Slovenia and oversee a cease-fire between the Yugoslav Army and Slovenia's territorial-defense forces.
Many people here say that the agreement has averted, for the time being at least, a full civil war in ethnically riven Yugoslavia.


Year-Round Beauty, And the Berries Aren't Bad, Either
IF a gardener were to design the perfect plant, it might have graceful spring flowers, luscious summer fruit, spectacular autumn foliage and a sculptural outline of colorful twigs in winter.
Oh, and of course, a minimum of aggravating insects.
Highbush blueberry fits the description.
A shrub that is hard to top for four seasons of pleasure, it is equally at home in a country border, a suburban backyard or a city rooftop container.


Mexico-Italy Oil Pacts
The state-run oil companies in Italy and Mexico have signed several cooperation agreements, including one to market Mexican crude in Europe.
The pacts were signed earlier this week by the chairmen of Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi of Italy and its Mexican counterpart, Pemex.


Japanese In Ministry Cut Pay
After weeks of denying that the Government bore any responsibility for Japan's giant stock scandal, the Finance Minister and several of his top deputies today cut their salaries by 10 percent and conceded that they had failed to guard against improprieties in the securities industry.
The admission was the first formal acknowledgement that the Government's regulation of the securities industry had contributed to the stock scandal.
The salary reduction is similar to one that top officials of the country's four biggest securities houses said on Monday they were imposing on themselves.


Boost to South Africa's Leader
The lifting of American trade sanctions is likely to raise President F. W. de Klerk's standing among white voters.
South Africa's blacks are less pleased.
News analysis, page A10.


Chattem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


FNW Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Weiss, Unflinching Still, Facing Conservative Ire
The most hated member of the New York Congressional delegation, in the eyes of many conservatives, is Ted Weiss.
"He's an embarrassment to his district, the city and the state," said Howard Lim, New York county chairman of the Conservative Party.


Riggs National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Scorpion Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quick Financing Sought for Weather Satellite
A Senate subcommittee called on President Bush today to declare a national emergency because of the country's deteriorating weather satellite system and to free money to launch a new satellite to track severe storms.
The proposal, which was announced at a meeting of a Senate Appropriations subcommittee responsible for the National Weather Service, would require approval of the full committee, and eventually the full Senate and House.
But the subcommittee's action placed in high relief the troubles of the Government's plans for a fleet of five new weather satellites.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Sangamon County, Ill., is offering $25.8 million in certificates of participation priced to yield a maximum 6.85 percent for an issue due 2004 through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Yields on serial bonds range from 4.55 percent in 1991 to 6.7 percent in 2003.
The noncallable bonds are rated Aa by Moody's.


Sports of The Times; A Return To Fun And Games
DEAR South Africa,  Congratulations seem in order.


Caere Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Giving Women More Than Quick Abortion Fix; The Gag Rule
To the Editor:
We are counselors in New York City who see pregnant young women 12 to 21 years old.
These are women who are in satisfying relationships, as well as women who have been raped and who are victims of incest.
However, these women have one thing in common, they depend on our federally funded Title X health center to meet their family planning needs.


Despite Voters' 'No,' Board Allows Dump For Nuclear Waste
Rejecting the results of a townwide referendum held one day earlier, officials in this rural community in western New York voted unanimously tonight to accept a low-level radioactive waste dump.
The vote makes West Valley the first community in the Northeast to officially register itself in favor of accepting the nuclear dumps that the Federal Government has ordered all states to create.


Stocks Slip in Tokyo
Stock prices in Japan were down today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed at 22,937.92, off 183.38 points, or about eight-tenths of a percent.


Genetics Institute Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Boston's new superintendent of schools, Lois Harrison-Jones, misstated her previous position in some copies.
She was an assistant superintendent in Dallas.


Federal National Mortgage Association reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Giving Women More Than Quick Abortion Fix; Freedom of Religion
To the Editor:
"In Louisiana: Law? No. Cruelty" (editorial, June 20), deploring Louisiana's new abortion law, is on target.
As you say, the state is "asserting dogma disguised as law."


Time Warner May Revise Rights Plan
Bowing to pressure from the Securities and Exchange Commission staff and angry shareholders, Time Warner Inc. said late last night that it was considering alternative structures to its proposed rights equity offering.
The announcement marked the first time the company indicated that the S.E.C., which is reviewing the proposed rights offering, had what appeared to be significant objections to the deal.
As late as yesterday evening, one investment banker involved in the deal said he had no knowledge that Time Warner either planned major changes in the offering or had received significant criticism from the S.E.C.


'Prime Time Live' Evolves, and Lives
For most of its two years on the air, the ABC News program "Prime Time Live," with Diane Sawyer and Sam Donaldson, has been straining to become something different from what it was when it began.
Even Rick Kaplan, the show's executive producer, had distanced himself from identification with it.
"When people used to ask me what I did," he recalls, "I'd say I used to be the executive producer of 'Nightline.' "


West Mass Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Coca-Cola Co., Atlanta, appointed Carl Ware deputy group president of its northeast Europe and Africa group. *
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Inc., New York, named Peter B. Pond managing director in charge of the firm's Chicago investment banking office.


Player's Ban Is Lifted
Defensive lineman FRANK WARREN behaved well during his yearlong drug suspension from the National Football League, so Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE has cleared him to return to the league, New Orleans Saints President JIM FINKS said yesterday. (AP)


Bank of South Carolina reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


King World Productions reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


INSIDE
House Acts to Punish China
The House approved two bills limiting Chinese imports.
One would rescind Beijing's trade status unless it respects human rights.
Page A3.


Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


Brooklyn Academy Creates a New Post
Joseph V. Melillo, the director of the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music from 1983 through 1989, has been appointed to the new position of producing director of the academy, it was announced yesterday.
Mr.
Melillo will help plan and produce programs of opera, theater, dance and other events for the academy's four theaters.


Bush Takes Thyroid Medicine
President Bush has begun taking daily doses of synthetic thyroid hormone as part of his treatment for Graves' disease, the White House says.
Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said Tuesday that the substance, synthroid, would be taken by the President for the rest of his life.
The hormone, which Mr.
Bush began taking today, will replace the natural hormone that had been produced by his overactive thyroid gland; his thyroid was largely destroyed by radioactive iodine as part of the treatment.


Bucks Sign Malone To 2-Year Contract
Milwaukee signed MOSES MALONE to a two-year contract yesterday, hoping that the 15-year veteran can improve the weak rebounding blamed for the Bucks' first-round elimination in the National Basketball Association playoffs.
Coach DEL HARRIS, announcing the signing, called Malone "an intense competitor who will give us a big lift in our rebounding and inside game" despite being 36 years old.


Man Behind A.T.&amp;T. Deal Receives New Assignment
Robert M. Kavner, the A.T.&amp; T. executive who spearheaded the acquisition of the NCR Corporation, has a new job in the company's communications businesses.
After the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company's successful pursuit of NCR, many in the industry were surprised when Mr.
Kavner, who is passionate about the computer business, was not selected to run the combined computer operations.
The job went instead to an executive who had been with NCR, Gilbert P. Williamson, who also received a seat on the A.T.&amp; T. board.


Music in Review
Art Farmer
Sweet Basil 88 Seventh Avenue South (near Bleecker Street) Manhattan Through Sunday
Art Farmer started his late set on Tuesday night at Sweet Basil with Jerome Kern's "I'm Old-Fashioned." But he was playing it on a new-fangled instrument: the flumpet, a hybrid of trumpet and fluegelhorn.
The instrument looks like a trumpet with a slightly more conical bell and two flamboyant curves framing the valves, and it seems designed to add warmth to the trumpet tone without the fuzziness of a fluegelhorn.


Saving the Day


Paychex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Maryland Prices $100 Million Bonds
The State of Maryland priced $100 million in tax-exempt general obligation bonds yesterday through competitive bidding.
The financing was awarded to a group of underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Unlike many recent offerings that have had to rely on insurance to raise the quality of credit and insure a lower borrowing cost, Maryland is among the few states that retain a triple-A rating, the highest issued by Moody's Investors Service, Standard &amp; Poor's and Fitch Investors Service.


Senators Agree to Curtail Debate on Crime Measure
The Senate voted 71 to 24 tonight to limit debate on the anti-crime bill, and Senate leaders said they hoped the vote would clear the way for final passage before the Senate concludes its business week on Thursday.
Debate is expected to be limited to 10 hours.


Editors' Note
An article on July 3 described a controversy involving allegations of plagiarism at Boston University's College of Communication.
In a commencement address in May, the dean of the college, H. Joachim Maitre, repeated virtually word for word passages from an article by a PBS film critic.
In the speech, Mr.
Maitre did not acknowledge or credit the article.
The Times account acknowledged that the controversy had first been reported in The Boston Globe on July 2.
But it should also have noted that the quotations it cited from Mr.
Maitre's speech were taken from the Globe article.


Walter B. Terry, Banker, 76
Walter Bliss Terry, a retired vice president of the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, died on Saturday at his home in Peapack, N.J.
He was 76 years old.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Q-Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Birds vs. Garden Bugs
To The Home Section:
Anne Raver's rave review of good bugs as replacements for chemicals in the war against bad bugs  [ "In My Garden, a Bug For Every Pest," June 20 ]  leaves one element out of the picture: birds.
I have twice unleashed an army of ladybugs in my vegetable garden, only to sit by helplessly as the birds had a banquet on the insects.
None of the beetles survived.
Are there no birds in your garden, Ms.
Raver?
GEORGE A. TEST Oneonta, N.Y.


In the Nation; Hanging Tough in L.A.
In the American democracy, only Federal judges are supposed to hold their positions for life, and even they can be impeached.
But Chief Daryl Gates of the Los Angeles Police Department is turning himself into another kind of lifetime appointee -- and it's easier to impeach a Federal judge than to force him out.
Chief Gates's position is protected by civil service; so the mayor, the civilian Police Commission or even the Civil Service Commission could remove him only with great difficulty -- and L.A. voters recently made it even harder.
That makes Chief Gates more powerful, practically speaking, than any elected official.


Salick Health Care reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Penelope Leach
To The Home Section:
In "Growing Up with Help from Penelope Leach"  [ June 13 ] , Carol Lawson wrote that Dr.
Leach has been criticized by members of the American child-care establishment for saying that "something like full-time mother care for several months is best for a new infant."


College Bound Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Tour Leader Drops Out; LeMond Now No. 1
A bone-breaking fall today by front-runner Rolf Sorensen has put three-time winner Greg LeMond into the lead of the Tour de France sooner than he wanted.
Sorensen, a Dane who had held the lead since Sunday, broke his left collarbone in the spill and dropped out of the race after completing today's fifth stage with the overall lead.
LeMond was in second place, 9 seconds back, but on Thursday he will move into the lead by one second over Sean Kelly of Ireland.


John M. Gerstenmaier, Executive, 74
John M. Gerstenmaier, retired vice chairman of Goodyear, died Monday at his home in Menlo Park, Calif.
He was 74 years old and also lived in Naples, Fla.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Intervoice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Harmonia Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Newmark &amp; Lewis to Close 11 Jersey Stores
Newmark &amp; Lewis Inc., the New York area's biggest retailer of electronics and appliances, will close 11 of its 14 stores in New Jersey because of poor business and high operating costs, the company said yesterday.
There had been persistent reports in the appliance industry that Newmark &amp; Lewis was about to close the stores because of continuing losses from slumping home-appliance sales.
Asked yesterday about those reports, Warren G. Hyman, Newmark &amp; Lewis's co-chairman and co-chief executive, confirmed that the company had placed advertisements today in New Jersey newspapers announcing the closings and a liquidation sale of floor models.


Needing Lift, Kaifu Grabs a Flight for the U.S.
Japanese have long been used to the ritual of their leaders conferring with American Presidents.
But today, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu appeared to have set a modern record by leaving for his sixth meeting in the United States with President Bush in less than two years.
The question for many Japanese is whether this session will be his last.


Trico Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A map on Friday with an article about the solar eclipse today misstated its timing.
The shadow of the moon strikes the earth early today over the Pacific Ocean and moves eastward through Central America to Brazil, where it will be late afternoon.


Exabyte Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


In a Reversal, France Is Told To Allow Moroccan to Return
A court ruled today that France wrongly expelled a dissident Moroccan writer, Abdelmoumen Diouri, and said he could immediately return to France.


Giving Women More Than Quick Abortion Fix; Inconsistent Justice
To the Editor:
In Justice David Souter's construction, the First Amendment is not offended in Rust v.
Sullivan by regulations forbidding federally financed family planning clinics from informing women of their abortion rights.


N.F.L.'s No. 1 Picks Not in a Hurry to Sign
With most National Football League training camps set to open in the next week or so, a majority of the first-round draft picks are cooling their heels rather than packing their bags.
And if negotiations between N.F.L. clubs and agents representing draft picks don't accelerate soon, the number of extended holdouts could surpass those of previous years.
As of yesterday, only five first-round picks had signed.
Three of them signed on draft day, April 22.


First National Bancorp (Ga.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gennum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Most Viewers Will See Bite Taken From Sun
Although the solar eclipse on Thursday will not be total anywhere on the United States mainland, people in most parts of the country will see at least a bite taken out of the Sun.
In San Diego, at 11:30 A.M., the Moon will cover 78 percent of the Sun, causing a noticeable darkening.
In New York City, the maximum extent of the eclipse will occur at 3:35 P.M., but since the city is relatively distant from the path of totality, only 7 percent of the Sun will will not been seen.


Ernest F. Zaloom, 78, Oriental Rug Importer
Ernest F. Zaloom, president of George B. Zaloom &amp; Company Inc., importers of Oriental rugs in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 78 years old and lived in Short Hills, N.J.
Mr. Zaloom died of kidney failure, his son, George, said.


Spectrum Control Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Dinkins Alters Banking Rules on South Africa
On the day President Bush announced an end to five years of United States sanctions against South Africa, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday announced broad new rules that would limit city business with banks that have ties to South Africa.
Saying that South Africa had not made enough progress toward introducing democratic reforms, Mr.
Dinkins declared that banks would be rated on compliance with the new rules.


School's Budget Cuts: Looking for Magic
When school opens in New York City on Sept. 11 more classrooms will be strained to the breaking point.
Fewer teachers will be around to offer art, music and the electives that give high school its pungency.
Fewer guidance counselors will be available to help the most aimless and unruly youngsters, and ragged textbooks will have to make it through another year patched together by tape and glue.


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


China Continues to Battle Devastating Floods


Gwinnett Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Israel Plans Stock Sales
The Israeli Government plans to raise more than $500 million by selling shares in state companies, a senior official said.
The official, Joseph Nitzani, who heads the agency that manages state-owned companies, said the Government would sell 20 percent of its holdings in the Zim Israel Navigation Company and 23 percent of the Bezeq Israel Telecommunication Corporation.
Other scheduled sales include 26 percent of Maman Cargo Terminal and Handling Ltd. and all shares in Malam System Ltd., Agridev Ltd. and Dead Sea Periclase Ltd., he said.


Iraq's Nuclear Menace
Ever so grudgingly, Iraq now admits that it was conducting a secret uranium enrichment program, thus tacitly conceding it was hellbent on making nuclear arms.
Worse yet, it's still trying to conceal a starker truth, that it has come closer to making a bomb than the U.S. suspected.
That shocking news, from knowledgeable Iraqi defectors, reveals that Saddam Hussein remains a regional threat despite the crushing defeat that was supposed to have neutralized him.
Even a single nuclear bomb in the hands of a ruthless dictator is menace enough.
A nuclear production capability, if undetected, could multiply the risk of attacks and of nuclear blackmail.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ONE of every 80 births results in twins.
To the parents who raise them, twins bring a special set of frustrations, challenges and rewards.
The relationship between twins is both a bond and a rivalry that begins in the womb and lasts until they die.
For the one in three sets of twins who are identical, the closeness can lead to uncanny skills at communicating with each other.
During infancy and toddlerhood, they may even develop their own language.
The ways parents have been advised to raise twins have shifted dramatically in recent decades.


India's Chief Urges U.S. Investment
The newly elected Prime Minister of India urged the United States today to erase "old perceptions" about India, and expressed blunt interest in increasing sharply American economic and political links.
The Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao, said in an interview that "the sky's the limit," in terms of potential American investment.
Mr.
Rao expressed hope that trade with the United States would "improve vastly."


CBS Earnings Decline 63%, But Stock Posts Small Rise
CBS Inc. said yesterday that its second-quarter net income fell 63 percent from a year earlier and attributed the decline primarily to a drop in operating income at the television network.
But the company's stock price rose marginally on the strength of several positive signs.
CBS reported net income of $50.7 million, or $3.31 a share, for the quarter, down from $138 million, or $5.36 a share, a year earlier.
Revenues fell 14 percent, to $709.4 million from $828.3 million.


MRRM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Doctor Says Voice on TV Caused Seizures
A neurologist reports in a medical journal that a woman got epileptic seizures by hearing the voice of Mary Hart, a host of the syndicated television program "Entertainment Tonight."
Symptoms included an upset stomach, a sense of pressure in her head and mental confusion, said Dr.
Venkat Ramani, who reports the case in today's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine.


Novametrix Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to April 28


New York City Warned Of Jail Overcrowding
New York City's top jail official warned yesterday that up to 4,000 prisoners may have to be released soon from city jails because of projected overcrowding.
"We have a true emergency," the official, Correction Commissioner Allyn R. Sielaff, said at a meeting with the Board of Correction, the city agency that monitors jail conditions.


Japanese In Ministry Cut Pay
After weeks of denying that the Government bore any responsibility for Japan's giant stock scandal, the Finance Minister and several of his top deputies today cut their salaries by 10 percent and conceded that they had failed to guard against improprieties in the securities industry.
The admission was the first formal acknowledgement that the Government's regulation of the securities industry had contributed to the stock scandal.
The salary reduction is similar to one that top officials of the country's four biggest securities houses said on Monday they were imposing on themselves.


Review/Dance; 2 Rising Young Stars With the Royal Ballet
Darcey Bussell is a 22-year-old English dancer and Zoltan Solymosi is a 23-year-old Hungarian dancer: their New York debut in "Swan Lake" on Tuesday night revealed a great deal about the Royal Ballet today.
The British company boasts a first-rate corps and it performed lyrically in the supernatural lakeside scenes that Yolanda Sonnabend, the designer, has strewn with suggestions of carapaces and carcasses.
This "Swan Lake," by Anthony Dowell, looks even better on repeated viewing.


A Third Airline For Taiwan
Taiwan has set up its third international airline to break China's attempts to isolate the island, the Communications Ministry said.
The carrier, Mandarin Airlines, was established by Taiwan's primary airline, China Airlines, and the China Trust Group, Taiwan's largest private financial institution, said David Tan, Mandarin's president.


Tele-Metropole Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


Tough Adoptions: New York Tries 'Hard Sell'
Shannon, 4 years old, is No.
A-458 in New York State's new catalogue of children who need adoptive homes.
The book says he was born with fetal alcohol syndrome and has serious mental limitations.
He loves his toy car.
"Fast!" he exclaims.
A few pages over is Tammy, No.
Z-285.
She is 14.
She was placed in foster care at 6, adopted at 9 and orphaned a few months later.
"Though she is rarely affectionate, those who know Tammy detect an underlying sensitivity," the book says.


Avantek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


France Unveils Strict New Rules on Immigration
Bending to public demands for a tougher immigration policy, Prime Minister Edith Cresson today unveiled stricter measures to prevent illegal immigration.
The move came two days after she announced plans to charter special aircraft to deport illegal immigrants.
Mrs.
Cresson immediately found herself in the awkward situation of being hailed by members of the far-right National Front Party and condemned by members of her Socialist Party.


Pioneer Savings Bank -Wash.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bandag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Levi Strauss Associates reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


Columbia Default
The Columbia Gas System Inc. said it had missed an $11 million debt payment.The default brings the total of Columbia's defaults to $50 million since the company said last month that it might seek bankruptcy protection because of its costly long-term gas-purchase contracts.
On Monday, the company missed a $14 million debt payment.
Earlier yesterday, Columbia Gas, based in Wilmington, Del., said it had made arrangements to pay accrued interest on its interest-bearing notes that are overdue and pay post-maturity interest on its short-term discount notes.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Johnson Triumphs Michael Johnson of the United States ran the season's fastest 400 meters and Merlene Ottey of Jamaica continued her winning streak with a new season mark yesterday in the 100-meter dash at the Athletissima I.A.A.F.-Grand Prix meet in Lausanne, Switzerland.
Johnson caught Roberto Hernandez of Cuba at the top of the backstretch and accelerated to win in 44.17 seconds.
Hernandez finished in 44.40, a meter behind.
Steve Lewis, the 1988 Olympic champion, was fourth and Antonio Pettigrew of the United States was fifth.
Ottey, who was challenged by Gwen Torrence, finished in 10.84.
That improved by .04 seconds her previous season mark, set at Oslo four days ago.
Noureddine Morceli of Algeria was on a world-record pace for half of the men's mile race, but he finished in 3 minutes 49.12 seconds.
Sandra Farmer-Patrick won the women's 400-meter hurdles in the fastest outdoor time this year, 53.61.
Leroy Burrell of the United States, who bettered the world record in the men's 100 meters to 9.90 seconds last month, won his race in 9.96. (AP)


Central Fidelity Banks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Settlement Backed For Unit of ITT
The Thorp Credit and Thrift Company, a subsidiary of the ITT Financial Corporation, said that a state court had given preliminary approval for a settlement of a class-action lawsuit under which more than 400,000 people in Minnesota could share $47 million in refunds for life insurance they were required to buy.


Star Banc Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Virginia Banks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hayes-Dana reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stock Prices Retreat, With Dow Off 2.46
Stocks retreated late yesterday after scoring strong gains earlier in the day as short-term investors took their profits out of the market and program traders began selling.
Computer stocks continued to dominate activity, with traders buying some heavily and moving heavily out of others.


YELTSIN SWORN IN AS RUSSIA'S LEADER
With a fanfare of trumpets, a patriarchal blessing and a dollop of politics, Boris N. Yeltsin was inaugurated today as the first freely elected President of the vast Russian federated republic.
"Great Russia is rising from its knees," Mr.
Yeltsin said after taking the oath of office before a Kremlin assembly in the cavernous Palace of Congresses that included President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, leaders of his Government and the Russian Orthodox patriarch.
"We shall surely transform it into a prosperous, law-based, democratic, peaceful and sovereign state."


Flagler Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dreco Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Why Can't They Design for Older Eyes?
To the Editor:
Youngsters ignore oldsters not only in audio matters, as Edward W. Herold points out for movies and television in "What Hi-fi Means When You're Past 40" (letter, June 13), but also in visual matters.
Witness the design of electronic equipment such as videocassette recorders and clocks, where manufacturers have taken to using gray lettering on black.
It may look like good design, with which I don't necessarily agree, but it's tough on the eyes.


Van-Dumping Study Voted
The International Trade Commission voted today to continue investigating complaints by the Big Three American auto makers that Japanese competitors were illegally dumping mini-vans on the United States market.
The three-member commission unanimously found reasonable grounds to believe that the American industry had been damaged by the Japanese trade practices.


Essay; Breaking the Underworld Bank
The most lucrative bank heist in history ($5 billion and counting) has taken place over the past decade in front of the eyes of an anesthetized or slow-footed gaggle of lawmen and bank regulators.
B.C.C.I. -- the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, known widely as "the Bank of Crooks and Criminals International" -- has belatedly had its barn doors slammed around the world, after providing gangsters and banksters a means of financing global drug operations and laundering its profits.


Foley Square Journal; Court Buffs Crave Giuliani Glamour
No. 1, it is summer.
No. 2, it is the post-Giuliani era at the Federal Court House in Manhattan.
The combination has made for a lot of bored court buffs.
The core group -- six or seven retired men, occasionally joined by a woman named Thelma -- still eats lunch at the big round table in one corner of the courthouse cafeteria.
Over tongue sandwiches or tuna and tomatoes, they still tell stories about their favorite judges and lawyers, and pick on one another's personal habits.


ARCO Reports New Gasoline That Sharply Cuts Pollutants
ARCO will announce today that it has developed a gasoline as clean-burning as methanol that would cut some pollutants by more than a third.
The company does not plan to produce this more expensive fuel unless it is ordered to, but since it is certain to be ordered to do something, it clearly wants to take the initiative.
Later this year California is expected to issue new fuel regulations, and the oil company's announcement is apparently an effort to shape those rules and head off requirements that would be more difficult for the company to meet.


Inquiry Is Set On Aid for Bull
The European Commission will investigate plans by the French Government to give the computer maker Compagnie des Machines Groupe Bull more than $1 billion in aid.
France has said it plans to give Bull $420 million in subsidies and $650 million in cash.
Bull, 93 percent of which is owned by the French Government, said on Tuesday that it would allow the NEC Corporation, the big Japanese electronics company, to acquire 4.7 percent of Bull.
The move came despite some hesitation by the French Prime Minister, Edith Cresson, who has been known for her anti-Japan remarks.


Sheldahl Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


'Dark Amid the Blaze of Noon'
Millions await today's solar eclipse, from Hawaii through Brazil, all agog.
They're not the first.
Mark Twain's Connecticut Yankee escaped terminal combustion in King Arthur's court by "predicting" the sun would vanish at three minutes past noon on June 21 in the year 528.
Lo, the darkness fell on schedule and the condemned man lived.


GTE in Pact to Build Soviet Phone Service
The GTE Corporation said yesterday that it had entered into an agreement with American and Soviet interests to build and operate a telephone and facsimile service linking Moscow with North America, Western Europe and Asia.
Details on the value of the venture, to be called Sovintel, were not disclosed.


Neworld Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


HOME IMPROVEMENT
ADDING electrical outlets or circuits when remodeling requires deciding how to route the wiring inconspicuously yet economically.
There are several options to consider or present to a builder handling the project.
Before performing any electrical work yourself, consult a local building inspector to learn who is permitted to undertake electrical projects and what regulations apply.
The most conspicuous but often least expensive method of routing wiring is in surface-mounted metal or plastic channels called raceway.
Generally, this method is also the fastest because it does not require opening finished construction.


Rushing South Africa's Reward
Many but by no means all Americans will welcome President Bush's decision yesterday to lift economic sanctions imposed on South Africa five years ago.
Under President F. W. de Klerk, Pretoria has gone far to remove the stain of apartheid from its laws.
Segregation persists; so do grievous inequalities.
But a leader big enough to admit fundamental error has earned rewards -- like the decision to end a 21-year ban on South Africa in the Olympic Games.
For his part, Mr.
Bush admits no errors.
When challenged by reporters, he bridled at conceding the efficacy of a sanctions bill adopted over President Reagan's veto.
He insists he was right to oppose the measure then, even as he acclaims South Africa for complying with the five conditions stipulated for lifting sanctions.
What could have been an expression of national will is thus left looking a bit like White House imperiousness.


Believe It or Not, a Milkman Making Rounds in Scarsdale
An unlikely suspect has emerged as an antidote to an age of fax machines, frozen dinners, automated tellers and non-dairy creamers.
Meet the milkman.
With the self-consciousness of someone who knows he is one of a dying breed -- indeed, some people would have sworn he was extinct -- Bob O'Byrne plys the winding roads of Scarsdale, dropping glistening glass bottles into aluminum milk boxes.


Michael F. Dillon, 64, A Presiding State Judge
Michael F. Dillon, the Presiding Justice of the State Appellate Division in Rochester, suffered a fatal heart attack Tuesday night while speaking at a farewell dinner for a Cuomo administration official.
He was 64 years old and lived in Lackawanna, N.Y.
Justice Dillon was speaking at a dinner for John J. Poklemba, the outgoing Commissioner of the Division of Criminal Justice Services.
The judge was taken to Albany Memorial Hospital, where he was pronounced dead.


TV's Duty or Push-Button Programming?
In a darkened conference room, a group of 24 tourists from across the country sat before a flickering television screen, each holding a red button in one hand and a green button in the other.
Green means good.
Red means bad.
When they liked what they saw, they pressed the green button.
If they hated a joke, they pressed red.
Recruited off the street with the promise of a free souvenir -- a CBS key chain that converts into a pen -- the button pushers came to this small screening room in CBS-TV City because, as the little blue card that granted them entrance said: "CBS is interested in America's opinion. YOUR OPINION COUNTS."


Sunrise Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Health Workers Plan to Demonstrate
With talks on trading givebacks for jobs stalled, leaders of New York City's municipal unions are concentrating their energies on a mass demonstration by health workers planned for next week.
Thousands of people who work in the city's public hospital system are gearing up for a protest on Tuesday to dramatize the plight of a health care system that they say has been devastated by budget cuts and layoffs.


Last-Minute Adjustments Before Eclipse of Century
On the eve of an eclipse of the Sun described by experts as the eclipse of the century, astronomers hastily reprogrammed their equipment today to lessen the effect of obscuring high-altitude dust arriving from the volcano on Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines.
The dust cloud began spreading across the Hawaiian sky last week, and it threatens to degrade some important astronomical observations scheduled by major observatories at the 13,800-foot summit of Mauna Kea mountain, about 30 miles east-northeast of here.


Audiovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Colonial Investment Grade Municipal Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Woman Found Beaten to Death in Manhattan
A 75-year-old woman who lived alone in an Upper East Side building known for its tight security was found stabbed, beaten and strangled in her apartment on Tuesday night, the police said yesterday.
The woman, Helen Clewell, of 1763 Second Avenue near East 92d Street, was stabbed in the back, beaten on the head with a blunt instrument and strangled, a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner's Office, Ellen Borakove, said.
Ms.
Clewell had also been slashed several times.


For Tossing and Turning All Night
TENT designers often like to sleep in the tents they make -- at least for one night.
But Charles Duvall, the senior designer for Moss tents in Camden, Me., tried out a new triangular design called the Deltoid for 10 days.
His findings: "You can sleep in it in many different directions," he said, which is good to know, considering that most children sleep in odd configurations throughout the night.


Teledyne Canada Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pinnacle Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The 50's Return, as Scary as Always
QUICK! Think Fifties! Think atomic!
"Unfortunately, I remember it all very clearly," said Joan Rivers, the comedian, who was asked by Barneys New York to provide captions for a series of seriously Fifties photographs.
"That's when I was in high school and college."


Cape Cod Bank &amp; Trust Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Platinum Falls on Reports Its Use in Cars May Be Cut
Platinum futures prices dropped yesterday amid reports that an oil refiner has developed a cleaner-burning gasoline that could reduce demand for platinum in automobile pollution-control systems.
Platinum futures settled $4.10 to $4.60 lower on the New York Mercantile Exchange, with the contract for delivery in July at $379.50 a troy ounce.


Review/Concert; Mostly Mozart Begins, With an All-Mozart Bill
The Mozartmania that has swept much of the world this year is a mixed blessing, at best.
Still, there was ample reason to celebrate on Tuesday evening, when Mostly Mozart opened its 25th season at Avery Fisher Hall.
The observance of the bicentenary of the composer's death has captured the public imagination to a degree that could scarcely have been imagined at the bicentenary of his birth, in 1956.
The runaway success of Peter Shaffer's "Amadeus" -- the play and, even more, the film -- was undoubtedly a factor in the Mozart boom of recent years, and of course the machinery of media hype can create prodigies far beyond those of even a decade or two ago.
But the Mostly Mozart phenomenon played no small role in preparing the ground for an interest in the composer that has far transcended classical music precincts.


Japanese In Ministry Cut Pay
After weeks of denying that the Government bore any responsibility for Japan's giant stock scandal, the Finance Minister and several of his top deputies today cut their salaries by 10 percent and conceded that they had failed to guard against improprieties in the securities industry.
The admission was the first formal acknowledgement that the Government's regulation of the securities industry had contributed to the stock scandal.
The salary reduction is similar to one that top officials of the country's four biggest securities houses said on Monday they were imposing on themselves.


Dollar Declines Marginally As German Rate Talks Near
The dollar fell marginally against most currencies yesterday as speculation intensified about German interest rates in advance of today's meeting by officials of Germany's central bank.
Currency traders said the dollar's slight fall was partly the result of profit taking, but also reflected jitters that the German Bundesbank might raise key interest rates after its policy-making council meets.
Higher rates in Germany would make the mark worth more against the dollar and other currencies.


Motorola Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CK Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


South Carolina Coach
South Carolina ended two months of searching yesterday when STEVE NEWTON of Murray State was named basketball coach.
Newton, 50 years old, will succeed GEORGE FELTON, who was fired May 14.
Newton took over at Murray State in 1985 after seven seasons as an assistant at the Kentucky school.
His teams went 116-64 (64.4 percent) and won four consecutive Ohio Valley Conference regular-season titles and three league tournaments. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-12
U.S. sanctions on South Africa were lifted by President Bush, who said Pretoria's moves to end its system of racial separation and white minority rule were "irreversible." Page A1
News analysis: Lifting the sanctions may bolster some of President de Klerk's political support among whites, while many blacks fear that it could cause his Government to drag its feet on a transition to genuine majority rule.
A10


Newest Parental Nightmare: Eco-Smart Child
IN the old days, the children were the sneaky ones -- smoking in the bathroom and doing other things they shouldn't.
Now, it's the parents who are afraid of being caught by their environmentally aware, health-conscious and "politically correct" children, some of whom are barely out of kindergarten.
They march around in unbleached cotton T-shirts that proclaim, "When You Buy Ivory Someone Else Pays," "Save the Earth" or "Oceans in Question." And they carry their sports equipment in tote bags emblazoned with dancing dolphins and the message, "Don't Let Their Song Be Silenced."


Teledyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Finally! Holyfield And Tyson Set a Date
The bickering is over.
The deal is made.
The heavyweight fight for which the public has been clamoring -- Evander Holyfield versus Mike Tyson -- is on.
Holyfield, the undisputed heavyweight champion, and Tyson, the former champion, will meet Friday night Nov. 8 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., in a TVKO pay-per-view match.


Summagraphics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Keeping Children And Their Clothes In Line
WHEN Tom Nussbaum's daughter, Maddy, was 3 years old, she would drop her clothes all over the floor.
So he designed a welded-steel snake that would serve as a clothes rack and hung it on the wall at her height.
"And it worked," Mr. Nussbaum said.
More animals metamorphosed from his line drawings, and eventually, Atomic Iron Works was born.


Yields on Money Market Funds Decline
Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report fell for the week ended yesterday.
Tax-exempt yields declined sharply after posting small gains in the previous week.
The average number of days to maturity of securities held in managers' portfolios rose to 56 days, from 51.


Bio-Logic Systems reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


And a Smile Cracked His Face


Music in Review
Terry Waldo
Michael's Pub 211 East 55th Street Manhattan Tuesdays through Saturdays
Terry Waldo, the pianist and singer who roams through a wide range of turn-of-the-century pop music, recently led a program of the music of Jelly Roll Morton through a successful run of nine weeks at Michael's Pub.
He returned to the Pub on Tuesday with a different program featuring two of the other parts of his repertory, piano rags and bawdy songs.


The Man Who Fished and Cut Bait
DESIGNING a pack of cards to play fish, the children's game, was not Richard McGuire's intent.
But one day the New York illustrator found himself compiling a list of characters he wanted to draw; all were nouns ending in "er." What eventually resulted was a pack of cards whose style veers toward Russian Constructivism.
The "stranger" is a man in black who strikes a shadowy, Dashiell Hammett pose.
The "ghostwriter" is a Casper-like figure, hand poised over a typewriter.


Alliance For Title Matchup Is Formed
Officials from three bowls, two conferences and Notre Dame today added the Fiesta Bowl to their group in announcing an alliance intended to make a matchup more likely each year between the college football teams ranked No. 1 and No. 2.
The alliance, negotiated during the last several months, will include the Orange, the Cotton, the Sugar and the Fiesta Bowls.
The Fiesta Bowl was chosen as a last-minute addition over the Citrus, the Gator, the Blockbuster and the Holiday Bowls.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.72
5.82
7.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.60
7.79
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.70
7.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.26
8.23
8.57
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.50
8.52
8.55
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.55
9.55
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.18
7.19
7.46
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Oracle Systems reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


California State Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bullet Through Window Hits Boy, 14
A 14-year-old boy playing on his bed with his pet Chihuahua was struck in the head by a bullet that sailed through the window of his fourth-floor apartment in Manhattan early yesterday, the police said.
The boy, identified by the police as Julio Millan Jr., was in critical condition on a respirator at New York Hospital yesterday afternoon after undergoing several hours of surgery, said a hospital spokeswoman, Myrna Manners.
Witnesses said the bullet had apparently passed through his head and slammed into the bedroom door.


Thomas Smoked Marijuana But Retains Bush Support
The White House said today that Judge Clarence Thomas, President Bush's Supreme Court nominee, had smoked marijuana while in college, but that the President had decided that it was "a minor matter" that should not disqualify him.
Judy Smith, a spokeswoman for the White House, said Judge Thomas had smoked marijuana "several times" while he was an undergraduate at the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Mass., "and perhaps once" when he was at Yale Law School.


New Film Society Chairman
The trustees of the Film Society of Lincoln Center have elected Julien J. Studley, the head of a commercial real estate firm and a founding director of the society, chairman of the board.
He replaces Alfred R. Stern, the chairman since 1988, who has been named president emeritus.
Roy L. Furman, president of the Film Society for the past three years, remains in his post.


Mid AM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


17 Killed as Peruvian Police Shoot Down Passenger Plane
Seventeen people died when members of Peru's national police shot down a commercial airplane as it took off from an airport in the Amazon jungle, airline officials said today.
The C-200-212 plane, en route to the Amazon city of Pucallpa, was shot down Tuesday by the national police during takeoff from the Bellavista airport some 360 miles northeast of Lima, the plane's operator, Aerochasqui, said in a statement issued in Lima.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Bush will nominate Greenspan to another four-year term as Fed chairman.
The announcement was expected in Washington and on Wall Street.
But with Greenspan's term expiring in a month, mild jitters had developed in the financial markets.  [ Page A1. ]


Sports of The Times; At Last! The Rocket Is Sighted
WHEN Raghib (Rocket) Ismail autographed a reported $18 million contract with the Toronto Argonauts of the Canadian Football League in April, for all practical purposes the former Notre Dame wide receiver and running back virtually vanished from the consciousness of United States sports.
Out of sight on television, out of mind.


At Last, the Stone Wall Cracks
It took more than four years to confirm a kernel of truth, but the public now knows, beyond all the fudging or evasion, that senior officials of the Central Intelligence Agency were part of the cover-up of the Iran-contra scandal.
Forbidden by Congress to operate a covert supply line to the rebels in Nicaragua, C.I.A. officials lied at every opportunity to tell the truth and kept the lid on whenever Congress inquired.
Alan Fiers, the agency's former director of covert action in Central America, has blown the lid with his guilty plea to two counts of withholding information from Congress.
The charge is a form of contempt of Congress, which is just what the Reagan Administration displayed with the entire project and its cover-up.


Gasoline Drops to $1.13
Retail gasoline prices dropped a penny over the last week as they continued inching lower amid sluggish demand, according to a survey released this week by the American Automobile Association.
Nationwide, the average price for a gallon of self-serve regular unleaded was $1.13, the survey said.
The price has now fallen 3.7 cents since June 4.
The fuel price was lower or unchanged in every region, the survey said.
Analysts have said that prices have fallen because demand for gasoline remains low during the recession.


Mimi Schnall, 57, Dies; Westchester Democrat
Mimi Schnall, a Westchester County Democratic committeewoman, died on Friday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 57 years old and lived in Greenburgh, N.Y.
Mrs. Schnall died of gall bladder cancer, her husband said.


Borland To Acquire A Rival
After years of successfully beating up on the Ashton-Tate Corporation and its dBase software, Borland International Inc. said yesterday that it would acquire its rival in a stock swap valued at $439 million.
Borland's Paradox data base software has been eating into the market share of dBase, which is both a programming language and a program for managing large data bases on personal computers.


Bankers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Delay for Dykstra
LEN DYKSTRA's return will be put off at least until next week.
The Philadelphia Phillies had hoped their center fielder, who suffered a broken collarbone, three fractured ribs and a broken cheekbone in a car accident May 6, would be ready to return this weekend against the San Francisco Giants.


Raising Hurdle for Coliseum, Judge Orders Clean-Air Plan
A Federal judge ruled yesterday that a massive, long-disputed skyscraper project in Columbus Circle can go forward but will be halted if New York City fails to come up with a plan by late next year to meet Federal air-quality standards in all five boroughs.
The ruling creates another hurdle for a project that has been hobbled by lawsuits and declining economic conditions.
It has been revised and scaled down twice since it was proposed in 1985.
The ruling also appears to hold the project hostage to force the city to meet the federally imposed deadline by November 1992 to specify how it will control air pollution.


Volcano Is Unforeseen Third Party in Talks on Bases in Philippines
An Air Force assessment that the Mount Pinatubo eruptions have probably caused irreparable damage to American installations threatens to make moot a long-running dispute between the United States and the Philippines over extending the leases of two major military bases.
Since World War I, the Subic Bay Naval Station and Clark Air Base have been the hub of American military operations in Asia, and have provided jobs for hundreds of thousands of Filipinos, either directly or in bars and massage parlors around the bases.
The bases' demise could put an end to an important vestige of the colonial past.


Liberty National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Inspired by an Australian Classic
THOUSANDS of Australian children have held "Snugglepot and Cuddlepie" close to their hearts since 1918, when May Gibbs wrote and illustrated the book about the adventurous nymphs.
Now Clarence House is producing a glazed cotton fabric, Water Babies, inspired by the book.
"In our juvenile designs, we like to create classic looks, say, from the 1930's and 40's," said Susan Freedman, the vice president of Clarence House.





CBS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chemfix Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Anderson Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 2


Silicon Valley Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Second Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pay-Per-View Politics
There it was, buried at the end of a newspaper article about the $50 million pay-per-view television special starring boxers Mike Tyson and Donovan ("Razor") Ruddock.
The idea came from an unlikely source -- or not so unlikely, the more you thought about it.
A Las Vegas impresario, Steve Wynn, chairman of Mirage Resorts, which sponsored the multimillion-dollar bonanza, told a reporter there was nothing standing in the way of a colossal $100 million pay-per-view broadcast except the absence of an event that could galvanize a national TV audience.
"Election night!" Mr.
Wynn said.
"That would be a great pay-per-view event!"


Mexicans in Path of Eclipse Want No Place in the Sun
It will be the longest solar eclipse until the 22d century, and tens of thousands of visitors here in Baja California are frantically readying their equipment, studying weather reports and plotting where to watch it on Thursday.
But most of the villagers on this peninsula have already finished their preparations.
Fruit trees have been adorned with red paint and ribbons to deflect "eclipse rays." Women of childbearing age have been advised by their elders to wear protective safety pins, keys and red underwear.
Most important of all, villagers have their equipment ready: Their television sets are plugged in.
Nearly everyone seems to be planning to follow all the action from indoors.


Excerpts From Bush's Remarks on Sanctions: 'This Progress Is Irreversible'
Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference today at the White House: OPENING STATEMENT
First, let me state that apartheid must be eliminated, and we've worked with the nations of the world to bring an end to this system of racial prejudice by every means possible.
Political and economic pressure had been brought against the Government of South Africa by the United States and by other nations for the last several years.
And progress has been slow and often painful.
But progress has definitely been made.


Songwriters End Sony Suit
A group of songwriters agreed yesterday to drop a lawsuit against the Sony Corporation, removing one of the final obstacles to an agreement for the consumer electronics industry to pay royalities to the music industry to compensate for sales lost when music is copied at home with digital recording equipment.
The agreement is expected to be announced today in New York.
Officials at Sony and Michael Oberman, a lawyer for the songwriters, declined to comment yesterday.


Keane Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Sides Rest Cases at Trial In St. John's Sexual Assault
The defense and the prosecution in the St.
John's University sexual assault trial rested their cases yesterday after the final witness gave contradictory and at times confusing testimony.
The prosecution presented 16 witnesses, but the defense opened and closed its case in one day with only two witnesses.
Their testimony was intended to underscore the defense theme that the female student who says she was sodomized and sexually degraded by the three defendants had been provocative and appeared to have invited the sexual activity.


First Indo-American Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SI Handling Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 2


Pain Pills Found Effective in Arthritis
Inexpensive pain killers sold over the counter are just as effective as a prescription anti-inflammatory drug in treating arthritis of the knee, a new study has found.
The finding could have a significant effect on medical care because osteoarthritis of the knee, which is related to normal wear and tear, afflicts 80 percent of the people by the time they are 65 years old and because most doctors prescribe anti-inflammatory drugs when patients complain of knee pain from arthritis.


Archdiocese Will Lay Off 111 Workers
The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, faced with a budget deficit and cutbacks in New York City programs it helps run, announced yesterday that it was laying off employees for the first time since the fiscal crisis of the 1970's.
Layoff notices have been sent to 111 workers, most of them in a joint city-archdiocesean program that makes home visits to troubled families.
The layoffs are being made to help close the archdiocese's $30 million deficit in its $370 million operating budget.


Home Video
When "Ninja Turtles II: The Secret of the Ooze" is released this month, the cassette jacket will carry a logo with the notation "Copy Protected," and the tape will have an eight-second message before the movie saying: "In order to insure that the program you are viewing is an original and of the highest quality, this videocassette is protected by the Macrovision anticopy process."


Merchants Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Music in Review
Steve Winwood  Madison Square Garden
If the pantheon of English rock stars who became famous in the 1960's were compared to the court of King Arthur, Steve Winwood would most resemble the noble Sir Galahad.
At age 43, the singer, keyboardist and guitarist, who performed at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday evening, stands alone among those 60's rock pioneers in retaining a relatively youthful image.
And his repertory, which in recent years has become heavily laced with mystical ballads like "Higher Love," portrays him as an ardent seeker after truth and light.


Bailout-Job Panel Formed
Federal officials said today that they had formed a search committee to find a chief executive to run the bailout of the nation's savings and loans.
The move comes as the Bush Administration is facing an uphill fight for $80 billion it has requested from Congress to continue the highly unpopular rescue.
Treasury officials hope that creating the post would discourage Congress from making any critical changes in the regulatory structure that oversees the bailout, which now is expected by some to cost American taxpayers more than $500 billion over 40 years.


Student Loan Marketing Association reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Provena Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Joseph P. Young, Executive, 86
Joseph Paul Young, retired senior vice president and director of circulation for Conde Nast Publications, died on Monday at his home in White Plains.
He was 86 years old.
He died of Parkinson's disease, a spokesman for the family said.


Giving Women More Than Quick Abortion Fix
To the Editor:
"Abortion: An Inmate's View" (Op-Ed, June 25) offers a convicted murderer's view of abortion.
Whatever insight Jean Harris has to offer is tainted by her own assessment of the value of human life.


It's Time for Rotisserie League Owners to Go for Broke or Bail Out
While the midseason mark of the baseball season signals the time many fans begin to seriously follow the pennant races, it also means the end of the trading deadline in most Rotisserie leagues.
Owners of Rotisserie teams should take this opportunity to scrutinize their rosters and decide whether their teams have a realistic chance of competing for the championship, or whether they should begin playing for next year.
If there are legitimate contenders among the owners, they should make every possible move to enhance their chances of winning because they cannot be sure when they will get their next opportunity to go for it all.
The best way to strengthen a team is by trading the undervalued players on your roster to teams at the bottom of the standing for their proved veterans, since you can usually predict what kind of numbers the seasoned players will have at the end of the year.


2 Networks Appeal Rules
NBC and CBS are asking the Federal Communications Commission to reconsider its new rules that block them from owning the shows they broadcast and selling them into rerun syndication.
In May, the commission revised its financial interest and syndication rules, allowing networks to own up to 40 percent of the prime-time shows they produce themselves but still barring them from domestic syndication of first-run entertainment shows.


Airline Traffic Posts 12% Drop
Dampened by war and recession, international passenger traffic on 200 leading airlines fell an average of 12 percent in the first five months of the year, an industry group said today.
Airlines also lost $2.5 billion from January through March, the group, the International Air Transport Association, said.


Kawasaki Is Told To Pay for Jet Skis
Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ltd. and two subsidiaries have been ordered to pay $21 million to an engineer who invented the jet ski and had accused the Japanese company of stealing it.
A six-member Federal court jury here found that $7.5 million in compensatory damages and $13.5 million in punitive damages should be paid to the inventor, Clayton Jacobson, said Rodney Soda, a lawyer for Mr.
Jacobson.
Attempts to reach Kawasaki's lawyers were unsuccessful.


North Testimony Under Immunity Is Seen Aiding Iran-Contra Inquiry
Oliver L. North, the central figure in the Iran-contra affair, provided fresh grand jury testimony that may have helped prosecutors revive their investigation by obtaining admissions from a former Central Intelligence Agency official, according to lawyers and a review of legal documents in the case.
Mr.
North testified to the grand jury more than a dozen times in recent months.
That testimony and some of his personal documents obtained by prosecutors during Mr.
North's trial, including his notebooks, offered crucial clues about conversations and meetings with a wide variety of officials on efforts to supply the Nicaraguan rebels by diverting to them profits from arms sales to Iran.


IEH Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 29


Pinnacle Banc Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Events: Day Lilies, Shakespeare and Trees
Definitely Day Lilies
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
Day Lily Weekend, with talks, demonstrations and guided tours, will be held from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday.
On July 17 from 8:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., there will be a bus trip to three private gardens and a nursery on Long Island, each of which features day lilies in landscape design.
Fee, $65 ($55, members).
Registration is required for the bus trip; call (212) 220-8747.


Elliott Heard Jr., 58, Superior Court Judge
Superior Court Judge Elliott G. Heard Jr., the first black appointed to the bench in Gloucester County, died of cancer on Tuesday at Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 58 years old and lived in Mullica Hill, N.J.
A Democrat, he was appointed to the bench in 1984 by Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, a Republican.
Judge Heard presided over the family court division.


Last Allied Soldiers In Iraq Kurdish Zone To Leave by Monday
The United States and its European allies will withdraw their last remaining troops in northern Iraq by Monday, Pentagon officials and European diplomats said today.
To protect Iraqi Kurds from possible retribution by President Saddam Hussein, the officials said the United States and seven European countries have agreed to leave behind a 2,500-member rapid deployment force in southeastern Turkey.


Rafferty Fined $8,000
RONAN RAFFERTY of Northern Ireland was fined $8,000 yesterday for walking out of the United States Open last month.
Rafferty quit the course after nine holes of the second round at the Hazeltine Country Club in Minnesota, and flew home.
Rafferty was 11-over par at the time and stood little chance of making the cut.
He later said he left because he was concerned about his pregnant wife. (AP)


Premier Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cherry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Designatronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Washington Talk; Two Reaching for Whip in the House
"Happy Birthday," Representative David E. Bonior wrote Representative Lewis F. Payne Jr., congratulating him on his 46th birthday Tuesday.
"I know I haven't mentioned your birthday the last few years. But recently you've been on my mind. I hope I've been on yours. All the best. David."
While Mr.
Payne allowed that it was "awfully kind of David" to send the birthday note, he said it would not sway him.
Mr.
Bonior is squaring off Thursday against Representative Steny H. Hoyer in a secret ballot to replace Representative William H. Gray 3d of Pennsylvania as Democratic whip, the third-ranking leadership post in the House.


Bell Atlantic Repair Allowed
The Bell Atlantic Corporation can work on a computer problem that caused a huge phone failure without official exemption from a Federal court order barring regional telephone companies from making equipment, a Federal judge said today.
During a hearing, Federal District Judge Harold H. Greene here told the company to "go ahead and fix this" problem with the computer software.
But he also denied Bell Atlantic's formal request for an emergency waiver of his standing order.


U.S. Makes First Payment on Debt to U.N.
The United States took the first step today toward paying off its longstanding debt to the United Nations.
The United States representative, Thomas R. Pickering, said Washington was in the process of paying the first of five yearly installments of $36.1 million for the organization's regular budget.
In addtion, the United States also arranged to pay the United Nations $18.5 million for its Iraq Kuwait Observer Mission.
That was the full United States assessment.


Youthful Yankees a Big Surprise But Outlook Is Wait Till Next Year
The Yankees are still pennant contenders in the American League East as their second half starts tonight against the Angels in Anaheim, Calif.
That is no misprint.
It is a mouthful.
The team with serious troubles on and off the field last season has rebounded quickly from a 67-95 record, its worst since 1913, to play promising and surprising baseball in the Bronx.
New York has not yet reached the .500 mark, but a suspect division allows the club to ponder playing meaningful games in September.


Thomas Smoked Marijuana But Retains Bush Support
The White House said today that Judge Clarence Thomas, President Bush's Supreme Court nominee, had smoked marijuana while in college, but that the President had decided that it was "a minor matter" that should not disqualify him.
Judy Smith, a spokeswoman for the White House, said Judge Thomas had smoked marijuana "several times" while he was an undergraduate at the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Mass., "and perhaps once" when he was at Yale Law School.


For Many, the Thrill Of the New Is Gone
THEY are the dropouts of the electronic age.
Their eyes glaze over when they hear phrases like "eight times oversampling" and "bitstream D/A conversion." They tend to demur when asked their opinion of compact disks.
And rather than contemplate store shelves stocked with compact disk players, laser disk players and combi-players, they keep their old equipment with its familiar dials and knobs and worn grooves.


Market Place; Hospital Concerns Are Selling Stock
ATTRACTED by robust prices for publicly owned hospital companies, at least two large hospital groups that were taken private in the late 1980's are preparing to return to the stock market.
Healthtrust, the big hospital chain that was spun off to employees in 1987 by the Hospital Corporation of America, says it plans an initial public offering later this year.
And American Medical Holdings plans to sell 16.2 million shares; in 1989 it was taken over in a leveraged buyout by Harry Gray, a former chairman of the United Technologies Corporation; Melvyn Klein, a lawyer, and the Pritzker family of Chicago.
The plan would increase public holdings to 34 percent from 20 percent now.
American Medical, based in Dallas, said its private investors would put in $92 million at the same time through a private placement that would value the stock at around $11.80.
American Medical Holdings closed at $11 yesterday, up 12.5 cents, on the American Stock Exchange.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section last Thursday incorrectly rendered the name of an artist whose work is on view in the "Green" exhibition at the Max Protetch Gallery in SoHo.
She is Elyn Zimmerman.


Licensee Is Now Selling a Lotus Data Base
A controversial software product created and eventually abandoned by the Lotus Development Corporation is being sold in a limited form by a start-up company under a licensing agreement with Lotus.
Marketplace, a data base that contains millions of names, addresses and profiles of consumers and businesses, was taken off the market by Lotus in January after protests by Lotus customers and privacy advocates.
For Macintosh PC's
The new company, the Marketplace Information Corporation, which like Lotus is based in Cambridge, Mass., hopes to avoid controversy by selling only the business-to-business data base.
The company said it would not sell the consumer data base, which Lotus had called Household.


Rockwood National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thomas D. Nicholson Dies at 68; Led Museum of Natural History
Thomas D. Nicholson, the director of the American Museum of Natural History from 1969 to 1989, when he retired, died on Tuesday at his home in Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
He was 68 years old.
He died of cancer, Herb Kurz, the museum's public affairs director, said yesterday.


Business Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Unitrin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Patricia Robbins Beatty, Wrote Children's Books on the West, 68
Patricia Robbins Beatty, an award-winning author of 50 children's books, died on Tuesday at the Riverside (Calif.) Community Hospital.
She was 68 years old and lived in Riverside.
She died of lung cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


King to Confront Her Historic Possibilities in U.S. Open
Although this week's possibilities at historic Colonial Country Club are indeed spectacular, Betsy King will rely on the serene control that guides her entire life in her attempt to become the first golfer to win three United States Women's Opens in a row.
Combining quiet determination with restraint is the way King, 35 years old, has learned to win on the L.P.G.A.
Tour.
She went without a victory in her first seven years on tour as she struggled to harness her big swing and a considerable temper.
But since enlisting instructor Ed Oldfield to help her understand her mechanics, and intensifying her Christian commitment to understand herself, King has won 24 tournaments in the last eight years.
Righteous Anger Allowed
"My problem is I get emotional, but I have the wrong emotions," King said the other day as she prepared for the first round of the 72-hole Open on Thursday.
"I have more of an anger emotion than a happy emotion. Through my faith, I've learned that righteous anger is the only anger that is O.K., and there are very few times you're faced with righteous anger on the golf course. So, I've tempered how I approach everything."


BRIEFS
*
Charter Consolidated P.L.C., London, a conglomerate, sold 1.6 million shares of Minorco S.A., the Luxembourg-based unit of the Anglo American Corporation of South Africa, completing a program to sell low-yielding assets.


Financial Officer Named To a Top Job at Rockwell
The Rockwell International Corporation said yesterday that it had named Robert A. dePalma, its chief financial officer for the last six years, to be vice chairman.
The company said Mr. dePalma would be replaced as senior vice president and chief financial officer by W. Michael Barnes, who had previously been corporate vice president for business development and planning.


CHRONICLE
The rap musician M. C. HAMMER was named Booster of the Year by his hometown, Oakland, Calif.
"Everything I learned, good and bad, I learned here," he said.
"I survived the streets of Oakland. I can survive anywhere."


House Votes Curbs on Chinese Imports
Outraged by China's human rights record, trade surplus with the United States and reluctance to restrict arms shipments, the House of Representatives approved two measures today to restrict Chinese exports to the United States.
By a vote of 223 to 204, the House, as expected, adopted a binding resolution that would cancel President Bush's renewal of China's most favored nation status.
But the margin indicated that this measure stood no chance of surviving the veto that Mr.
Bush promised.


Save the Whaling Panel
To the Editor:
The International Whaling Commission is the only barrier between whales and their unlimited destruction.
The Bush Administration is undermining the commission's effectiveness, indeed threatening its survival, by not paying the full United States dues assessment for the year.


Quotation of the Day
"Great Russia is rising from its knees. We shall surely transform it into a prosperous, law-based, democratic, peaceful and sovereign state." -- Boris N. Yeltsin after taking the oath as President of Russia.  [ A1:4. ]


De Klerk's Victory; Without Resolving the Issue of Power, Pretoria Regains World Acceptance
With the lifting of American economic sanctions against South Africa today, President F. W. de Klerk has received the most significant foreign endorsement yet of his contention that the dismantling of apartheid that he began last year will not be reversed.
By leading South Africa back into international acceptance after years of isolation for its racist policies, Mr. de Klerk is fulfilling his promise to whites that the respectability gained will outweigh their loss of privilege over the black majority.


Frank W. Fetter, 92, Professor of Economics
Frank Whitson Fetter, an economist and educator, died on Sunday at the Hanover Terrace Healthcare, a nursing home in Hanover, N.H.
He was 92 years old and lived in Hanover.
Dr. Fetter died of cancer, said a spokesman for the family.


Iran-Contra Guilty Plea May Stall Vote on Gates
The Senate Intelligence Committee is weighing whether to delay hearings, tentatively scheduled for Monday, on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, committee staff members and Administration officials said today.
The hesitation stems from the guilty plea Tuesday by a former Central Intelligence Agency official who admitted in Federal Court that he told his superiors about crucial elements of the Iran-contra affair months before the dealings were publicly disclosed.
The admission by Alan D. Fiers Jr., the former chief of the C.I.A.'s Central American Task Force, that he had told his superiors that profits from arms sales to Iran were going to aid the Nicaraguan rebels has revived questions about whether Mr.
Gates knew more than he acknowledged about the affair in 1986 when he was Deputy Director of the intelligence agency.


Child-Friendly Version Of Loch Ness Monster
NESSIE, a not-so-threatening cousin of the Loch Ness monster, can be a boon for parents whose children make bath time a battle royal.
Nessie is a hand-held shower that can be connected to any standard shower head or tub spout with the aid of a screw-on diverter available from hardware or plumbing-supply stores.


Campeau Is Sued By Its Founder
Robert Campeau, who brought the Campeau Corporation to the brink of bankruptcy and was then forced out, is suing the company for wrongful dismissal and seeking $88 million in compensation.
Mr.
Campeau's suit seeks damages for the way he was removed as president, chairman and chief executive.
Campeau, founded in Toronto by Mr.
Campeau 37 years ago, owns major United States retail chains including Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and Burdines, which are operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.


Books of The Times; A Plan for Saving the Children
When the Bough Breaks The Cost of Neglecting Our Children By Sylvia Ann Hewlett Illustrated. 346 pages.
Basic Books/HarperCollins. $22.95.
Yes, another Cassandra come to warn us about what we are doing to the children.
But Sylvia Ann Hewlett doesn't only wring our hearts in her passionately argued "When the Bough Breaks: The Cost of Neglecting Our Children." She tries to wring our pocketbooks as well.
And she makes some very good sense.


Mulheren's Conviction Is Overturned by Court
A Federal appeals court yesterday threw out the conviction of John A. Mulheren Jr., the former Wall Street speculator who was found guilty last year on charges that he conspired with Ivan F. Boesky to illegally manipulate stock prices.
In a blistering critique of the Government's case, the court said that none of Mr.
Mulheren's convictions could stand because the Government did not have any conclusive evidence that a crime had occurred.
Because the convictions were dismissed, Mr.
Mulheren cannot be retried on those charges.


Help, Someone, Make New York an Affordable Place to Live
To the Editor:
The annual Rent Guidelines Board follies have closed (news item, June 25) without satisfying anyone.
Nor could they have, in today's economy in New York City.
On one side are the landlords, whose property taxes are undoubtedly going up, and on the other are the renters, many of whom have been in the same six-room apartments since marriage after World War II, through child rearing and now retirement.


Soviet Voices Cry Out For Drastic Solutions To the Economic Crisis
On the eve of perestroika, there was a popular notion in the liberal Soviet intelligentsia that once restraints on free thought were lifted, reform and prosperity would surely follow.
In those dark days, Soviet citizens who publicly complained about their lives, especially to foreigners, risked being jailed for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda."


Digital Sound Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Horizon Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Response by C.F.A.
The College Football Association, responding to an antitrust suit filed by the Federal Trade Commission, said at a hearing in Washington yesterday that the F.T.C. did not have legal jurisdiction to pursue its case.
The C.F.A., which has 65 member schools, has a five-year, $300 million contract that begins this season with ABC, which also has a pact to televise Big Ten and Pacific-10 games.


A Pile of Pies and a City Hall Cake Mark Birthday for Dinkins


CHRONICLE
The film producer SHERRY LANSING ("Fatal Attraction," "The Accused") and the director WILLIAM FRIEDKIN ("The French Connection," "The Exorcist") said Tuesday that they were married in a private ceremony on Barbados on Saturday.


BUSH LIFTS A BAN ON ECONOMIC TIES TO SOUTH AFRICA
President Bush today lifted the American economic sanctions imposed on South Africa in 1986, saying Pretoria's moves to end its system of racial separation and white minority rule were "irreversible."
Mr.
Bush said the State Department had advised him that with the release of all political prisoners in recent weeks, President F. W. de Klerk had met all five conditions laid down by the sanctions legislation and therefore by executive order he was immediately ending the ban on trade with South Africa, bank loans to its Government, new investments there and airline connections.


History and a Name In a Vienna Project
Karl Marx Hof, one of this city's largest public housing projects, embodied the hope of a better life for hundreds of thousands of workers living in squalid conditions when it opened in 1930.
Situated provocatively in the city's exclusive 19th district, Karl Marx Hof's large red facade and powerful arches, not to mention its name, immediately became a symbol of the strength of the worker and the city's socialist government.
Now, 61 years later, Karl Marx Hof is impressive more for architectural than political reasons.
Halfway through a three-year renovation that is expected to cost the city more than $36 million, the Expressionist structure by the Viennese architect Karl Ehn, with its Cubist forms and details that recall the style of Frank Lloyd Wright, is a landmark and a lure for tourists.


Brazil Coach Inherits Tradition and Little Else
After a decade of decline, when money, talent and fans were in short supply, Brazilian soccer has taken the first step in its effort to dominate the sport worldwide again.
The short-term goal is to win the 1994 World Cup, to be held for the first time in the United States.
With that in mind, but with little in the way of resources to make it happen, the Brazilian Soccer Federation has placed its hopes on a new coach and hired Paulo Roberto Falcao to guide the team.


Westcorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hearings Postponed On C.I.A. Nominee
Despite last-minute appeals from the White House, the Senate Intelligence Committee indefinitely postponed its hearings on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to head the Central Intelligence Agency.
The hearings had been tentatively scheduled for Monday.
The panel said it wanted more information about what Mr.
Gates knew of the Iran-contra affair.
Members will convene Tuesday to decide when to begin the hearings.
Article, page A10.


French Liquidation
A French court has decided to liquidate one of the country's two remaining personal computer makers after the company failed to find a buyer.
The decision by a commercial court to liquidate SMT-Goupil leaves state-controlled Groupe Bull as the only French company still making personal computers.
The demise of SMT-Goupil had been widely expected after Ing.
C.
Olivetti &amp; Company S.p.A.. the big Italian computer maker, said two weeks ago it was no longer interested in rescuing the French company.


Wasserstein Names Capital Markets Chief
Luis S. Mendez, former head of the equity department at the First Boston Corporation, is joining Wasserstein, Perella &amp; Company as head of the firm's fledging capital markets division.
Mr.
Mendez, who knew Bruce Wasserstein and Joseph Perella at First Boston, joins his former co-workers after a two-year stint as a consultant.
Mr.
Mendez, 54, left First Boston in June 1989. and during his time as a consultant, he meet frequently with Mr.
Wasserstein and Mr.
Perella to discuss the development of a capital markets operation at their firm.


Freed From Prison, Simon Returns to Bronx and Weeps in Joy
Politicians often describe the Allenwood Federal prison camp in Pennsylvania as a country club.
But one former politician, Stanley Simon, who spent 2 years and 14 days there, doesn't see it that way.
"There is no semblance of a country club," Mr.
Simon, the former Bronx Borough President, said yesterday, the day after he was released.
"Everybody there would give their right arm not to be there."


Review/Film; Surf's Up For F.B.I. In Bigelow's 'Point Break'
"You trying to tell me the F.B.I.'s going to pay me to learn to surf?"
Yes, dude, that's exactly what his superiors are trying to tell Johnny Utah (Keanu Reeves), a clean-cut rookie officer with a secret flair for being bodacious.
In "Point Break," Johnny happens to be available when a gang of bank robbers leaves behind a surfboard-wax sample (in a footprint), some beach-related toxins (in a strand of hair) and photographic evidence of a tan line (in a surveillance camera shot of one masked robber delivering a kind of humorous message by dropping his pants).


Bonior of Michigan Is Picked as 3d-Ranking House Democrat
House Democrats today elected Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan as whip, marking the fourth major shift in the Democratic Congressional leadership in five years.
After weeks of intense, behind-the-scenes campaigning, Mr.
Bonior, a low-keyed insider tactician who served four years as chief deputy whip, defeated Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, chairman of the House Democratic Caucus.
The vote, by secret ballot in a closed meeting of the Democratic caucus, was 160 to 109.


How I'm PC
We've been exposed to an alarming number of university-bashing polemics, some with ominous titles like "Killing the Spirit," "The Death of Literature," "The War Against the Intellect" and "The Graves of Academe." With "killing," "death," "war," "graves," it sounds like Armageddon, doesn't it?
Among the most recent works to warn us that the academic sky is falling is the less terminally titled "Illiberal Education: The Politics of Race and Sex on Campus." Its author, Dinesh D'Souza, disapprovingly analyzes what he calls a "minority victims' revolution," a kind of revenge of the previously downtrodden.


After Prison, Ex-Officer's Advice on Police Violence: 'Don't Do It!'
Peter Marsala, a former New York City police officer, has a piece of advice for "brother and sister officers" who have edged too close to excessive force: "Don't do it!"
Mr. Marsala went over that edge and paid the price -- 28 months in prison.


A Retirement At Compaq
The Compaq Computer Corporation said today that Michael S. Swavely, president for its North American division, had decided to retire.
Mr.
Swavely, who has been on sabbatical since January, was succeeded by Eckhard Pfeiffer, formerly president for international operations.
Mr.
Pfeiffer also assumed the new position of chief operating officer.


Holyfield vs. Tyson: The Winner Is TVKO
TVKO can't lose.
First, its Nov. 8 megafight was to be a rematch of Evander Holyfield and George Foreman.
Their April 19 fight lured 8.5 percent of all homes equipped with pay-per-view television, and there's no reason to think a second go-round would have scared off buyers.
Not with P. T. Foreman as chief promoter.


Treasury Issues Rise as Rates Dip
The reappointment of Alan Greenspan as chairman of the Federal Reserve helped to start a mild rally in the credit markets yesterday, as prices of Treasury securities rose and interest rates fell a bit.
Also lifting the markets were expectations that an inflation report expected today would show that price pressures were under control during June.


Robbing the Elderly of Joy
To Connecticut legislators, the goings-on at Fairfield's Jewish Home for the Elderly were a near-scandal.
Patients were selling raffle tickets.
A Sweetheart Ball was coming up.
The bulletin board carried announcements for a craft sale and even a weekend cocktail party.
Faced with such frivolity -- and rising costs -- the lawmakers targeted the state's nursing homes for budget cuts, urging that they be stripped to "essential services" and that perks be dropped.
Lorraine Anderson in the State Office of Management suggests that Connecticut rethink its approach to nursing home care.
What has to be asked now, she insists, is "What is care?"


No Headline
U.S.-Soviet Arms Talks Gain Little Ground
The Secretary of State and the Soviet Foreign Minister said they made only limited progress in nuclear arms reduction talks, and not enough to schedule a summit meeting.
Page A4.


Sears Unit Sells $500 Million In Asset-Backed Securities
Sears Receivables Financing Group Inc., a subsidiary of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, yesterday priced $500 million in asset-backed certificates due in 1996 through a Sears Credit Account Trust 1991-C.
A syndicate managed by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc. managed the underwriting.


Poof Go Percentages as Mets Win in 9th Inning
The Mets had Gregg Jefferies on second with two outs and the score tied at 3-3 in the ninth inning, Garry Templeton about to pinch-hit for Kevin Elster and Kevin McReynolds on deck last night.
Greg Riddoch, the manager of the Padres, checked the printout of data in his dugout, determined that McReynolds had three hits in 21 career at-bats against Larry Andersen, and decided to go with the percentages.
Riddoch walked Templeton to get to McReynolds.


Precious Metal Prices Drop, With Platinum Leading Fall
Prices of precious-metal futures dropped yesterday as news of a cleaner-burning gasoline stirred speculation of reduced platinum demand, and a stronger dollar undercut gold and silver values.
Platinum settled $5.50 to $5.80 an ounce lower on the New York Mercantile Exchange, with the contract for delivery in July at $374.


Bradley Beats Heat to Lead Open
On a day so hot even a solar eclipse couldn't provide enough shade, veteran Pat Bradley conquered bumpy greens and swirling winds as well as the 95-degree weather today and took the first-round lead in the 46th United States Women's Open.
Shunning the parasols that many in the field walked under to escape the severe heat, Bradley resolutely looked out from under her visor on her way to a two-under-par 69 over the difficult and weatherbeaten Colonial Country Club course.


Time Warner Said to Seek Simpler Deal
Under fire from regulators and shareholders, Time Warner Inc. struggled yesterday to find an alternative to its proposed rights offering.
After backing away from the initial complex plan, it is now looking at more traditional ways of raising the cash it needs to pay off some of its nearly $11 billion in debt, people familiar with the proposed deal said.
Several executives with knowledge of the talks said the company now preferred a much simpler deal that could raise between $2 billion and $2.7 billion, as opposed to the $2 billion to $3.5 billion of the initial plan.
The executives said one option that was now attractive was a guaranteed rights offering underwritten by investment banks.
There is also talk of a straight equity offering.


Thomas D. Nicholson Dies at 68; Led Museum of Natural History
Thomas D. Nicholson, the director of the American Museum of Natural History from 1969 to 1989, when he retired, died on Tuesday at his home in Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
He was 68 years old.
He died of cancer, Herb Kurz, the museum's public affairs director, said yesterday.


Review/Film; A Chance to Confound Fate
"BOYZ 'N THE HOOD," John Singleton's terrifically confident first feature, places Mr.
Singleton on a footing with Spike Lee as a chronicler of the frustration faced by young black men growing up in urban settings.
But Mr.
Singleton, who wrote and directed this film set in south central Los Angeles, has a distinctly Californian point of view.
Unlike Mr.
Lee's New York stories, which give their neighborhoods the finiteness and theatricality of stage sets, Mr.
Singleton examines a more sprawling form of claustrophobia and a more adolescent angst.
If Mr.
Lee felt inclined to remake George Lucas's "American Graffiti" with a more fatalistic outlook and a political agenda, the results might be very much like this.
"Boyz 'n the Hood" spans seven years in the life of Tre Styles (Cuba Gooding Jr.), who in the film's first episode is seen idly discussing street crimes, and in its last is caught up in one such crime himself.
Beginning with some sobering statistics detailing the homicide rate among black men in America, the film builds toward a deadly climax even while depicting its characters' best efforts to keep violence at bay.


Unhappy Rocket Fans
RAGHIB ISMAIL 's introduction to the Canadian Football League's regular season was a loud chorus of boos last night.
The slender rookie receiver from Notre Dame watched the game between the Toronto Argonauts and the Ottawa Rough Riders from the bench at Lansdowne Park.
The crowd of 23,254 booed heartily when the public-address announcer informed them that the injured Ismail was not dressed for the game.


Walker Slides In
Minnesota Viking running back HERSCHEL WALKER finished third yesterday but still qualified for a spot on the 1992 United States Olympic and World Cup bobsledding team.


Media General Posts 59% Drop
Media General Inc. said today that its second-quarter profits fell 59 percent from the period a year ago, when it recorded a one-time gain of $6.4 million.
The company also noted declining advertising revenues in reporting net income of $5.1 million, or 20 cents a share, in the quarter that ended on June 30.
Media General, based in Richmond, had earnings of $12.4 million, or 48 cents a share, a year earlier.


Our Towns
Once upon a time there was a little town in Putnam County.
That town had a lot of moms and dads and children who dreamed of performing such amazing feats of athletic achievement that the hometown crowd would be paralyzed with awe, unable even to aim its Instamatics.
So powerful is the thunderous applause of even just eight approving adults in the ears of Little Leaguers everywhere that many feel compelled to wave to the grandstands as they trot to first base.


Awe on Earth as the Sun Disappears
Hundreds of cloud-fearing men and women began assembling on the beach at dawn here today, and by 10:25 they were gratefully baking under clear blue skies as they looked through their filtered telescopes and binoculars.
"First contact," someone shouted, to great applause, and Dr.
William Rosenzweig looked at his watch.
"The universe works," proclaimed Dr.
Rosenzweig, a gynecologist from Burlingame, Calif.
"There's some satisfaction in that."


Changes at Top Levels Of American Savings
The American Savings Bank F.S.B., a 39-branch institution based in White Plains, yesterday announced sweeping changes in its top management.
W.
Ronald Dietz, 48 years old, was elected president, chief executive and a director, replacing William G. Lillis, who will remain at the bank until his previously announced retirement on Oct. 31.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.62
5.72
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.57
7.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.69
7.57
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.15
8.26
8.49
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.46
8.50
8.49
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.49
9.55
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.17
7.18
7.44
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Auctions
Two Masks Go Home
Two of the three American Indian ceremonial masks that were auctioned at Sotheby's in New York on May 21 -- despite protests by two tribes -- were returned last week to their tribal owners.


States Plan Suit on Tax for a Nuclear Plant
Officials from Rhode Island, Massachusetts and Connecticut said today that they would sue New Hampshire in the Supreme Court over its new tax on utilities that own the Seabrook nuclear plant.
They contend that the tax unfairly discriminates against out-of-state utilities because New Hampshire utilities that own part of Seabrook get an offsetting credit against their state business taxes.


Bayer Looks East
Bayer A.G., the German drug maker, said it planned to invest about 500 million marks, or about $276.2 million, over the next five years in an industrial park in eastern Germany that would provide hundreds of jobs.
Bayer said it was negotiating with the Treuhand, the agency that controls property of the former East German Government, to buy land in the state of Saxony-Anhalt.


Surrendering Pomp To Fit Circumstance
As the New York City Council's lone Republican, Alfred C. Cerullo 3d of Staten Island is also its minority leader of one, and as such has rated a city car and driver.
But in a nod to the city's fiscal woes, Mr.
Cerullo said yesterday that he would relinquish that perquisite next week.
The minority leader's Chevrolet Caprice will return to the city motor pool, and his $24,500-a-year driver will no longer rack up two hours of overtime a day.
The chauffeur will be available to fill in for other city drivers.


Pressure on Los Angeles Chief Growing
Pressure on the Los Angeles Police Chief, Daryl F. Gates, mounted today as transcripts of testimony by an assistant chief and a recently retired assistant chief were made public.
The transcripts portrayed the Chief as a remote administrator who looked the other way when it came to the use of excessive force by police officers.
Assistant Chief David D. Dotson recalled a case in 1988 in which officers were accused of brutality and property destruction during a drug raid.
Sergeants supervising the raid, he said, moved out of the way when glass came raining down rather than find out what was happening.
The commander involved was never disciplined.


The Specter of a Nuclear Dump Site Divides an Upstate Town


At the Bar
What are we to make of the fact that Wallace Stevens, who by early morning, evening and weekend wrote some of America's most important and abstruse poetry, was an insurance lawyer in Hartford by day?
That question has become fair game as law school faculties have become saturated with poets and novelists and philosophers and literary critics manques.
Out of intellectual curiosity and, perhaps, a need to find kindred spirits somewhere in the vast reaches of the legal profession, members of the growing "Law and Literature" movement have glommed onto and delved into writers who either studied law, like Kafka, or wrote on legal themes, like Melville.


Rochlitz Journal; A German Who Dares, in Parachutes and Politics
A military helicopter descended from the clouds and landed on a meadow outside this pleasant eastern German town one morning recently, and Jurgen Mollemann bounded out to begin another day of campaigning.
The energetic German Economics Minister was packed into a waiting Volvo limousine and hustled to the town hall, where a crowd of local officials and political supporters was waiting.
His speech was upbeat, an appeal to eastern Germans to have a bit of patience as they confront their current economic problems.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-5
A jetliner crashed in Saudi Arabia, killing all 261 people reported aboard the plane.
The DC-8 jet, which was carrying Muslim pilgrims home to Nigeria, crashed while making an emergency landing after takeoff.
Page A1


CHRONICLE
GEENA DAVIS, a star of the film "Thelma and Louise," has taken over the lead in "A League of Their Own," a film about the first season of the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League in 1943.
The part was to have been played by DEBRA WINGER, who was removed from the cast by the studio, Columbia Pictures.
She did not leave voluntarily, said her publicity agent, PATRICIA KINGSLEY.


Stocks Gain In Slow Day; Dow Up 14.98
Stock prices rose a little yesterday in sluggish trading as investors waited for further news on the direction of second-quarter earnings.
Summing up what appeared to be the tenor of the market, Edwin Walczak, chief investment officer of Vontobel U.S.A., the American arm of Bank Vontobel of Zurich, said: "There's not a lot going on. Usually you get four or five calls a day. But the market's been so flat for so long, I haven't gotten a call from a broker in two days."


Review/Film; Don Juan Returns As Senor Nice Guy
It is the conceit of "Don Juan, My Love" that, after 450 years, the legendary womanizer arises from his grave to do one good deed, thereby to escape purgatory and get on with the business of death.
Antonio Mercero's new Spanish comedy opens today at Cinema 1.
Like Mr.
Mercero's "Wait for Me in Heaven," in which Generalissimo Franco and his official stand-in were the central characters, "Don Juan, My Love" is a comedy of mistaken identities.


CHRONICLE
Writers including MAYA ANGELOU, ARTHUR MILLER and YEVGENY YEVTUSHENKO have joined an appeal by the PEN American Center in New York for clemency for HAROLD OTEY .
Mr.
Otey, 39 years old, is on death row in Nebraska for the 1977 murder of a woman during a burglary.
After several appeals, he is now seeking a life sentence without parole.
He was granted a stay of execution until Monday so the Nebraska Board of Pardons could reconsider his case.
PEN, the writers' and editors' society, has members from Canada, England, Germany, the Soviet Union, Israel, Sweden and the United States joining the appeal.
They have sent letters to Gov.
BENJAMIN NELSON, arguing that Mr.
Otey should receive clemency because he has been a model prisoner and because he had no prior convictions.
On death row, he has passed his general educational development exam and taken classes in literature, philosophy, logic and religion.
He has published three books of poetry and wants to teach in prison.


List of Potential Iraq Targets Gets Presidential Approval
President Bush has approved a list of about 20 Iraqi command-and-control targets that would be attacked if Baghdad refused to comply with international demands that its nuclear technology be destroyed, Pentagon officials said today.
Administration officials have concluded that punitive strikes on Iraqi leaders would inflict more pain on President Saddam Hussein and his high command than strikes aimed at sites where Baghdad is suspected of hiding equipment and materials used to develop nuclear or chemical weapons, a senior Pentagon official said today.


Review/Film; A White Dog as a Metaphor for Racism
"White Dog," the unreleased 1981 film about racism that opens the Film Forum's tribute to Sam Fuller, the B-movie giant, cast a long shadow before it ever saw the light of day.
Long deferred in preproduction, and at various times assigned to directors as disparate and unlikely as Roman Polanski and Tony Scott, "White Dog" was made with an N.A.A.C.P. representative on the set and with threats that the film might be boycotted if and when it was ever finished.
Both Paramount Pictures , the film's distributor, and NBC , which had planned to show it on television, shied away from this controversy.
So "White Dog" surfaced only briefly for test-marketing before disappearing from theatrical release.
In light of the finished film, which is a fascinating oddity and as clear an indictment of racism as one might ever see, this furor seems all the more remarkable.


Review/Art; 'Medusa's Head,' Without the Snakes
Chris Burden's "Medusa's Head," a five-ton sphere of rock and concrete, does and does not live up to its name.
As with the Medusa of myth, the sheer ugliness of Mr.
Burden's new sculpture may stop some viewers in their tracks -- and its startling levitation only adds to the effect.
Measuring 14 feet in diameter, this scarred and craggy meteorlike mass hovers 2 feet above the floor in the otherwise empty main lobby of the Brooklyn Museum, its sole support a thick chain in the ceiling.
The sculpture suggests the remnant of a violent interplanetary clash, something that might be more at home in a museum of natural history.
But as one approaches the work, it becomes so fascinating that it can elicit a childlike Christmas-morning glee.
You almost can't get close enough to it.
Instead of snakes, this Medusa sprouts yards of model-railroad track crisscrossing its ravaged surface with ferocious industriousness.
Like so many of the other efforts of this California performance artist turned sculptor, the "Medusa's Head" inspires a visual double take and a fair amount of mental juggling.


Iraq Lets Shiite Refugees Quit Swamp
Iraq has withdrawn its forces from the vast southern swampland under United Nations pressure and allowed some of the thousands of Shiite Muslim refugees hiding there to escape, apparently in the hope of persuading the Security Council to relax trade sanctions this month.
This was the news awaiting Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan and a team of United Nations officials and journalists today when they reached this dusty little village of cracked and tumbledown buildings lying on the edge of a sea of dark green rushes.


261 Die as a Flight for Muslim Pilgrims Crashes Near Jidda
An airliner carrying Muslim pilgrims home to Nigeria crashed in flames today while trying to make an emergency landing shortly after takeoff, killing at least 261 people, officials and witnesses said.
The DC-8 plane nose-dived onto the tarmac and exploded, scattering bodies across the Saudi desert, airport officials and the witnesses said.


The Spoken Word
LECTURE AND WALKING TOUR, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
A walking tour of lower Manhattan, followed by "House of Heritage," a slide presentation and lecture on the changing history of the area, Sunday at noon.
Walking tour fee, $12 ($11 for the elderly, $6 for students); lecture: $2.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Kaifu Visits Bush and Brings Word of War Payment
In another effort to improve the image of Japan in America, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu told President Bush today that he had settled the question of a $500 million payment that the United States wanted as a contribution to the Persian Gulf war.
Mr.
Kaifu and his wife, Sachiyo, stopped here en route to the economic summit meeting in London that begins on Monday, to spend the night with the Bushes at their vacation home.


Trustee Chosen For Monarch
Harrison J. Goldin, the former New York City Comptroller, has been appointed to serve as bankruptcy trustee for the Monarch Capital Corporation.
Mr.
Goldin's appointment on Tuesday came two weeks after Monarch agreed to file for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
In late May, state insurance regulators seized control of the company's Monarch Life Insurance Company subsidiary.


Fiscal Woe Takes Toll On the Arts
Increased admissions fees, staff layoffs, reduced hours and canceled days of operation: for New York City's cultural institutions, these are just some of the consequences of last week's severe budget cutting.
Last week, after the city's fiscal maneuvering had finally run its course, $24 million had been cut from the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs.
The figure amounts to 28 percent of the department's $87 million budget for 1991.


For Lawmakers in California, Short Session May Pay Off
State lawmakers may get $368 each for special sessions that lasted just a few minutes into another day on the Fourth of July weekend as they worked on closing a $14.3 billion budget gap.
After ending the regular sessions on the Wednesday before the holiday, the Assembly spent two minutes in a special session on Thursday and the Senate continued for three minutes before adjourning for the weekend, legislative records show.
Both houses conducted only procedural business and did not vote on any bills.


Laughter, Music &amp; Dance, Seriously
"EVERYTHING at this moment seems to be in a kind of flux," David Gordon observed recently.
That sense of relativism -- a feeling that in art, as in the rest of history, few truths have been etched in stone and that those that were ought still to be questioned -- pervades Serious Fun.
It is even embodied in the title of the series, which promises laughter amid gravity, profundity sprung from playfulness.
A majority of the pieces chosen for the 17-day festival, which runs through Aug. 3 at Tully Hall, could be labeled performance art, a catchall term for uncategorizable work that fuzzes the traditional boundaries between music, theater, dance and the visual arts.
Mr.
Gordon's "Mysteries," which has a visual design by Red Grooms, a solo piano score by Philip Glass and a cast of 13 actors, is such a piece.
It combines words, music, movement and mobile scenic elements in a way that suggests a play but is not conventionally dramatic, and that alludes to dance without being strictly choreographed.
The words that Mr.
Gordon said he preferred to use to describe "Mysteries" were "an event."


No Open for Wilander
MATS WILANDER showed up on crutches at a news conference yesterday in Bastad, Sweden, to announce that he would not play in the United States Open.
The Swedish tennis player had arthroscopic knee surgery earlier this week.
"Unfortunately, it's too early," Wilander said of playing in the tournament he won in 1988.
"I don't think the hard courts are good for my knee."


Teufel Finds Shea Makes Him Shy
Tim Teufel took a seat in the wrong dugout at Shea Stadium -- or was it the right one? -- and wondered what, exactly, he should do next.
Should he bounce onto the field, hand extended to the Mets who were taking batting practice?
Should he go back into the visitors' clubhouse and wait for his real teammates to arrive, to dress in these gray uniforms?


Art in Review
John Zinsser Julian Pretto Gallery 103 Sullivan Street SoHo Through July 20
Maybe you can beat a dead horse after all.
John Zinsser is one of a number of younger painters whose efforts suggest that Color Field painting and its weaker cousin, Lyrical Abstraction, may enjoy something of a revival in the 1990's.
Much in the manner of 1960's formalism, his work emphasizes paint as paint, its color and its application process, to the exclusion of all else.
Previous works have often had thinnish layers of variegated colors that imply random dripping or pouring.
These new paintings, which have a definite feeling of summer, are smaller and more condensed, with surfaces of bright green layered on in thick, wide strokes that stack up a little like bricks.
Strategically splattered drops of red or yellow paint increase the optical zing.
Like dandelions in a well-tended lawn, they add a hint of chaos, but only a hint.


John Hilder Loeb, 72, An Ex-Brillo Executive
John Hilder Loeb, former vice president of Brillo Manufacturing Corporation of New York, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Loeb died of cancer, his son, David, said.


8th-Inning Burst by Bonds Helps Pirates Hold Off Reds
Barry Bonds drove in four runs, including three in Pittsburgh's five-run eighth with his 12th homer, as the Pirates defeated the Cincinnati Reds, 10-6, tonight.
Struggling Randy Myers (4-6) gave up all five runs in the eighth after the Reds had twice rallied to tie the National League East leaders.


New Jobless Claims Fall by 35,000 in Week
The number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment insurance fell by 35,000 in the final week in June, the Labor Department said today, pushing the total number to the lowest level since last September.
Economists said the decline, which was sharper than expected, showed that the labor market was improving as the economic recovery began.


Panel Delays Hearings On Nominee for C.I.A.
Despite a lobbying effort by the White House, the Senate Intelligence Committee today decided to delay the hearings on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence while it seeks information from intelligence officials on his knowledge of the Iran-contra affair.
"The timing of the hearings, as I say, is completely, completely unknown at this time," Senator David L. Boren, the committee's chairman, told reporters after the meeting, stressing that the decision was made "on a totally bipartisan basis."


Review/Art; A Look at an Old Spain The New Is Displacing
"Vanishing Spain" is a forceful but frustrating exhibition.
It offers a generally unnostalgic, unsentimental, uncondescending view of a pre-modern Spain in danger of disappearing.
It was probably this Spain, more than any other, that made the country one of the tourist magnets of Europe.
What this photographic exhibition lacks is a catalogue that would define the clashes wiping out the old Spain and consider how the new and the old Spain view each other, and what form the old Spain is likely to take as it is increasingly opened up and yet also razed by television and computers.
The absence is important.
A poetic or scholarly meditation could provide a way of thinking about a conflict that just about every country experiences and that many visitors to Spain immediately and painfully feel.


Utah Driver's Long Fight for Her Name on a License
Wendy Jean Alldredge says she knows that life can sometimes be galling.
But this took the cake.
After her divorce in 1988, she went to the Utah Driver License Division to change the last name on her driver's license from Jorgensen, her former husband's name, to Alldredge, the name she was born with.


The Council Dithers, as Bullets Fly
New York City faces another summer when teen-agers armed literally for war shoot up neighborhoods in defense of drug turf or adolescent pride.
Yet an obvious response -- a ban on their military assault weapons -- languishes in the City Council, for no good reason.
Fast-firing assault weapons, designed for combat, have no legitimate civilian use.
They are responsible for the increase in bloodshed on city streets, especially the "stray bullet" shootings of innocent bystanders to crime.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Pan Am all but gave up its fight for survival by agreeing to sell to Delta its European, Asian and African routes and its shuttle.  [ Page A1. ]  Pan Am has always been a distinctively American institution, since its origins as a tiny mail-shuttling service.  [ D5. ]


Restaurants
Jo Jo
In today's marketplace the concept of a winsome bistro that serves dynamically flavorful low-fat food at moderate prices seems a sure bet.
Add to that formula Jean-Georges Vongerichten, the chef who left the four-star Lafayette to open this establishment, and it's no wonder the place resembles Epcot Center during spring break.


Sounds Around Town
Pop and Funk
Ambitious Lovers, Central Park Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, 70th Street, east of the Band Shell, (212) 360-2777.
The Ambitious Lovers, led by the band's guitarist and singer, Arto Lindsay, and Peter Scherer on keyboards, play a volatile mixture of funk, Brazilian pop, American pop and noise; amid the shifting styles, Mr.
Lindsay's words offer unlikely images and odd insights.
Material Issue opens the concert at 3 P.M. tomorrow; admission is free, with donations requested.


When High Court Voices Moral Disapproval
To the Editor:
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist in his opinion in Barnes v.
Glen Theater, which allows states to ban nude dancing, appeals to moral disapproval of public nudity.
But he fails to explain why public nudity might be deemed immoral or if there might be a morality that would permit nudity under certain conditions.


Citicorp Sells Majority Stake In Bond Insurer Subsidiary
In a move that will significantly bolster its balance sheet, Citicorp yesterday announced the sale of more than half the stock in Ambac Inc., a municipal bond insurance subsidiary.
The price of $20 a share set yesterday by underwriters led by Salomon Brothers and Morgan Stanley &amp; Company was well below the mid-$20's price Citicorp had expected before the sale was postponed in late June because of unfavorable market conditions.


Politics in South Africa Could Scuttle '92 Teams
Even though South Africa has been readmitted to the Olympics, it is not certain that the country will send a team to the 1992 Summer Olympics, the Secretary General of South Africa's Olympic committee said today.
Johan du Plessis said participation would depend on the political situation and on whether athletes from all sports -- not just major ones like track and field -- could go, the South African Press Association reported.


Slovenes Haunted by Clashes Over Secession
A gaping hole mars the bulbous, Baroque steeple of St.
Peter's parish church in this Slovenian town on the Austrian border.
A rash of bullet holes in the Rev.
Andrej Zrim's study across the way shows that the Yugoslav Army tank that fired its cannon into the tower also trained its machine gun on that non-military target.
The damage occurred on July 2, when the army and the Slovenian militia fought over the border post here, which the federal troops seized on June 28, after Slovenia declared itself independent.
Father Zrim still does a good imitation of how he hit the floor when the firing started.


Iran-Contra Prosecutor Obtains Tapes of C.I.A.'s Calls to Agents
The Iran-contra prosecutor has acquired tapes of hundreds of telephone conversations between Central Intelligence Agency headquarters and C.I.A. agents in Central America, providing a lode of data on Oliver L. North's secret arms pipeline to Nicaraguan rebels, Government officials and others involved in the inquiry said today.
The conversations included corroborating evidence that helped the prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, secure a plea bargain this week from a C.I.A. official, Alan D. Fiers Jr., who has implicated his superiors in the arms scandal.


A $727,130 Nose at Belmont
By picking the winners of the third through the eighth races yesterday at Belmont Park, some bettor or bettors hauled down the second-largest Pick Six payoff since New York's race tracks began offering the combination bet six years ago: $727,130.
Belmont Park officials said the identity of the winner was not known because the bet had not been cashed.
But they said the payoff would not exceed the record Pick Six payoff, $767,998, which was returned at Aqueduct on April 9, 1990.


As Soviet Debt Grows, So Do Western Worries
As Soviet and Western leaders prepare for next week's summit conference, it increasingly appears that they may need to deal quickly with the issue of the Soviet Union's huge debt and shortage of hard currency.
Soviet officials recently estimated their current foreign debt at $70 billion, up from $60 billion to $65 billion at the end of last year.
Some 25 to 30 percent of the total falls due this year.


The Cancer in Football and Pro Wrestling
LYLE ALZADO'S face slipped off the newsstands just as National Football League teams began opening their training camps this week, but the lineman's burning eyes, beseeching yet still defiant, should haunt the new season, at least until the full story plays out.
Is Alzado, who admits to having lied in public for years about his drug use, telling the whole truth now?
Is the N.F.L. finally sincere in its anti-drug posture?
Are steroids really a great risk?
Why shouldn't athletes have the right to go beyond healing medicines and expensive machinery to enhance their performances?


At the Movies
Tony Scott's Project
Let's not forget about the baby brother.


U.S. and Florida Settle Suit on Everglades Water
The Federal Government and the State of Florida reached a tentative agreement today in a bitter lawsuit accusing the state of not enforcing its own environmental laws to safeguard the Everglades.
The agreement comes after two and a half years of intense resistance that cost the state $6 million in legal fees.


Third Banking-Overhaul Bill Is Near
Yet another plan for overhauling the laws governing the banking industry is in the works.
The chairman and ranking Republican on the Senate Banking Committee will come forward next week with a proposal substantially different from both the Bush Administration's version and the bill that passed a House committee last month.
The measure makes it increasingly likely that Congress will enact significant banking legislation this year, but its contours are still several months from being determined.


How Senators Voted on Anti-Crime Bill
Following is the 71-to-26 roll-call vote by which the Senate voted to pass the comprehensive crime bill.
A yes vote was a vote for the bill.
Voting yes were 45 Democrats and 26 Republicans.
Voting no were 10 Democrats and 16 Republicans.
Alabama: Heflin (D) Yes; Shelby (D) Yes.
Alaska: Murkowski (R) No; Stevens (R) No.
Arizona: DeConcini (D) Yes; McCain (R) No.
Arkansas: Bumpers (D) Yes; Pryor (D) Not Voting.
California: Cranston (D) No; Seymour (R) Yes.
Colorado: Brown (R) Yes; Wirth (D) Yes.
Connecticut: Dodd (D) Yes; Lieberman (D) Yes.
Delaware: Biden (D) Yes; Roth (R) Yes.
Florida: Graham (D) Yes; Mack (R) Yes.
Georgia: Fowler (D) Yes; Nunn (D) Yes.
Hawaii: Akaka (D) Yes; Inouye (D) Yes.
Idaho: Craig (R) No; Symms (R) No.
Illinois: Dixon (D) Yes; Simon (D) No.
Indiana: Coats (R) Yes; Lugar (R) Yes.
Iowa: Grassley (R) Yes; Harkin (D) Yes.
Kansas: Dole (R) Yes; Kassebaum (R) Yes.
Kentucky: Ford (D) Yes; McConnell (R) Yes.
Louisiana: Breaux (D) No; Johnston (D) No.
Maine: Cohen (R) Yes; Mitchell (D) Yes.
Maryland: Mikulski (D) Yes; Sarbanes (D) Yes.
Massachusetts: Kennedy (D) No; Kerry (D) Yes.
Michigan: Levin (D) Yes; Riegle (D) Yes.
Minnesota: Durenberger (R) No; Wellstone (D) No.
Mississippi: Cochran (R) Yes; Lott (R) Yes.
Missouri: Bond (R) No; Danforth (R) Yes.
Montana: Baucus (D) Yes; Burns (R) No.
Nebraska: Exon (D) Yes; Kerrey (D) Yes.
Nevada: Bryan (D) Yes; Reid (D) Yes.
New Hampshire: Rudman (R) Yes; Smith (R) No.
New Jersey: Bradley (D) Not Voting; Lautenberg (D) Yes.
New Mexico: Bingaman (D) Yes; Domenici (R) Yes.
New York: D'Amato (R) Yes; Moynihan (D) No.
North Carolina: Helms (R) No; Sanford (D) Yes.
North Dakota: Burdick (D) No; Conrad (D) Yes.
Ohio: Glenn (D) Yes; Metzenbaum (D) No.
Oklahoma: Boren (D) Yes; Nickles (R) Yes.
Oregon: Hatfield (R) No; Packwood (R) Yes.
Pennsylvania: Specter (R) Not Voting; Wofford (D) Yes.
Rhode Island: Chafee (R) Yes; Pell (D) Yes.
South Carolina: Hollings (D) Yes; Thurmond (R) Yes.
South Dakota: Daschle (D) Yes; Pressler (R) No.
Tennessee: Gore (D) Yes; Sasser (D) Yes.
Texas: Bentsen (D) Yes; Gramm (R) Yes.
Utah: Garn (R) No; Hatch (R) No.
Vermont: Jeffords (R) Yes; Leahy (D) No.
Virginia: Robb (D) Yes; Warner (R) Yes.
Washington: Adams (D) Yes; Gorton (R) Yes.
West Virginia: Byrd (D) Yes; Rockefeller (D) Yes.
Wisconsin: Kasten (R) Yes; Kohl (D) Yes.
Wyoming: Simpson (R) No; Wallop (R) No.


Going to the Subcontinent of India by Way of New Jersey
How much room does it take for a subcontinent to tell Americans about its culture, its beliefs, its arts?
In the case of the Cultural Festival of India, which opens today and runs through Aug. 11, it takes about 80 acres, half of them set aside for parking alone, on the campus of Middlesex College in Edison, N.J.
Visitors will find themselves in a mini-India, wandering about a landscape speckled with monumental displays and archways, with shops and stalls and puppet shows, daily parades and traditional Indian weddings -- the real thing, not dramatizations.
This outsize cultural transplant is a private nongovernmental undertaking involving 2,000 volunteers and almost 100 cultural organizations coordinated by a Hindu religious sect, Bochasanwasi Swaminarayan Sanstha, a group devoted to social work and the rituals of faith.


Profits Up At Morgan, Wachovia
Two of the nation's strongest banks, J. P. Morgan &amp; Company and the Wachovia Corporation, yesterday reported solid second-quarter results, reflecting their avoidance of the risky lending that has hurt many competitors.
Earnings were up 11.6 percent at Morgan and 5.7 percent at Wachovia.


CHRONICLE
MATTHEW MAXWELL TAYLOR KENNEDY, 27 years old and the 9th of the 11 children of the late Robert F. Kennedy and ETHEL KENNEDY, is to marry VICTORIA ANNE STRAUSS, 27, of Haverford, Pa., at the Roman Catholic Cathedral of SS.
Peter and Paul in Philadelphia tomorrow.
The couple met in Aspen, Colo., five years ago and are students at the University of Virginia Law School.


China Rejects Vote by House Tying Trade to Human Rights
China today angrily rejected a Congressional vote that would permit China to retain its favorable access to American markets only on condition that it improve its human rights record.
Duan Jin, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, called the vote by the House of Representatives on Wednesday "gross interference in China's internal affairs." The conditions, he added, were "absolutely unacceptable."


Diner's Journal
Seafood in Queens
London Lennie's, a sprawling, perpetually packed seafood house on Woodhaven Boulevard in Rego Park, Queens, has the visual trappings of a prosperous chain restaurant: sparkling tile floor, polished wood walls, prints of palace guards, a retail fish counter near the entrance and a neon-crowned bar.
But it doesn't take long to realize that this buoyant spot is anything but institutional.


Plea Entered in Sexual Attack
A man accused in the June sexual attack on a 15-year-old girl whom he had raped six years earlier pleaded not guilty on Wednesday.
The man, Samuel Barnett, 44, entered the plea in Alameda County Superior Court to charges that included kidnapping.
Mr.
Barnett, who is being held without bail, served 6 years of a 12-year sentence for the 1985 attack. being attacked on June 10.


Police Seeking Clues In Slaying of Couple At a Catskills Resort
Four days after a Brooklyn couple were killed at a Catskills bungalow community here, investigators today once more canvassed the wooded grounds surrounding the site and gathered new evidence.
But the hunt for leads remained frustrating, investigators said.
"There are no real good immediate leads," said Capt.
Michael F. Cahill of the state police.
"It's just the normal police grind and all we've managed to do is eliminate a lot of people."


Aquino's Defense Chief Quits
Defense Secretary Fidel V. Ramos said today that he had submitted his resignation to President Corazon C. Aquino so he could concentrate on running for president in May.
Mr.
Ramos, the former chief of staff of the Philippine armed forces, has helped Mrs.
Aquino crush six coup attempts by right-wing army rebels since she came to power in 1986.
He became Defense Minister in 1988.


Toshiba Conveyor Uses Superconductors
The Toshiba Corporation of Japan today announced the development of a transport system that uses a special property of new superconductors to keep a container floating precisely above a flat magnetic track.
Superconductors are materials that conduct electricity without resistance and also create strong magnetic fields.
Because the magnetic levitation system does not depend on gravity, Toshiba said, it could be used to move materials in space stations, along walls or even upside down on ceilings.


Neighbor Is Charged in Killing of Woman, 75
A neighbor was charged yesterday in the killing of a 75-year-old widow on the Upper East Side, in a case that the police said was not a bias crime but a crime of opportunity.
The neighbor, a 32-year-old unemployed plumber named Charles Ocasio, beat and strangled the woman, Helen Clewell, when she resisted during a robbery attempt that began when he noticed that her door was ajar, Joseph R. Borrelli, the chief of detectives, said last night.


CHRONICLE
JOHN GIFFEN WEINMANN , the Ambassador to Finland, has been chosen by PRESIDENT BUSH to be the new chief of protocol.
He will replace JOSEPH V. REED JR., who said last week that he would resign in October.
Mr.
Weinmann, 62 years old, was a member of Mr.
Bush's national finance committee and the Louisiana state finance chairman for his Presidential campaign.
Previously, he practiced law in New Orleans and was the president of the Waverly Oil Corporation.


Matsushita Plans 2d Georgia Plant
The Matsushita Electric Industrial Company of Japan said it would build a $40 million battery plant here.
The consumer electronics maker said the plant would employ 270 workers when it is completed in January 1993 and add another 70 by 1997.


Grenade Attack Burns 4 in Brooklyn Club
A grenade was thrown into an illegal Brooklyn social club early yesterday, starting a fire that burned four men, the police said.
The incendiary grenade was thrown about 4:40 A.M. through a small window in the door of the Private Affairs Social Club, at 298 Irving Avenue in the Bushwick section.


E.D.S. Extends SD-Scicon Deadline
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, said it was extending its $195 million takeover offer for SD-Scicon P.L.C., the British computing services company.
Because only 27 percent of SD-Scicon's shares have been tendered, E.D.S. extended the deadline to July 24.
The offer, made on June 11, was to have expired on Wednesday.


Teachers' Union Chief Faults Bush School Plan
The leader of the nation's second largest teachers' union today assailed the Bush Administration's proposal to allow Federal funds to be used for any school that parents choose: public, private or parochial.
The criticism came from Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers, who called the "school choice" plan a "fig leaf for giving public funds to private schools."


Budget Discord Sends Maine Workers Home
Maine's state government, closed last week for lack of a budget, was shut down again today after negotiations on a budget agreement stalled.
Gov.
John R. McKernan, a Republican, ordered the latest government shutdown at 3:30 A.M. after failing to reach agreement with the Democratic-controlled Legislature on new taxes and a reduction in workers' compensation taxes for businesses.


On my Mind; Mistakes of the War
Imagine!
Saddam Hussein actually has been lying about how much nuclear material he has stashed away.
Massive, injured astonishment seizes the United Nations and the United States Government.
American politicians and journalists who supported the coalition policy of leaving Saddam Hussein in power after he was defeated now tighten their lips with annoyance at his ingratitude.
Saddam Hussein has turned out to be the one thing they apparently were not prepared for him to be: Saddam Hussein.


Thomas W. Zito; Executive, 77
Thomas W. Zito, who retired earlier this year as executive director of the New Jersey Association of Housing and Redevelopment Authorities, died on Wednesday at Bayonne Hospital in Bayonne, N.J.
He was 77 years old and lived in Bayonne.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Quotation of the Day
"Man, it was a beauty. The prominences were superb. The diamond rings were magnificent." -- Fred Hess of the Bronx, viewing the eclipse in Mexico.  [ A12:3. ]


BRIEFS
*
American Express Co., New York, told the S.E.C. that it had bought 11 percent of the outstanding preferred shares of Illinois Power Co., Decatur.
No price was given. *
British Petroleum Co.
P.L.C., London, and the Norwegian state-owned oil company, Den Norske Stats Oljeselskap A.S., have been awarded oil exploration concessions by Nigeria.


Truce in Yugoslavia Has No Impact on Croatia's Ethnic Fault Line
In front of the rubble that was once Zivko Peulic's house, Croatian security forces were straining this afternoon to load a damaged armored personnel carrier onto a truck.
A small fire flickered in one corner of the building as a bulldozer's jaws crunched against the concrete walls and kitchen appliances.
The accord announced Sunday with great fanfare by Yugoslavia's leaders may have brought this patchwork country back from the brink of open warfare, at least for the next few months.
But it appears to have done little to quell tensions in eastern Croatia, where the country's two largest ethnic groups, Serbs and Croats, are locked in increasingly violent conflict.


Tourist Killing Tied to Gang Fight
The gang dispute that led to the fatal shooting of a Maryland tourist in Chinatown last week concerned a Vietnamese immigrant who recently had been thrown out of the gang because he was suspected of using drugs, the police said yesterday.
Officers said that they had been unable to locate the immigrant, whom they identified as Hung Liu, 29 years old.
The police said they believe that Mr.
Hung's presence on a crowded Chinatown street corner on the Fourth of July led to the dispute, but added that they had not determined whether he fired the bullet that struck and killed the tourist who was passing by, riding with friends to a restaurant.


Sports of The Times; Ya Gotta Believe, Or Do Ya?
WHAT the New York Mets and the Oakland Athletics had in common when the second half of the baseball season geared up last night was that both teams were within two and a half games of their respective division leaders.
What the Mets have to hope they have in common with the A's for the rest of the season is the kind of killer instinct that Oakland possesses.
The A's will assure anyone who wants to listen at any time that the rest of the American League West erred in not burying a very good team when given the chance during Oakland's disappointing first half.


RESULTS PLUS
CYCLING All Shook Up Thierry Marie staged a near-record breakaway in yesterday's sixth stage of the Tour de France, shaking up the standing with his first-place finish and dropping Greg LeMond into third place.
LeMond, the three-time winner, who started the day in first place, finished 30th in the 161-mile stage from Arras to the port city of Le Havre.
Sean Kelly of Ireland moved from third to second place over all.
Marie moved out early and built a 22-minute margin that was whittled to less than two minutes by the end of the leg.
Marie started his move with 145 miles left in the stage.
The longest breakaway in the event's history was 157 miles by Albert Bourlon of France in 1947.
At the end, Marie's margin and 32 seconds of bonuses gave him a lead of 1 minute 4 seconds over Kelly, who placed fourth in the stage behind Remig Stumpf of Germany and Djamolidine Abdoujapalov of the Soviet Union.
Abdoujapalov, riding for Carrera, was tied for third with LeMond, 1:07 behind Marie.
The stage started without Wednesday's leader, Rolf Sorensen of Denmark, who was forced to withdraw after breaking his collarbone in a fall.
LeMond, who inherited the lead, refused to wear the yellow jersey during the stage out of respect for Sorensen, who flew to a sports clinic in Italy for surgery.
Marie won the prologue and had the yellow jersey during the first stage, but gave it up to LeMond, who had gained enough bonus seconds to move into first place.
LeMond subsequently turned the symbolic jersey over to Sorensen after the team time trial Sunday. (AP)


Court Upholds Welfare Curb When Children Leave Family
Reversing lower-court decisions in two cases, a state appeals court yesterday upheld New York City's policy of cutting off most welfare payments to parents whose children are in foster care.
City lawyers had argued that a change in policy could lead parents to hand some of their children over to foster care in order to have more welfare money for the rest of their family.


Aid Cut Wouldn't Change Israel's System
To the Editor:
In "Why Prop Up Israeli Socialism?" (Op-Ed, June 24), Robert J. Loewenberg, president of the Institute for Advanced Strategic and Political Studies, paints a reasonably accurate picture of the problems facing the Israeli economy.
He is right in suggesting that Israel's domestic problems are a greater long-term threat to its survival than security issues.
He is also right in suggesting that aid to Israel should include some efforts at economic reform.


Le Jour de Gloire
If you're French -- in person, passion or palate -- Sunday is more than merely July 14.
It is the 14th of July -- le quatorze juillet, Bastille Day -- a holiday that is celebrated by a French person in New York as patriotically as the Fourth of July is observed by an American in Paris.
While there are dozens of private parties scheduled by and for French ex-patriates and visitors in the metropolitan area, there is at least one public party where the French flavor will be injected into the sidewalks of New York.


I.B.M. to Buy Metaphor to Aid Apple Plan
As a first step toward establishing a joint software development company with Apple Computer Inc., I.B.M. announced yesterday that it would buy Metaphor Inc., a Silicon Valley software developer.
Metaphor is reported to be the focal point of the two computer makers' plan to create a joint software system that will redefine desktop personal computing in the second half of the decade.
Terms of the proposed purchase by I.B.M. were not disclosed.


'Persuade Your Neighbors to Compromise'
To the Editor:
The view that American lawyers are selfish and greedy (At the Bar, Law page, June 14) is nothing new.


Market Place; Lockheed Sees Fortunes Improve
IN the aerospace industry, where good news has been scarce of late, the Lockheed Corporation has been getting more than its share.
The latest was a vote on Tuesday by a subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee to restart production of Lockheed's F-117A Stealth fighter-bomber, one of the stars of the Persian Gulf war.
Lockheed finished producing the Air Force's original order for 59 of the radar-evading planes last year.
It is unclear whether the subcommittee's decision to finance at least 24 more planes will survive the lengthy and divisive process of setting next year's Pentagon budget in Congress.


Art in Review
Gillian Jagger Anita Shapolsky Gallery 99 Spring Street SoHo Through tomorrow
Gillian Jagger's new sculptures are among her best.
They were made by suspending sheets of lead from chains and then hammering them with a rubber mallet, shaping them, coating parts of them with epoxy to harden them and covering one side of them with a silvery paint.
The results suggest torn but flowing fabrics and battered but still functional shields.
Each of these upright expressionist sculptures is also like a large, wrinkled skin with two sides as different in tone as the two sides of a sculptural wall by Richard Serra.
One side, however torn, holds firm; the other, interior side is more vulnerable and protective.


Corrections
A report in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Tuesday about ozone described it incorrectly.
It is an allotrope of oxygen, a form of the element having different chemical properties from those of ordinary oxygen gas, not an isotope.


Regulator Wary on Plans for A-Plant
Pledging openness and regard for public feeling, the new chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission held his first official briefing today, in which he questioned his staff's handling of safety concerns at the nation's oldest nuclear reactor.
The chairman, Ivan Selin, who took office July 1, said he was not convinced that his agency was acting properly on the safety of Yankee Rowe, a 30-year-old nuclear power plant in the Berkshire Hills in northwest Massachusetts.


Stocks Rise in Japan
Stocks closed higher today in Tokyo.
The Nikkei index of 225 shares ended the week at 23,137.78, up 199.86 points, or 0.87 percent.


Lonrho Files Suit
The British mining-based conglomerate Lonrho P.L.C. said it was suing two of the three Fayed brothers of Egypt and the House of Fraser retail group for conspiracy during the Fayeds' 1985 takeover of House of Fraser Holdings Ltd., which owns the venerable Harrods department store.
The brothers, Mohamed, Ali and Salah al-Fayed, outbid Lonrho with an offer of $:615 million, or about $999 million.
Lonrho is headed by the British executive Roland (Tiny) Rowland.


Ernst Wins Ruling in Suit
A judge has thrown out much of a $250 million lawsuit filed by the California Attorney General that accused the Ernst &amp; Young accounting firm of negligence in auditing the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association and its parent company.
In announcing the suit last year, John Van de Kamp, who was the Attorney General at the time, said the accountants' clean bill of health made it easier to sell high-yield "junk bonds" at Lincoln branches.
Investors lost $250 million on the securities.


WEATHER IS LINKED TO CRASH OF PLANE
Federal investigators who examined a cockpit voice recorder and interviewed the pilot of a commuter airplane that crashed here on Wednesday suggested today that bad weather had hampered more than one landing at the municipal airport.
The investigators said there appeared to have been no mechanical problems with the plane shortly before it crashed, killing 13 passengers and crew members.


New Jersey's High Court Upholds Law Barring School-Zone Drugs
In October 1988, Charles Ivory Jr. was arrested for drug possession as he rode his bicycle through Count Basie Park in Red Bank.
Because the park is owned by the board of education he was also charged with intending to distribute drugs in a school zone -- and is facing a mandatory prison sentence.
Today the New Jersey Supreme Court, in a 6-to-1 ruling, upheld charging Mr.
Ivory with violation of the state law, enacted in 1987, that mandates prison sentences for drug possession within 1,000 feet of school property.
The police found 17 grams of cocaine and a small amount of marijuana in a pocket of his jacket.


Stock Offering By Panhandle
The Panhandle Eastern Corporation offered $129 million in common stock to the public yesterday through underwriters led by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.
Dealers said the offering included 9 million common shares that are being offered in the United States and 2.4 million shares being offered in international markets.
The shares were priced at $10.75 a share with provision for an over-allotment option of 1.8 million shares.


A. Courtenay Shepard; Executive, 52
A.
Courtenay Shepard, former corporate vice president and president of Colgate-Palmolive's Canadian subsidiary, died on Wednesday at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 52 years old.
Mr. Shepard died of lung cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


WALESA DEFEATED ON ELECTION LAW
Poland's Communist-dominated lower house of Parliament today rejected a third attempt by President Lech Walesa to tighten an election law that he says will produce a fragmented and weak Parliament.
The house voted 258 to 89 to reject a draft that Mr.
Walesa presented to replace a law that he was forced to sign last week when the house overrode his veto.


George Kuhnreich, 67, Ex-Executive at Tandy
George A. Kuhnreich, a New York stockbroker who later became an officer of the Tandy Corporation in Texas, died Tuesday at the Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas.
He was 67 years old and lived in Fort Worth.
Mr.
Kuhnreich died of complications that followed a liver transplant, said a spokesman for the family.


Testing The Waters
GREG ANTHONY , vice chairman of the Young Republicans of Nevada and first-round draft choice of the Knicks, was in New York yesterday to talk about staying in school, saying no to drugs and his basketball career.
Anthony said he eventually wanted to be a "United States Senator from Nevada." But like BILL BRADLEY , who went on to become a Senator from New Jersey after his Knick playing days, Anthony has also set politics aside until his playing career is over.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 12


Pepisco Offering 7.35% Notes at Par
Pepsico Inc. set the interest rate yesterday on a $250 million medium-term note issue through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Review/Dance; The Royal Ballet Recalls Its Past
The Royal Ballet's triple bill at the Metropolitan Opera House, presented on Wednesday evening and to be repeated tonight, is not for those who prefer the company's spectacular productions of 19th-century classics.
Instead, it is a program that recalls the creative aspect in the Royal's history.
"Winter Dreams," in its United States premiere, is a cheeky but penetrating distillation of Chekhov's "Three Sisters" by Sir Kenneth MacMillan, now the company's principal choreographer.
The New York premiere (the ballet was seen in Washington in March) is " 'Still Life' at the Penguin Cafe" a delightful morality tale filled with animal characters by David Bintley, the company's resident choreographer.


Weaker Monthly Showing for Many Top Retailers
Sales of America's biggest retailers turned erratic in June, reducing a euphoria that had been building from a strong showing in May that the recession was ending.
Retailers said yesterday that their total June sales held up, but nine of the 20 biggest reported lower or flat same-store sales from the levels a year earlier.
In May, 13 of the 20 said that same-store sales rose.
In total sales, for example, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company and the J. C. Penney Company were up 2.9 percent and 7.5 percent, respectively, but they had same-store declines of 3.8 percent and 8.2 percent from the year before.


In an Advance for Computer Chips Researchers Move Atoms of Silicon
Researchers at I.B.M. say they have demonstrated an ability to pick up and deposit single atoms of silicon, the essential material in computer chips.
The achievement is the first step toward a new field of electronics that could eventually lead to a vast increase in the number of transistors in chips.
But many practical obstacles will have to be overcome before the technique can be applied to commercial products.


Art in Review
'The Subversive Stitch' Simon Watson 239 Lafayette Street SoHo Through July 27
There's a whole lot of sewing going on in contemporary art these days, much of it in politically inclined art, and its frequency has inspired this well-chosen group exhibition.
The stitch in the title of the show -- which has been organized by Simon Watson, the gallery owner, and Maurice Berger, an art historian -- is applied somewhat broadly and covers many uses of sewing, knitting or fiber, all of them subversive in intent.
Mel Chin's "Support," for example, is simply part of an old tree wedged into a corner and decorated with a hangman's noose made from yellow ribbon.
In every case, some form of authority or instance of exploitation is called into question.
In many, the social meaning of clothing, as well as the esthetic merit of craft, is examined.


Appeal Filed in FNN Deal
The company that bought the bankrupt Financial News Network after a bidding war last spring now wants some of its money back.
The Consumer News and Business Channel, which is owned by NBC, has filed an appeal in Federal District Court in Manhattan, asking for a reversal of a May decision by a bankruptcy judge that reopened bidding for the network.


Jose Salazar Lopez; Mexican Cardinal, 81
Jose Cardinal Salazar Lopez died of a heart attack on Tuesday at a hospital in Guadalajara, church officials said.
He was 81 years old.
Appointed by Pope Paul VI in 1973, Cardinal Salazar was the third of only five cardinals in Mexican history.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 551 money market mutual funds increased by $5.1 billion, to $457.6 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The 202 institutional funds' assets rose by $2.69 billion, to $129.99 billion.
The assets of the 259 general-purpose funds were up by $401.2 million, to $177.85 billion.
The 90 broker-dealer funds' assets increased by $2.01 billion, to $149.76 billion, the institute said.


Angels Sign Valenzuela To Minor League Pact
The California Angels are willing to give FERNANDO VALENZUELA another chance to pitch in the majors.
To earn it, he will have to spend at least a month in the minors.
Valenzuela, waived last Friday by the Angels, agreed to a minor league contract with California on Wednesday.
Valenzuela's agent, TONY DeMARCO, his attorney, DICK MOSS, and Angels senior vice president DAN O'BRIEN came to terms on a deal that will send the left-hander to the minors for at least 30 days.


Accord on Digital Taping Now Faces Congress Debate
In order to open up the market for one of the most advanced recording technologies, electronics companies like the Sony Corporation and the Tandy Corporation ended a long feud with the music industry yesterday over digital home recordings and agreed to support legislation that requires paying royalties to the industry.
But the task of getting Congress to pass the measure still lies ahead.
Edward P. Murphy, chief executive of the National Music Publishers Association, said that gaining the cooperation of Congress might be harder than reaching the fragile compromise with the electronics industry.
"The second act is probably the most difficult," he said.


When High Court Voices Moral Disapproval; Constable's Blunder
To the Editor:
"Fight Crime, Not Liberty: The Exclusionary Rule Needs Protection" (editorial, June 25), on the rule that "requires the courts to throw out illegally seized evidence as a deterrent to misconduct by law officers enforcing the law," is flawed.


Henry C. Nathan; Biologist, 66
Dr.
Henry C. Nathan, a professor of biology at Pace University, died on Saturday at his home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
He was 66 years old.
He died after a heart attack, his family said.


Jefferies Looks and Looks But Can't Find His Name
Gregg Jefferies entered the Shea Stadium clubhouse, moved quickly across the room, sped past his locker and wheeled to glance at the lineup board.
The quick glance then became a long and hard stare.
"Is that the lineup for tonight?" Jefferies, the second baseman for the Mets, asked about the collection of names that included Keith Miller at second.
Told it was, Jefferies flung his hands in the air.


PAN AM IS SELLING OVERSEAS ROUTES AND ITS SHUTTLE
Pan Am, the nation's pioneer in commercial aviation, all but gave up its long fight for survival yesterday by agreeing to sell the European, Asian and African routes that helped make it famous, as well as its East Coast shuttle.
The buyer is Delta Air Lines, the nation's third-largest carrier behind American and United.
If the $260 million deal is completed, Delta will join a handful of other carriers with vast international route networks that are expected to dominate the industry in the next decade.


A Stiffer Spine for Mr. Greenspan
President Bush's renomination of Alan Greenspan to head the Federal Reserve Board is surely deserved.
The Fed, under his leadership, has brought inflation steadily down; and it calmed jittery markets after the 1987 and 1989 stock market crashes.
Those are sterling successes.
Indeed, the question arises why the renomination -- coming barely a month before Mr.
Greenspan's current term ends -- was so tardy and grudging.
The obvious inference is that the White House hoped to strong-arm the chairman into lowering interest rates, delivering a temporary boost to the economy.
By one measure, the White House got its way: last week the Fed decided against a move that had been expected -- the gradual tightening of monetary policy next year.


Iran-Contra Inquiry Termed Open-Ended by Prosecutor
Lawrence E. Walsh, the special prosecutor whose Iran-contra investigation has been rejuvenated by the admissions of a former intelligence official, said today that he could not predict how high into the Reagan Administration his inquiry might reach or how long it may last.
The possibility of further prosecutions was revived this week when Alan D. Fiers Jr., who headed the Central Intelligence Agency's operations in Central America, admitted in a plea bargain that he told his superiors about the Iran-contra operation, including the diversion of Iran arms-sale profits to the Nicaraguan rebels, months before they were publicly disclosed.


Books of The Times; A Young Man's Road to Superman
Young Nietzsche Becoming a Genius By Carl Pletsch  Illustrated. 261 pages.
The Free Press. $22.95.
In "Schopenhauer as Educator," "Twilight of the Idols" and other works, Nietzsche articulated a theory of genius and influence that was based largely on his own youthful efforts to find -- and later to transcend -- a philosophical mentor.
This fascinating theory, which would inform Harold Bloom's famous essay, "The Anxiety of Influence" (1973), is examined and amplified in Carl Pletsch's new book, "Young Nietzsche."


Sounds Around Town
Gipsy Kings
Gipsy Kings, Cheb Khaled, Mory Kante, Central Park Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, 70th Street, east of the Band Shell, (212) 360-2756.
Three leading world-music acts are to appear in a concert presented by the French Music Office on Sunday afternoon in honor of Bastille Day.
The Gipsy Kings from southern France fuse flamenco-style guitar and fiery vocals in the Gitane dialect (a combination of Spanish, French and traditional gypsy languages) with a pop sense of form.
The compositions of Mory Kante, a traditional African musician born in Guinea, blend electronics with the sound of the African kora, a harp-like stringed instrument.
Algerian-born Cheb Khaled is known throughout North Africa as the king of rai, for performing in a style that blends traditional Algerian Berber melodies with electronic funk and reggae.
Summerstage doors open at 2:30 P.M. on Sunday, and the music begins at 3 P.M.
Admission is free.


Stunning Eclipse Cuts a Darkened Path
A total eclipse of the Sun that scores of astronomers here called the most spectacular in memory blacked out a 150-mile-wide swath across the Pacific Ocean and the Americas today.
In the thin subfreezing air at the summit of this 13,700-foot mountain, astronomers, visiting dignitaries, journalists and others joined in a cheer when the fully eclipsed Sun bloomed into a ghostly luminous ring surrounded by glowing streaks of gas.
Partial Eclipse on Mainland
As the stark volcanic landscape of the mountain was plunged into darkness, radiant loops of red fire appeared around and behind the black disk of the Moon, each prominence leaping 50,000 to 100,000 miles from the Sun's surface.


Sponsors Slow To Line Up With Luyendyk
When Arie Luyendyk won the 1990 Indianapolis 500 after six years of struggling with uncompetitive teams, it looked as if his career path would be smoothly paved from then on.
Instead, it has taken a frustrating detour.
He will compete here this weekend in the Marlboro Grand Prix at the Meadowlands sports complex.
Luyendyk, 37 years old, will drive a fluorescent red car owned by Vince Granatelli, the son of Andy Granatelli, the owner who planted the most famous Victory Lane kiss in history when Mario Andretti won the Indy 500 in 1969.


F.C.C. to Review Its Rules On TV Station Ownership
The Federal Communications Commission took the first steps today toward a broad examination of its rules that govern television broadcasting, including who can own stations.
The F.C.C. will seek arguments on whether it should discard rules that prohibit a single owner from having more than one station of the same type in the same market and that bar television stations from owning cable systems.
The latter change would require Congressional action.


When High Court Voices Moral Disapproval; The New Monarchists
To the Editor:
With the resignation of Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall, the word "conservative" is again being applied to Reagan-Bush appointees to the Supreme Court.
I am sure I am not the only one this usage infuriates.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Express Information Services Corp., Boston, an American Express Co. subsidiary, named James L. Fox executive vice president and chief operating officer of its integrated systems technologies unit. *
American Savings of Florida F.S.B., Miami, said Edward P. Mahoney, its president and chief operating officer, had resigned.


Irwin H. Pizer; Medical Librarian, 56
Irwin H. Pizer, a former health-sciences librarian and professor of library administration for the University of Illinois at Chicago, died on Monday at his home in Chicago.
He was 56 years old.
He died of colon cancer, the university said.


Help for Bill on 'Baby Bells'
An end to the legal restrictions that bar regional telephone companies from manufacturing equipment was strongly supported today by an important Democrat on this issue in the House of Representatives.
Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the House telecommunications subcommittee, has enough influence on the issue to increase the likelihood that the House will adopt the legislation.
He has previously been guarded about his stand on a bill for the "Baby Bells."


Nuclear Dump Divides a Rural Town
There was a hush here on Tuesday evening when hundreds of residents gathered to learn the results of a referendum on whether their town should become home to a dump for low-level nuclear waste.
When the answer -- no -- came, dump opponents broke into cheers while supporters shuffled off glumly into the darkness.
But just one night later, the Town Board said yes -- yes to the waste and yes to the $4.2 million "benefits package" of schools, library, fire department and park that go along with it.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Marriott Corp. is offering $125 million in 10 1/4 percent senior notes due 2001 at 100 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BBB by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Ancient Lava Flow Linked to Animal Extinctions
Analysis of lava from a vast outpouring that swept across a large part of Siberia 248 million years ago has shown that it occurred about the time that the great majority of animal species on earth became extinct.
The analysis, being reported today in the journal Science, is likely to encourage those who believe that volcanic eruptions have been responsible for some mass extinctions, although the researchers said they had not established cause and effect.


Broad, Tough Anti-Crime Measure Is Easily Approved by the Senate
The Senate tonight approved a broad new anti-crime bill that would expand the number of Federal offenses that are punishable by death, impose a waiting period on handgun sales and place new limits on the rights of prisoners and the accused.
The measure, which had become bogged down in last-minute parliamentary maneuvers and private negotiations after eleven days of debate, passed by a vote of 71 to 26, with 45 Republicans joining 26 Democrats in support of a bill that blended measures of both parties.


56 Soldiers Hurt in Kuwait Blast
An explosion ripped through a United States ammunition depot today, showering soldiers with shrapnel.
At least 50 Americans and six Britons were wounded, officials said.
The military Central Command in Tampa, Fla., said injuries ranged from minor cuts to severe shrapnel wounds.


Black Caucus Votes To Oppose Thomas For High Court Seat
The Congressional Black Caucus voted 19 to 1 today to oppose the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee who would be the second black to serve on the Court if he succeeds the retiring Thurgood Marshall.
Representative Edolphus Towns, the Brooklyn Democrat who heads the caucus, said that after members reviewed the nominee's civil rights record, the feeling was that "he was not the person to carry on the legacy of Thurgood Marshall."


Alcoa to Pay New York State $7.5 Million in Waste Fines
The Aluminum Company of America agreed today to pay $7.5 million in fines -- including the largest criminal penalty ever levied for a hazardous waste violation -- for an array of state environmental offenses at its plant in the North Country town of Massena.
Among the violations admitted by the company was leaving PCB-contaminated soil piled on its property for more than 90 days in 1989, a violation of state law.
When the soil -- enough to fill 33 railroad cars -- eventually was transported to a dump in Alabama, it was mislabeled as nonhazardous material.
State prosecutors and environmental officials had also charged the Pittsburgh-based company with illegally disposing of acids and caustic solutions that were used in an aluminum-cleaning process.
Since 1983, the solutions were intermittently poured down a manhole, where they mixed with wastewater that eventually drained into the ecologically fragile Grasse River.


Robert B. Miller Dies; Psychiatrist Was 74
Robert B. Miller, a psychiatrist, neurologist and educator died on Tuesday at his home in Weston, Conn.
He was 74 years old.
Dr. Miller died of lung cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


P.L.O. Says It Turned In Arms
The Palestine Liberation Organization said today that it had completed the demobilization of thousands of its guerrillas in southern Lebanon by giving up all its heavy and medium weapons to the Lebanese Army in the port city of Tyre.
But the Lebanese Minister of Defense, Michel al-Murr, said only 50 percent of guerrilla armor was delivered today.
He demanded that all heavy arms be handed over.


Brady and Kemp Defend Low-Income Housing Plan
The Bush Administration today defended its efforts to provide low-income housing for the poor from the real estate portfolios of failed savings and loans.
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady and Jack F. Kemp, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, responded to criticism that the affordable housing program mandated as part of the industry rescue had fallen far short of its intended goals.


Pixar Film Deal With Disney
The Walt Disney Company said today that it was linking up with Steven P. Jobs, one of the founders of Apple Computer Inc., on a project to make and distribute computer-generated animated movies.
Disney said the deal was with Pixar Inc., which was founded by Mr.
Jobs.
Disney said it would distribute at least one full-length movie made by Pixar, which is among the leaders in computer animation.
Although many television cartoons and some animated movies are computer generated, Disney's full-length films have always been animated primarily by hand, a laborious and expensive process.


Pop/Jazz; New Music That May Be On, But Not Over, the Brink
FROM the MTV program "120 Minutes" to the alternative departments at major record labels to the New Music Seminar, an annual music-industry conference that begins this weekend at the Marriott Marquis hotel in Manhattan, new music has grown to be a serious business over the past few years.
For the next six days, the seminar and its live-music branch, New Music Nights, will bring more than 400 bands and 8,000 music-industry delegates into New York; this year, the "new music" umbrella includes metal, rap, dance music, pop, Latin, reggae, funk, African, house, rave, avant-garde jazz, techno-pop, folk-rock, punk, Mexican, Spanish, Irish, Russian, rockabilly, calypso, Eastern European and various recombinations of all of the above.
Seminar panels include "The Americanization of World Radio" and "Rap, Metal, Alternative: We're All in the Same Gang." One showcase is titled "The History of Our Future."


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about the popularity of baseball caps incorrectly described Billy Crystal's attire in the movie "City Slickers." He wears a Mets cap, not a Yankees cap.


Suspect Arrested in Slaying of Token Clerk
A man with a history of subway crime was charged yesterday with killing a token-booth clerk in a Manhattan subway station during a robbery early Monday, the police said.
Over the last six years, the suspect, Benjamin Wiggins, 28 years old, has pleaded guilty and served short sentences for offenses ranging from stealing tokens to armed robbery.


Growth of Private Police Demands National Regulation
To the Editor:
"Policing the Private Police" (editorial, June 22) points out that too often private security officers do not have the training needed to insure public safety.
And our states are not providing the guidance private agencies require.
Several states have no statutes of any kind regulating the hiring and employment of private security officers.
Other states have a patchwork of uneven and often ineffective laws and regulations.


Critic's Choice; Caramoor Festival
Although freelance orchestras in New York have an enormous pool of players to draw on, diligent readers of personnel lists cannot help but note that many of the better, more visible groups tend to use the same core of musicians.
Given that, one might expect those orchestras to sound almost identical, perhaps even a bit faceless.
But the Orchestra of St.
Luke's, one of the city's busiest freelance bands, has established a distinct identity over the last decade.
Its playing is tight, polished and vigorous, and its musicians sound fully at ease in a broad stretch of the repertory.
Tonight at 9, one of the orchestra's sub-configurations, the Chamber Orchestra of St.
Luke's, is playing an all-Bach concert in the Spanish Courtyard at the Caramoor Music Festival, on Girdle Ridge Road in Katonah, N.Y.
Elizabeth Mann, the orchestra's excellent principal flutist, is to be the soloist in the Orchestral Suite No. 2 (BWV 1067), and Robert Wolinsky is to be the soloist in the Harpsichord Concerto No. 3 (BWV 1054).
The program also includes the Cantata No. 56, "Ich will den Kreuzstab gerne tragen," with William Sharp as the baritone soloist, and the "Brandenburg" Concerto No. 1 (BWV 1046).


NBC Is Closing News Bureau in New York
In a striking effort to cut costs, NBC said yesterday that it was closing its New York bureau, which has a news staff of 11.
That announcement comes a day after NBC said it planned to close its Miami news bureau, which has a total staff of 13.
The closings in New York and Miami will reduce the number of NBC news bureaus in the United States to seven.


6 Held in Welfare Fraud Scheme; Inquiry Uncovered Worker Bribes
Six New York City residents have been arrested and 21 others are being sought in a multimillion dollar welfare fraud scheme that included the bribery of city employees, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Using as many as six aliases, the recipients produced fake social security cards and birth certificates to prove eligibility for welfare and food stamps, the officials said.
Either because of the bribes or poor oversight by welfare employees, the suspects received monthly checks, with one getting as much as $118,000 since 1986.


Review/Film; See Spot. See a Lot.
The wickedest of all Disney witches sashays back to the screen today with the revival of "101 Dalmatians," the 1961 animated film that seems timely all over again.
"Is there anyone in this wretched world who doesn't
live
for furs?" asks the high- fashion harridan Cruella DeVille, who kidnaps 99 meltingly cute Dalmatian puppies with the intention of turning them into wearing apparel.
Cruella's two-tone hair, cigarette holder and razor-sharp cheekbones are at least as memorable as her villainy.
Even animal-rights advocates are bound to regard the red-gloved Cruella as entertainingly soigne.


Brooks Named to Coach Top Devils Affiliate
Herb Brooks, who coached the United States to a gold medal in the 1980 Winter Olympics and the Rangers for almost four seasons in the National Hockey League, was named yesterday as coach of the Devils' top affiliate in the minor leagues.
The appointment to run the Utica Devils of the American Hockey League immediately raised speculation that Brooks is destined to become coach of the New Jersey team.


Heat Overcomes Firefighter in Mount Vernon


Frank G. Drummond; Executive, 81
Frank G. Drummond, a retired New York real-estate executive, died on Monday at his home in Dumont, N.J.
He was 81 years old.
He died of Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Corrections
A front-page article on June 24 about nuclear power plants seeking renewal of their operating licenses misidentified a plant suspected of having parts that had been made dangerously brittle by radiation exposure.
The plant is Yankee Rowe, in Rowe, Mass., not Vermont Yankee, in Brattleboro, Vt.


U.S.-SOVIET TALKS PROVIDE FEW GAINS
The Soviet Foreign Minister, Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh, and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d held four and a half hours of talks today to try to wrap up the nuclear arms reduction treaty, but Mr.
Baker said they had made only limited progress and certainly not enough yet to merit scheduling a Moscow summit meeting in late July.
The two officials said that they had asked their experts to continue working on the three major outstanding issues holding up the accord and that they would meet again Friday to see if they can close the gaps.


Calumet Files for Bankruptcy Before Yearling Sales
Calumet Farm, whose thoroughbreds have won eight Kentucky Derbies and two Triple Crowns in half a century of success in breeding and racing, filed for reorganization under the bankruptcy laws yesterday.
But the owners said they were hoping to win time to pay their debts, which have been estimated at $70 million, and to keep "the farm and its glorious traditions intact."
The action was taken in a petition filed in the United States Bankruptcy Court in Lexington, Ky., where Calumet stretches for 800 acres across bluegrass fields that once were home to Whirlaway, Citation, Bull Lea and Iron Liege, the pre-eminent sire Alydar and Criminal Type, the 1990 Horse of the Year.


The Offer: Money for College, but Some Have Passed It Up
Ten years after Eugene M. Lang became a folk hero by promising college scholarships to an entire sixth-grade class in East Harlem, he gave a party recently for the first two to earn bachelor's degrees.
For the 22-year-old graduates, Rousanna Serrano, from Barnard College, and Zulma Hernandez, from Bard, the celebrations meant days in the limelight, an emotional reunion with their old classmates at Public School 121 and champagne toasts at a banquet attended by Mayor David N. Dinkins.


When High Court Voices Moral Disapproval; Rights Above Rhetoric
To the Editor:
Americans who cherish freedom from governmental intrusion in their daily lives can exult in the Senate vote that defeated the Justice Department's proposed exceptions to the exclusionary rule (editorial, June 25).
By withstanding the blandishments of the Bush Administration further to eviscerate the Fourth Amendment's proscription of unreasonable searches and seizures, the Senate has placed rights above rhetoric, expediency and specious appeals to law and order.


U.S. Is Suing To Salvage Shoreham
The Bush Administration, refusing to give up its fight to prevent the demolition of the Shoreham nuclear power plant on Long Island, moved yesterday to force a review of the environmental consequences of dismantling the plant.
The Administration's action pitted the Justice Department against the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, an agency the department usually defends.
The commission recently rejected the Administration's arguments and granted a license that cleared the way for the eventual dismantling of Shoreham.


Tucson Electric Proposes Giving Stake to Its Creditors
The Tucson Electric Power Company proposed a restructuring plan yesterday that would give its creditors a 60 percent stake in the financially troubled Arizona utility and reduce payments to some of its suppliers.
Tucson Electric has been suffering from overcapacity in its generating plants and from high costs.
It stopped repaying its banks and other creditors in January.
Since then, the company has been negotiating with creditors, suppliers and regulators in an attempt to overhaul its finances without seeking bankruptcy protection.


United Distillers Buys Glenmore
United Distillers Inc., the maker of Johnnie Walker Scotch and Gordon's gin, said it had bought the Glenmore Distilleries Company of Louisville, Ky., for $161 million in cash and the assumption of debt.
United Distillers is a unit of Guinness P.L.C., the British-based beer, spirits and luxury-goods concern.


For Children
There is, of course, more to Chinatown than cold sesame noodles and crowded gift shops.
There are clever chickens at a video arcade; archeologists searching for 19th-century artifacts; Columbus Park, with a recently renovated playground (at Worth and Mulberry Streets), and a history museum.
Here is a look at some Chinatown sights that families may want to sample.


U.S. Backs Payment for Soldier in LSD Tests
The Defense Department has dropped its opposition to compensation for a former Army sergeant who was unwittingly subjected to experiments with LSD and other drugs in the 1950's.
In a letter received Wednesday by Representative Jack Brooks, the Texas Democrat who is chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, the chief Pentagon attorney, Terrence O'Donnell, said the Defense Department no longer objected to a House bill to compensate the former soldier.
"I'm just tickled to death over it," said the former soldier, James B. Stanley, 57 years old, of nearby Palm Springs, Fla.
Representative Harry A. Johnston, a Florida Democrat who sponsored the bill to pay Mr.
Stanley $625,000 in damages, said, "I think they threw in the towel."
Although the Defense Department agreed to pay the monetary award, Mr.
O'Donnell said that $625,000 was excessive and that Mr.
Stanley had failed to demonstrate specific damages on which to base the award.
Mr.
Stanley, a jail shift commander for the Palm Beach County Sheriff's Office, was a 24-year-old Army staff sergeant when he volunteered to test protective clothing in 1958.
Instead, he was directed to drink a clear liquid he believed to be water and talk to interviewers.
Mr.
Stanley says he experienced behavioral changes that affected his job and destroyed his marriage.
He said he did not learn the true nature of the experiments until 1975, when he received in a letter from military doctors studying the soldiers given LSD.
Mr.
Stanley filed a lawsuit in 1977.
In 1987, the Supreme Court rejected his claim 5 to 4, citing a law that protects the military from lawsuits by soldiers.
Two years later, Representative Johnston filed his bill.


Economic Scene; Industrial Policy The Korean Way
TODAY'S formula for economic success stresses free trade, unfettered markets and minimal governments.
Yet the true Horatio Alger story of the third world, South Korea, gave government bureaucrats an unfashionably large role in shaping its economy.
Does that mean the reformers have it all wrong?
Hardly.
True, Seoul pursued industrial policy before anybody in Washington invented the term.
"There really was a Government-business partnership in which Government very much had the upper hand," said Stanley Fischer, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Korea's authoritarian Government threw a protectionist blanket over infant industries, regularly butted into financial markets to control the flow of credit, and, time and again, bullied business into doing what it wanted.


Critic's Notebook; On a New Cable Channel, Looking for a Laugh
Need a laugh these days?
Perhaps old network sitcoms might help, shows like "Rhoda," "Phyllis" or even "McHale's Navy." Or then there's "Saturday Night Live," Britain's "Monty Python" and Canada's "Kids in the Hall." On the originals trail, catch "Mystery Science Theater 3000" or "The Talent Pool" showcase, this week starring John Leguizamo ("Mambo Mouth").
They are all part of the anything-for-a-giggle menu being offered at Comedy Central.
Where is Comedy Central?


Though Only Partial, Eclipse Draws Crowds on Mainland
On the United States mainland, where only a partial eclipse was visible yesterday, the best viewing was in the Southwest.
But all over the country, in backyards, parks and city streets, people tried to get a glimpse through pinhole viewers, filtered binoculars and telescopes and odd-looking aluminized Mylar glasses.


The Imperious Presidency
In one breath, the Bush Administration's policy on South Africa has leaped from debatable to alarming.
Having ended sanctions against South Africa, the Administration wants local governments and private institutions to follow suit.
That's understandable.
What's not is the method proposed by Herman Cohen, the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs.
He has announced that the Justice Department is weighing a suit to challenge the "legal implications of states and local governments carrying out their own foreign policy with regard to South Africa."


Ford Studied Chrysler
Executives of the Ford Motor Company contemplated buying the Chrysler Corporation last winter but decided against a bid because their company had enough financial problems of its own, The Wall Street Journal said today.
The newspaper quoted unidentified people familiar with the situation as saying that Chrysler's chairman, Lee A. Iacocca, asked Ford's former chairman, Donald E. Petersen to act as an intermediary in talks between the auto makers.
Mr.
Iacocca, a former Ford executive, approached Mr.
Petersen after Chrysler's talks with the Italian auto maker Fiat S.p.A. fell through, The Journal reported.
But the newspaper said it was not clear whether Ford and Chrysler officials held any direct meetings.
Officials at Ford and Chrysler, along with Mr.
Petersen, declined to comment on the matter.


Dollar Posts Broad Gains On Job and German Reports
The dollar soared against the German mark and other major currencies yesterday in response to a rosy United States report on unemployment claims and to news that Germany would not immediately raise interest rates.
Currency traders said they were relieved by the German decision after days of intense speculation that the Bundesbank might take drastic steps to hold the line on inflation.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League CINCINNATI REDS -- Placed Jeff Reed, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 1.
Recalled Chris Jones, outfielder, from Nashville of the American Association.


A Symbol of U.S. Business Prowess
Pan American World Airways has always been a distinctively American institution -- from its origins as a tiny mail-shuttling service to its rise as the world's largest airline to its steady decline in the face of stiffening international and domestic competition.
For decades everyone from heads of state to terrorists regarded Pan Am as a symbol of America.
Its founder and longtime chief executive, Juan Trippe, a flamboyant aviation pioneer, was a friend and confidant of a series of American presidents and heads of state around the world.
Mr.
Trippe symbolized the self-confident globalism of some large American businesses during much of the 20th century.
For years, he worked closely with the American Government, and Pan Am was long the "chosen instrument" of United States aviation policy abroad.
But the airline never seemed to be nimble enough to adjust to a series of competitive challenges, from new carriers vying for international routes to airline deregulation in America.
Modest Beginnings
The airline started in 1927 with shoestring financing, a Fokker three-engine monoplane and the first United States international mail contract, between Florida and Cuba.
Mr.
Trippe, who ran the airline as a one-man fiefdom until he retired in 1968, once said, "I could see there was less competition abroad than at home."
That keen eye for opportunity was Mr.
Trippe's guiding philosophy.
And in pursuing his global ambitions, he nurtured relations with prominent people in both business and government.
In the early 1930's, he engaged Charles A. Lindbergh as a consultant to explore possible commercial routes across the Atlantic and over the polar regions to Asia.
Island bases in the Pacific were established, so the seven-day, island-hopping service from San Francisco to Manila, an 8,200-mile trip, could begin in 1936.
In its worldwide expansion, Pan Am followed the policy of private negotiation with foreign powers for landing rights.
Sometimes the State Department assisted, but much of the work was done face to face by Mr.
Trippe and his staff of foreign experts.
When Pan Am's famous transoceanic clipper flights were inaugurated, Mr.
Trippe was there, on the tarmac or in the cockpit.
At the beginning of round-the-world passenger service in 1947, Mr.
Trippe was on hand, hailed by foreign dignitaries including Generalissimo Chiang Kai-Shek in Nanking.
The high-level government contacts, both at home and abroad, in the pursuit of lucrative, state-granted routes were crucial to Mr.
Trippe's strategy.
In "The Chosen Instrument," a biography of Mr.
Trippe by Marylin Bender and Selig Altuschul, the authors wrote that it was evident to the airline entrepreneur that "a transportation company had to have a franchise, a right granted and protected by the government to operate between given points."  'Newest and Best Equipment'
They continued: "Preferably, the right should be exclusive. In order to attract private capital with which to buy the newest and best equipment to draw customers, the carrier had to be permitted to charge a rate that would insure a profitable return. What Trippe was heading toward was the semimonopolistic system of regulated competition such as prevailed for the nation's railroads, shipping and utilities, a system of quasi-public capitalism."
Pan Am prospered in this tightly regulated arena.
But particularly before World War II, it was also an innovator, not only in flying to distant locations but also in offering more than one class of passenger service, for example.
Still, the international service was mainly for the affluent, who were served by white-coated stewards, and the long flights were equipped with double-decker sleeping berths, equipped with curtains.
After World War II, Pan Am faced the unfamiliar phenomenon of competition.
Trans World Airlines started to fly the Atlantic.
United Airlines extended their routes to Hawaii.
Moreover, nations everywhere wanted an airline of their own, and the rules of international aviation stated that if a country allowed a foreign carrier to land, it could then demand that its airline be allowed reciprocal rights.
The airline still prospered, but it had trouble in the more competitive setting.
Efforts to expand proved difficult, as when Howard Hughes thwarted Mr.
Trippe's aim of acquiring T.W.A.
Still, Pan Am remained a leader for years.
And Mr.
Trippe was aggressive in purchasing new aircraft, which helped the development of the country's commercial aircraft industry, especially Boeing.
In 1966, he placed a $600 million order for the first Boeing 747's.
Even after Mr.
Trippe retired, Pan Am had difficulty moving beyond his legacy.
It lost money throughout the 1970's, being one of the highest-cost operators in the industry and suffering from a lack of high-traffic domestic routes to feed its international flights.
After airline deregulation in 1978, the competitive pressures on Pan Am only got worse.
The 1980's proved even more trying.
Losses mounted, despite concessions by its unions.
To garner cash, the company began selling assets.
The New York headquarters on top of Grand Central Station was sold in 1980, the Inter-Continental hotel chain went in 1981, and the Pacific routes, a lucrative business and a core of the corporate heritage, were sold in 1985.
Yet the saddest development for Pan Am during the decade was the tragedy over Lockerbie, Scotland, on Dec. 22, 1988.
A terrorist bomb blew up Flight 103, headed for New York, killing 270 people.
Many of those killed were Americans, college students and family members of armed forces personnel stationed in Europe, flying home for Christmas.


When High Court Voices Moral Disapproval; Democracy Abused
To the Editor:
I cannot see the Supreme Court ruling on topless and nude dancing (front page, June 22) as anything other than abuse of democracy.
This ruling encourages partisan prejudice to rear its ugly head with the power of the law on its side.


On Stage, and Off
'Most Happy Fella'
After weeks of negotiations, the Goodspeed Opera House production of "The Most Happy Fella" is set for Broadway.
The critically acclaimed revival, directed by Gerard Gutierrez and co-starring Sophie Hayden and Spiro Malas, will open at the Booth Theater in February.
The co-producers will be Goodspeed, Center Theater Group/ Ahmanson at the Doolittle in Los Angeles, Lincoln Center Theater and the Shubert Organization.


Art in Review
Thierry Kuntzel Museum of Modern Art 11 West 53d Street Manhattan Through Aug. 27
The 29th show in the Museum of Modern Art's "Projects" series is a deceptively simple video by Thierry Kuntzel, a 43-year-old French artist living in Paris.
The video is called "Winter (The Death of Robert Walser)." In the accompanying brochure, Barbara London writes that Robert Walser was a Swiss author "who, in his early writings, foretold his slow, quiet death in the snow."


Morris to Take Turn
JACK MORRIS is scheduled to take his regular turn in the Minnesota Twins' rotation tomorrow, even though he still hurts from the grounder that hit his foot while he was pitching in the All-Star Game on Tuesday night.


One-Hit Shutout: Sanderson Stars Again
He is not exactly Nolan Ryan standing out there, but the California Angels wouldn't have known the difference tonight anyway.
Scott Sanderson is simply smooth and effortless, getting ground balls and fly balls, striking out a batter here and there and making it almost look routine.
Tonight, the Yankee right-hander did it again, pitching a one-hitter, facing just 28 batters (one above the minimum) and beating the Angels, 2-0, at Anaheim Stadium.


James Revson, Writer At Newsday, Dies at 38
James Revson, a society columnist for Newsday, died yesterday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 38 years old and lived in Manhattan and Sag Harbor, L.I.
Mr. Revson died of AIDS, a spokeswoman for Newsday said.


Why the Wall St. Court Reversals?
From the time of the first guilty plea in the Wall Street scandals of the 1980's, Government prosecutors racked up an impressive string of indictments that appeared to expose widespread corruption in the financial industry.
Yet, as the cases have unfolded, the courts have reversed a number of convictions, raising questions about how extensive the wrongdoing actually was, and how well prosecutors handled these cases.


Texas River Unit Is Issuing Bonds
The Sabine River Authority, in Texas, is tentatively offering $70.45 million in refunding revenue bonds through underwriters led by Barnett Capital Markets.
The bonds, which are in serial form, are priced to yield from 4.25 percent in 1991 to 6 percent in 1996, to 6.6 percent in 2001 and 6.75 percent in 2003.


Martha Pulliam, 100, Publisher; Grandmother of the Vice President
Martha Pulliam, a former newspaper publisher and the grandmother of Vice President Dan Quayle, died today.
She was 100 years old.
Mrs.
Pulliam died at the Methodist Retirement Home Hospital here, said Owen Hansen, managing editor of The Lebanon Reporter in Lebanon, where Mrs.
Pulliam was publisher emeritus.


Foreman Back in Line
Is GEORGE FOREMAN angry that he won't be fighting EVANDER HOLYFIELD again?
Foreman's all-but-signed deal for a rematch with Holyfield fell apart on Wednesday when a Holyfield-Mike Tyson heavyweight title fight was signed for Nov. 8. .


Bridge
One of the world's most cosmopolitan bridge games is, surprisingly, played in Sweden's Riksdag or parliament.
In March a game included a group of visiting British parliamentarians; several career diplomats, including the Indian Ambassador to Sweden, Pushkar Johari, and David Herman, the American president of Saab.
On the diagramed deal Herman opened the South hand with two spades, abiding by the European preference for intermediate two-bids, just short of the values to insist on a game.
He landed in three no-trump, and won the first trick with the heart king when East held up his ace.


Last Troops Begin Withdrawing From Northern Iraq
Ending one of the largest military relief operations ever, the Pentagon said the last American and allied forces in northern Iraq began withdrawing today.
The pullout of the 3,300 troops, including about 1,500 Americans, is scheduled to be completed by Monday.
To deter reprisals against the Kurds by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, an eight-nation rapid-deployment force of 2,500 troops will be left in southeastern Turkey, the Defense Department said.


C.I.A. Reported to Have Used Bank That Regulators Seized
The Central Intelligence Agency used the Bank of Credit and Commerce International for intelligence operations before the bank was seized last week by international regulators, according to Government and bank documents and current and former Government and bank officials.
The bank was also involved in secret arms deals, including the covert sale of American arms to Iran in 1986, according to the documents and the officials.


30 Kurds Arrested After Storming the Turkish Embassy in London


Yet Another High-Tech Innovation: Eyeglasses to Shake, Rattle and Roll
Anyone who has ever sat or stepped on eyeglasses or found them twisted out of shape will appreciate frames that do not crack, break or lose their original contours.
Such frames are now available in plastic and even metal.
A profusion of high-tech alloys allows for lighter, thinner metal frames that combine greater comfort with durability.


AIDS-Like Virus Found In Many Domestic Cats
Dr.
Donald Delinks, a veterinarian here on Cape Cod, recently got some bad news about a patient: His 10-year-old mongrel cat, Flopsy, tested positive for the feline form of AIDS.
The feline immunodeficiency virus, FIV, is an increasingly common though little publicized diagnosis in this country since it was discovered in 1987 in California.


June Producer Prices Fell by Unexpected 0.3%
Producer prices fell last month, the Government said today, easing inflation fears but underscoring the shaky nature of the economic recovery.
The Labor Department said the Producer Price Index, a measure of prices charged wholesalers for processed and manufactured goods, fell an unexpected three-tenths of a percent.


U.S. Messages on July 1990 Meeting of Hussein and American Ambassador
Critics of United States policy toward Iraq in the period before the invasion of Kuwait last August have accused the Bush Administration of failing to give Baghdad adequate warning of the consequences of military action against Kuwait.
At the center of the dispute is a July 25, 1990, meeting between April C. Glaspie, the United States Ambassador to Iraq, and President Saddam Hussein.
In September, Iraq released what it described as a transcript of the meeting, but the Administration said the Iraqi document was incomplete and misleading, and in March Ms.
Glaspie said it was largely fabricated.


7 Powers In Search Of Policy
When the leaders of the Group of Seven industrial nations meet next week in London, they will tug in sharply different directions over how much aid to give the Soviet Union.
These differences could make the London economic summit conference one of the liveliest in years.
Group of Seven officials say the aid most likely to be approved will be technical assistance to move to a market economy as well as granting Moscow associate membership in the International Monetary Fund.


Socko Performance by Breland in Comeback
He was the World Boxing Association welterweight champion when he stepped into the ring on July 8, 1990.
But Mark Breland of Brooklyn knew he was in big trouble when the first punch thrown by a challenger named Aaron Davis was a routine-looking jab that made him go wobbly-legged.


Montana's Still There, but 49ers of Old Are Gone
Moving day.
All around, from morning until late afternoon, there is the kind of bustle that precedes the opening of football camps from here to Hempstead, L.I.: boxes stacked against walls, uniformed workers coming and going, phones ringing, empty vans being loaded with equipment.
It marks a transition of sorts -- the official start of a new season -- and perhaps no National Football League training camp will be watched more closely than the one that began this week in Rocklin, Calif., near Sacramento.
Six months after a devastating defeat, the San Francisco 49ers are preparing for a new season without some familiar faces.


Drexel Suit by Southmark
he Southmark Corporation today demanded more than $200 million from Michael R. Milken and other former officials of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., saying their greed forced the company into bankruptcy.
In a lawsuit filed in the Federal District Court in Dallas, Southmark said that Mr.
Milken, who is serving a 10-year Federal prison term, and others at Drexel overburdened the real estate development company with debt and then led it into highly speculative investments.
That was "solely to satisfy the greed of the Milken group and other defendants," Southmark said in the suit.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 13


Letter: On Consumers; How Health Warning Labels Work
To the Editor:
As the tobacco warning label showdown gathers thunder ("Tobacco Company Must Stand Trial," June 25), the central issue of legal sufficiency versus psychological adequacy has been squarely hit by the Louisiana Supreme Court's lightning bolt: "the adequacy of a manufacturer's warnings must be considered in determining how much risk the plaintiff voluntarily accepted."


Wendy L. Loring, a Banker, Weds
Wendy Lynn Loring, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur P. Loring of Glen Cove, L.I., was married yesterday at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I., to Paul Frederick Slater, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice F. Slater of Armonk, N.Y.
The Rev.
Mitzi Noble performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Slater, 27 years old, is an associate at the Bank of America in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Hamilton College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is a professor of geology at York College of the City University of New York in Jamaica, Queens.
Her mother, Carol L. Loring, is a nurse at the North Shore University Hospital at Glen Cove.


Patents; Clock With a Difference: It Tells the Time Left
Watches and clocks generally tell people the time of day.
This week, an inventor in New York state patented a "life-expectancy timepiece" to tell people how much time they have left in this world.
"A lot of people are couch potatoes, and a lot of people waste a lot of time," said David Kendrick, a reclusive inventor who lives in a cabin on a remote patch of land he owns near Berkshire, N.Y.
"My watch is to make people realize how precious time is, that each day is just here and you can't get it back."


Ralph Renick Is Dead; TV Newsman Was 62
Ralph Renick, a broadcaster who dominated the television news ratings in the Miami area for 35 years, died on Thursday at Cedars Medical Center.
He was 62 years old.
Mr.
Renick, who worked at WTVJ, suffered from hepatitis and liver cancer and had been in and out of the hospital since April.


International Paper Off
The International Paper Company has reported that its second-quarter earnings fell nearly 44 percent, to $104 million, or 95 cents a share, from $185 million, or $1.70 a share, a year earlier.
The company's sales slipped 3 percent, to $3.1 billion from $3.2 billion.
The wood products and paper company said the sluggish economy and higher industry capacity for uncoated papers put pressure on its prices, producing lower earnings.
On the New York Stock Exchange today, International Paper's shares gained 25 cents, closing at $71.


News Summary
International 2-5
A new approach to the arms talks in Washington was presented by Secretary Baker to the Soviet Foreign Minister.
The plan proposed a comprehensive way to settle the treaty's remaining issues.
Page 1


Japanese Translator of Rushdie Book Found Slain
The Japanese translator of "The Satanic Verses," by Salman Rushdie, was found slain today at a university northeast of Tokyo.
The translator, Hitoshi Igarashi, 44 years old, was an assistant professor of comparative culture who reportedly studied in Iran in the 1970's.
The police said he was stabbed several times on Thursday night and left in the hallway outside his office at Tsukuba University.


Get Rid of the Gag Rule
In 1983 the Reagan Administration took a very wise step.
It stopped pressing for the so-called "squeal rule," which required federally funded family planning clinics to notify the parents of patients under 18 who sought prescription contraceptives.
Eight years later President Bush can show similar wisdom by abandoning another relic of the Reagan era -- the "gag rule."
The gag rule refers to restrictions formulated in 1988 by the Department of Health and Human Services.
They would prohibit physicians in federally funded clinics from telling pregnant women that abortion is a legal option.
Furthermore, women who inquire about the procedure would be told that the clinic "does not consider abortion to be an appropriate method of family planning."


U.S. Troops Leave Iraqi North
The Pentagon said the last U.S. forces in northern Iraq have begun to withdraw, ending one of the largest military relief efforts ever.
Page 3.


Patents; System Helps Doctors Keep Up to Date
A pediatrician in Omaha obtained a patent this week on a communications network intended to serve as an electronic update for the Physicians' Desk Reference, the doctors' guide to drugs and treatments.
The pediatrician, Dr.
Charles T. Rush, said he invented the network to help doctors stay on top of the endless stream of developments in their fields.
For example, he said, the recommended treatment for meningitis has changed significantly in the last year, and doctors are now expected to give patients steroids before administering any antibiotics.


Seagate Planning Cuts in Staffing
Seagate Technology Inc., the leading independent producer of computer disk drives, said it would reduce its nonmanufacturing work force in the United States and Europe by 18 percent, or a total of 1,200.
The layoffs would constitute 3 percent of Seagate's worldwide work force, most of it involved in manufacturing in Asia.
Julie Still, a spokeswoman, said that while demand was still strong, prices for disk drives had been under pressure.
Other disk drive companies have also been making some cuts with computer sales slow.
"The whole industry has too much capacity," said John T. Rossi, an analyst at Robertson Stephen &amp; Company in San Francisco.
But Seagate has special problems, he said, because it was late developing small disk drives for use in laptop and notebook computers.


A Celebrity Brings a Friend to Pet Cemetery Protest


No Headline
Novamont S.p.A., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Ferruzzi-controlled Montedison group of Italy, says it has produced a new fiber out of corn that can be used to make paper, potentially saving trees.
The fiber, Chart-Bi, can replace up to 80 percent of the tree cellulose used in making paper, a Ferruzzi spokesman said.
The fiber can be used in making any kind of paper, the company said, but Chart-Bi's strength and resistance to oils and fats makes it especially adaptable for use in drawing paper and food wrapping.
The company said paper made with Chart-Bi would be on the market this fall.


Dollars Sold In 'Ambush' By Group of 7
The United States and its economic allies yesterday executed an "amubush" in the foreign exchange market, with waves of coordinated selling that knocked the value of the dollar down as much as 2.4 percent.
The move also appeared to be a quid pro quo for the German decision on Thursday not to raise interest rates.
The coordinated action seemed to dispel, for now, a belief that the strong dollar was of little or no concern as the United States and its allies prepared for the seven-nation economic summit in London next week.
Yesterday's pre-emptive strike showed that the Group of Seven -- which also includes Japan, Germany, Britain, France, Italy and Canada -- was still paying attention.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Duracell International Inc., Bethel, Conn., a manufacturer of alkaline batteries, appointed Becky W. Osterberg senior vice president of communications. *
Fleet/Norstar Financial Group, Providence, R.I., a financial services company, named Peter C. Fitts senior vice president of credit administration.


Corrections
The Economic Scene column in Business Day yesterday misidentified Larry E. Westphal.
He is an economist at Swarthmore College, in Swarthmore, Pa.


About New York
Salvatore Napolitano began working at the Central Park Carousel at age 15 in 1970.
He now holds the concession to run it -- a privilege for which he gave up going to any of the three law schools to which he was admitted.
It has been a magnificent ride, one that he prays will never end.
But it might end soon, because Mr.
Napolitano, now 36, might have made a humongous mistake.
Or he might have been the innocent victim of overzealous application of the new City Charter.
The New York State Supreme Court will decide.


World Debt Champion
To the Editor:
In "Economic Crisis Forcing Once Self-Reliant India to Seek Aid" (news article, June 29), you repeat a widely held misconception that India is "the world's third largest debtor after Brazil and Mexico."


Review/Pop; A Little 1960's Psychedelic Angst
The La's and Straitjacket Fits, who shared a double bill Wednesday night at the Marquee, both hint that the 1990's could be the 1960's upside down, exchanging insouciance for nervous desperation.
The La's, from Liverpool, play crisp, snappy pop songs that invoke the Beatles and the Kinks but are entirely drained of good cheer; Straitjacket Fits, from Dunedin, New Zealand, turn the drones and murk of psychedelia into a sound track for anxiety.
At first the La's seem to be straight out of the Mersey-beat era: four young men with mid-length hair playing the same instruments as the Beatles.
Each song briskly proffers a hook, usually a guitar line, while the arrangements have a little bit of skiffle bounce, a little bit of mid-tempo Beatles rock.
Their lyrics tend to be glum, uncertain or vaguely religious: "I get the feeling that I am responding to a call," says one ambiguous song.


A High Court Victory, But an Empty Pocket
Of all the stories of those who have won victories in the United States Supreme Court, Sheldon B. Toibb's surely ranks among the most bittersweet.
Last month, the Court ruled 8-to-1 that individuals can seek court protection under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code, which is normally reserved for faltering businesses.
That decision should help some bankrupt individuals keep valuable assets like stock.
A Chapter 7 filing, the main option previously for individuals, requires selling or giving up such holdings.


Heat Gets to Magic
Los Angeles Lakers star MAGIC JOHNSON was stricken with heat exhaustion while in Hawaii and was unable to attend former teammate MICHAEL COOPER's basketball camp in Albuquerque, N.M., yesterday, according to JOEY MONTANO, the camp director.
Johnson's agent, LON ROSEN, told Los Angeles radio station KFWB that Johnson became tired after filming a basketball show in Hawaii that will be aired next year.
He was not hospitalized, Rosen said.(AP)


RESULTS PLUS
HARNESS RACING  Precious Bunny Wins


Gorbachev Vows to Stand Tall in London
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that far from planning to "crawl" for aid before the leading industrial nations next week, he would present his case through specifics like the extent to which the Soviet Union would convert its military industries to civilian needs.
"What we are going to propose in the area of defense-sector conversion will be very much indicative of how far we would be prepared to go," he said, speaking with obvious enthusiasm of his mission to London, where he will ask the seven leading industrial nations on Wednesday for help in converting the ailing Communist economy.


Gerome Ragni, 48, a Stage Actor; Co-Author of Broadway's 'Hair'
Gerome Ragni, co-author of "Hair," the hit musical that for millions around the world became a theatrical summing-up of the rebellious youth culture of the 1960's, died Wednesday in New York City.
He was 48 years old.
He died of cancer, said his son, Erick.


Religion Notes
Thomas's New Church
So what religion is Judge Clarence Thomas, President Bush's nominee to the succeed Justice Thurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court?
He did not list his religion is his "Who's Who" entry or in his official biography.
But news accounts in the two weeks since the nomination was announced have produced this portrait:


Yankees Win in 10 And Say Hello to .500
Just one game short of the halfway point to their season, the Yankees finally found .500.
Barely.
It took 10 innings tonight, but a fielder's choice grounder by Steve Sax allowed Bernie Williams to score from third base, giving the Yankees a 2-1 victory over the California Angels and a 40-40 record.


Retail Sales Fell 0.2% Last Month
Retail sales were surprisingly weak in June, falling two-tenths of a percent and arousing fresh doubts among economists about the durability of the recovery.
The decline was broad-based, with automotive products posting the only gains, according to the Commerce Department's monthly report.
Without this sector, where the improved sales pace is thought unlikely to be sustained, retail sales tumbled five-tenths of a percent after rising nearly twice that much in May.


Strauss Will Give Up $4 Million In Salary to Take Post in Moscow
Robert S. Strauss will take a pay cut of more than $4 million and step down from seven corporate boards on his confirmation as the next United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union, according to a financial statement that he recently filed with the Government.
Mr.
Strauss's financial disclosure statement, which was made public this week and reported today in The Washington Post, details what is already widely known: the 72-year-old lawyer is a power broker of abundant wealth and envious political and corporate connections.
It shows that as advertised the Soviets will be receiving a consummate capitalist, and one that as anticipated has some potentially awkward connections.


Hoge, the Publisher, Leaves News to Be Consultant, Maxwell Says
Robert Maxwell, owner of The Daily News, said yesterday that James Hoge was no longer the paper's publisher "by mutual agreement."
Mr.
Maxwell added that Mr.
Hoge would work for Maxwell Newspapers, which includes The Mirror in London, as a consultant and would spend the fall semester as a fellow at the Institute of Politics at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.


Dow Rises 21.02 in a Seesaw Day
Stocks gave Wall Street investors and traders a case of the heebie-jeebies yesterday, before ending with a strong gain.
Keeping up its erratic pace of the last week, the Dow Jones industrial average bounced around for most of the session before ending at 2,980.77, up 21.02 points for the day and 48.30, or 1.6 percent, for the week.


Melvin C. Holm, 74, Carrier's Chairman For Over a Decade
Melvin C. Holm, who led the Carrier Corporation for nearly two decades, died on Wednesday at his home in Manlius, N.Y.
He was 74 years old.
In 1965 Mr.
Holm was elected president of Carrier, the world's largest maker of heating, refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment.
He became chief executive officer in February 1968 and chairman eight months later.


Black 'Conservatives' United Only by Frustration
President Bush's nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court has focused attention on a small group of critics of the traditional civil rights agenda who are identified as black conservatives.
But rather than a cohesive movement, those who, like Judge Thomas, are called black conservatives are a diverse group.
Some are conservative, some not.
They are defined by the one thing they all have in common -- a frustration with the idea that black people have one agenda defined by civil rights leaders.


Patents; Superconductors Made In Bulk Quantities
A former researcher at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, a Federal laboratory in Berkeley, Calif., has patented a new method for making high-temperature superconductors in bulk quantities.
The new method is intended to overcome practical problems associated with superconductors, which are materials that conduct electricity with almost no resistance.
New classes of ceramic-like materials discovered several years ago become superconducting at temperatures around 190 degrees below zero centigrade, warmer than previous types of superconducting metals.
Researchers are trying to raise temperatures even further to make them economically practical.


India Fireworks Blaze Kills 27
A blaze at a fireworks factory in southern India today killed at least 27 people and injured 70, news reports said.
United News of India said the fire broke out in the New Dawn Fireworks Factory near the town of Sivakasi, about 1,300 miles south of New Delhi.


Adjusting for Injustice
The 1990 Census, which failed to count probably five million Americans, mostly minority members, was the worst in decades.
Before Tuesday the Commerce Department must announce whether it will try to repair the damage by statistical adjustment.
At best, the decision is a challenging mixture of science and policy; at worst it's a matter of raw politics.
Can the Bush Administration, with nothing political to gain and much to lose from adjusting, be trusted to render a fair decision?
The decision will be subject to Federal court scrutiny in a continuing case brought by large cities, including New York.
There are good arguments for at least some form of adjustment.
Fair-minded citizens can hope that Commerce will at last show sympathetic understanding of the injustice caused by the undercount, and a will to right the balance.


Amy Hart Wed to T. M. Clyne
Amy Elizabeth Hart and Timothy Michael Clyne were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford Village, N.Y., by the Rev.
Walter F. Modrys.
The bride is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Hart of Bedford, N.Y.
The bridegroom is a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Clyne of Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Clyne, 30 years old, is to join the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York as a first vice president in August.
A Colgate University graduate, she received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University and graduated from the College of Financial Planning in Denver as a certified financial planner.
Her father is a dentist in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Her mother, Patricia Hart, is the president of P-DOH Enterprises Inc., a maker of tote bags in Bedford.


Giants May Sign Mowatt
The Super Bowl champion Giants, who will open training camp here Monday with a shortage of receivers, said today they had signed Odessa Turner and indicated they would also sign Zeke Mowatt.
Mowatt played tight end for the Giants from 1983 to 1989.
The New England Patriots signed him last year as a Plan B free agent.
He missed playing time there because of an injured finger, and he was involved in a sexual-harassment incident involving Lisa Olson, a sports writer, that resulted in a fine of $12,500 by the National Football League.
The Patriots released him three days ago, and the Giants' medical staff is checking Mowatt's physical condition.


Businessland In New Talks
JWP Inc., the company trying to buy Businessland Inc., is proposing to reduce the amount it will pay for Businessland's common stock and increase the amount it will pay to the company's bondholders.
The companies said today that they were negotiating new terms along those lines to sweeten the deal for Businessland's debt holders, who have so far rejected the $54 million takeover offer.
The companies did not disclose the new terms they are considering but said they hoped to reach an agreement on Monday.


Public &amp; Private; Summer Reading Lists
Reporters and editors have traditionally used reader inattention as an excuse to take long vacations during July and August.
We have promulgated the fiction that in the summer months, people are available to read only paperback books that can be left out on an Adirondack chair in the rain: books about carnivorous sea creatures, books about serial killings with Satanic overtones, books about the glamorous and cutthroat world of big cosmetics with sentences that begin, "His tanned hands moved over her body, the fingers warm and sensitive as isotopes . . ."
This is nonsense.
People read in the summer, even newspapers.
They simply read differently, just as they eat differently.
In winter people eat stew and mashed potatoes, and in summer they eat chicken and potato salad.


For Round-the-Clock Diagnoses, Just Pick Up Your Telephone
Doctors and druggists are using "900" numbers to give advice on the telephone for a per-minute fee.
One company, Doctors by Phone , began operating last month.
It has a staff of 75 professionals, including internists, cardiologists and osteopaths, who answer questions about health care and medical conditions for people anywhere in the United States who call (900) 77-DOCTOR (900-773-6286; if callers choose, they can dial the R, too, and the call will still go through).


The Year the Shooting Eased Up
Last year, for the first time, Americans took fewer snapshots than in the year before.
According to the new edition of the Wolfman Report, an annual survey of the photography industry, photographers took 15.72 billion pictures last year, down from 16.12 billion in 1989.
The survey, published yesterday by Popular Photography magazine, also said new camera sales dropped to 18.7 million units, from 20 million in 1989.


Upjohn Expansion
The Upjohn Company said it had agreed to buy the assets of Delta West Ltd., an Austrialian company specializing in hospital products.
No terms were disclosed, but the Kalamazoo-based drug maker said the purchase would allow it to expand its Pacific markets and increase the products it offers.
Delta West's products include pharmaceuticals used to treat cancer and drug-based injectibles used for anesthesia and to treat infections.
On the New York Stock Exchange, Upjohn's shares fell 37.5 cents each, to $44.50.


Bush-Dinkins Meeting? We'll See, Quayle Says
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who is accustomed these days to hearing complaints from his constituents about New York City's lack of money, pre-empted Barbara Walters yesterday to complain about the same problem to Vice President Dan Quayle.
And the Vice President said he would take it up with an even higher authority, President Bush, and try to arrange a Bush-Dinkins meeting.


Despite Praising Farrakhan in 1983, Thomas Denies Anti-Semitism
President Bush's nominee for the Supreme Court, Judge Clarence Thomas, expressed admiration for the Rev.
Louis Farrakhan in speeches eight years ago.
But Judge Thomas said today that he never shared any of the clergyman's anti-Semitic views.
The content of the speeches was disclosed today by The Dallas Times Herald.
After leaders of Jewish organizations and civil rights advocates expressed concern about Mr.
Thomas's remarks, he issued a statement saying he was not an anti-Semite.


Review/Pop; Crash Course In Rock From Africa
Mory Kante, a Guinean singer and band leader who lives in Paris, is a master of cross-cultural pop.
For Westerners his music may offer the easiest approach to West African rock, with its thumping funk beat, horn riffs and lilting keyboard hooks.
And for the appreciative West Africans who shouted, ululated and applauded certain lyrics when Mr.
Kante performed at S.O.B.'s on Thursday night, there's still enough of Africa in the music to make it their own.
Mr.
Kante sings with the strong, sailing tenor voice of a griot, and while the music that surrounds him is Westernized, his vocal lines still have the urgency and off-the-beat phrasing of Mandingo traditional music.
Mr.
Kante's 14-piece band -- with members from Guinea, Senegal, Sweden, Paris and Los Angeles -- is a song-and-dance revue; three women in quasi-African clothes were a kind of chorus line, joining Mr.
Kante in movements that distantly recalled African dances.
Meanwhile the band pumped out two-chord and three-chord vamps that were exuberantly multinational, kin to reggae, soca, funk, Senegalese mbalax and Los Angeles folk-pop, but with African touches.
Now and then, Mr.
Kante played a tama talking drum or strapped on a kora, the griot's harp-guitar, but he was as likely to play Western-style chords or riffs as to pluck the trickling runs of Mandingo griot music.


Manila Aide Says Clark Base Could Be Rebuilt This Year
The volcano-damaged Clark Air Base could be rebuilt within six months, Foreign Secretary Raul S. Manglapus of the Philippines said today after suggestions that the United States might abandon the base on grounds of cost.
Mr.
Manglapus also indicated that continued eruptions of Mount Pinatubo, which have crippled Clark and Subic Bay Naval Station, could delay the conclusion of a new treaty on the bases.
The American lease on the bases expires in September.


An Unwelcome Spotlight for a Spymaster
At the Central Intelligence Agency he was the consummate spymaster, the clandestine operations officer incarnate, but now Clair E. George is the man under the harshest glare of the Iran-contra investigation.
As the intelligence agency's third-ranking official when the Iran-contra affair unraveled, Mr.
George had risen through overseas intelligence posts in places like Hong Kong, Lebanon and Greece to be Deputy Director for Operations, responsible for managing the C.I.A.'s espionage operations and covert activities around the world.
Next Stop on Trail
Former intelligence agents describe him as charming, aggressive, profane, independent, temperamental, tough and totally absorbed in the espionage trade.
Those agents said his personality meshed seamlessly with that of William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence who promoted Mr.
George to some of the agency's highest and most trouble-prone jobs in the Reagan Administration.


A Welfare Official Denies He Resigned Because of Inquiry
The head of New York City's welfare bureau denied yesterday that he had submitted his resignation under pressure, as Commissioner Barbara J. Sabol said on Thursday.
The official, Allen Kraus, offered his resignation in June as deputy commissioner for the Human Resources Administration's Income Support Programs.
Mrs.
Sabol, the head of Human Resources, said on Thursday that Mr.
Kraus had left in the wake of a welfare fraud investigation that she said uncovered poor oversight in his division.


ENVOY'S TESTIMONY ON IRAQ IS ASSAILED
Leading Senators today accused the former United States Ambassador to Iraq of misleading Congress in March when she testified about a crucial meeting with President Saddam Hussein eight days before his forces invaded Kuwait.
The Senators' remarks came after they reviewed several secret cables, particularly one from the Ambassador, April C. Glaspie, summarizing the meeting.
The cables were provided by the State Department to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee this week.  [ Excerpts, page 4. ]


Fish's Eye View of Summer Swim Program


Boston Dean Quits In Plagiarism Case
The Boston University communication school dean accused of plagiarizing the writings of a film critic in his commencement speech has resigned as dean but will remain on the faculty, the university's president announced today.
At a morning news conference on the campus, the university's president, John R. Silber, said that H. Joachim Maitre had submitted his resignation as dean of the College of Communication, and that it had been accepted.


Miami Journal; Boycott Over Visit Of Mandela Lives On
It was just over a year ago that a triumphant Nelson Mandela arrived here to a chorus of protests from many of Miami's powerful Cuban-Americans who were angered by the South African nationalist's support of Fidel Castro.
The dispute was played out in public.
The City Commission rescinded a proclamation welcoming Mr.
Mandela, and Mayor Xavier Suarez and four other mayors from the region openly criticized Mr.
Mandela for not denouncing human rights violations in Cuba.


Milton D. Ratner, 73, Chicago Art Collector
Milton D. Ratner, a Chicago physician, businessman and art collector, died Wednesday at his home.
He was 73 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his stepdaughter, Julie Markow, said.


Oh, Yes. Steroids.
The World Wrestling Federation said yesterday that it would expand its drug program to include a steroid policy covering testing, education and rehabilitation.
BASIL V. DeVITO Jr., the federation's senior vice president for marketing, would not acknowledge that the change was related to the conviction last month of a doctor in Harrisburg, Pa., on 12 of 14 counts of selling anabolic steroids to four pro wrestlers and a weight lifter. (AP)


New York Taxpayers Have Had Bargain-Rate Labor Contracts
To the Editor:
Contrary to "At Last, a Labor Pro at City Hall" (editorial, June 22), on Edward Silver, who succeeded me as New York City's Commissioner of Labor Relations, I did not agree to "costly and wasteful" contracts.
The three contracts I negotiated -- teachers, District Council 37 and teamsters -- were the least expensive to the taxpayer negotiated by the city with any municipal employee union since such collective bargaining began.


Show Closing Demanded At Washington Museum
The National Museum of American Art, which has been at the center of a dispute over an exhibition that challenged traditional views of the 19th-century American Western expansion, is now involved in another controversy.
The organizers of the exhibition "Eadweard Muybridge and Contemporary American Photography," which opened here June 28, are demanding that the show be closed because the museum's director, Elizabeth Broun, removed a work she calls "degrading to women."


C.I.A. Officials May Be Called to Testify
The Senate Intelligence Committee may call current and former officials of the Central Intelligence Agency to testify as it pursues growing questions about Robert M. Gates's role in the Iran-contra affair.
The scandal has clouded the nomination of Mr.
Gates, who was deputy director of the agency when the affair came to light in 1986, to be the new Director of Central Intelligence.


Bonds's Repeat Performance Keeps Pirates Rolling Along
Barry Bonds hit a three-run homer in the fifth inning and Doug Drabek won for the seventh time in eight decisions as the Pittsburgh Pirates again pounded Cincinnati, beating the Reds, 7-2, tonight.
For the second successive night, Bonds had four runs batted in, including one he singled in in the seventh.
He has 59 r.b.i. this year.
Pittsburgh, which had 14 hits in Thursday's 10-6 victory, had 12 more as it sent the Reds to their fourth consecutive loss.


Salvadoran Government Strives for Peace
To the Editor:
"Aid to Salvador Can Wait" (editorial, June 25) misses points, which leads to a wrong conclusion.


La Quinta Holders Elect Directors
The shareholders of La Quinta Motor Inns Inc. have averted a proxy fight by electing directors backed by the Texas investors Sid and Lee Bass.
Sam Barshop, the motel chain's chairman, said the new directors would replace those who resigned under an agreement worked out with the Bass brothers, who along with their partner, Thomas Taylor, own 14.9 percent of La Quinta's outstanding stock.
The election, held today, leaves one slot open on the 11-member board.
The Bass group, which owns 15 percent of the company, and other large shareholders have pushed for changes because of La Quinta's diminished earnings.
But no buyers have been found.
The company's stock rose 12.5 cents today on the New York Stock Exchange, closing at $14.25.


Review/Theater; Hammett and Hellman And Desperate Intruder
Declan Hughes's play "I Can't Get Started" takes a ponderously serious approach to an idea that has been executed far more adroitly on Broadway in the musical "City of Angels." A writer of detective fiction and one of his characters engage in an imaginative dialogue at a critical moment in the writer's life.
"I Can't Get Started," which the Rough Magic Theater Company from Dublin is giving its North American debut through Sunday at the International Theater Festival in Stony Brook, is complicated by the fact that the writer was the real-life Dashiell Hammett.
His alter ego, Daniel Webster, is a gumshoe who is desperate to be given literary life at a moment in the early 1950's when the author, who has stopped writing, has been summoned before the House Committee on Un-American Activities in its investigation of Communism in Hollywood.
Hammett, who refused to name names, was blacklisted, spent six months in prison, and emerged with his health seriously deteriorated.
He died in 1961.


Enron Officers Settle Charges


Corrections
The Foreign Exchange tables in Business Day on Tuesday and Wednesday misstated the number of francs to the dollar for the previous days.
It was 6.1295 francs on Monday and 6.1650 on Tuesday.


How Senate Voted on Anti-Crime Bill
Following is the 71-to-26 roll-call vote by which the Senate voted to pass the comprehensive crime bill.
A yes vote was a vote for the bill.
Voting yes were 45 Democrats and 26 Republicans.
Voting no were 10 Democrats and 16 Republicans.
Alabama: Heflin (D) Yes; Shelby (D) Yes.
Alaska: Murkowski (R) No; Stevens (R) No.
Arizona: DeConcini (D) Yes; McCain (R) No.
Arkansas: Bumpers (D) Yes; Pryor (D) Not Voting.
California: Cranston (D) No; Seymour (R) Yes.
Colorado: Brown (R) Yes; Wirth (D) Yes.
Connecticut: Dodd (D) Yes; Lieberman (D) Yes.
Delaware: Biden (D) Yes; Roth (R) Yes.
Florida: Graham (D) Yes; Mack (R) Yes.
Georgia: Fowler (D) Yes; Nunn (D) Yes.
Hawaii: Akaka (D) Yes; Inouye (D) Yes.
Idaho: Craig (R) No; Symms (R) No.
Illinois: Dixon (D) Yes; Simon (D) No.
Indiana: Coats (R) Yes; Lugar (R) Yes.
Iowa: Grassley (R) Yes; Harkin (D) Yes.
Kansas: Dole (R) Yes; Kassebaum (R) Yes.
Kentucky: Ford (D) Yes; McConnell (R) Yes.
Louisiana: Breaux (D) No; Johnston (D) No.
Maine: Cohen (R) Yes; Mitchell (D) Yes.
Maryland: Mikulski (D) Yes; Sarbanes (D) Yes.
Massachusetts: Kennedy (D) No; Kerry (D) Yes.
Michigan: Levin (D) Yes; Riegle (D) Yes.
Minnesota: Durenberger (R) No; Wellstone (D) No.
Mississippi: Cochran (R) Yes; Lott (R) Yes.
Missouri: Bond (R) No; Danforth (R) Yes.
Montana: Baucus (D) Yes; Burns (R) No.
Nebraska: Exon (D) Yes; Kerrey (D) Yes.
Nevada: Bryan (D) Yes; Reid (D) Yes.
New Hampshire: Rudman (R) Yes; Smith (R) No.
New Jersey: Bradley (D) Not Voting; Lautenberg (D) Yes.
New Mexico: Bingaman (D) Yes; Domenici (R) Yes.
New York: D'Amato (R) Yes; Moynihan (D) No.
North Carolina: Helms (R) No; Sanford (D) Yes.
North Dakota: Burdick (D) No; Conrad (D) Yes.
Ohio: Glenn (D) Yes; Metzenbaum (D) No.
Oklahoma: Boren (D) Yes; Nickles (R) Yes.
Oregon: Hatfield (R) No; Packwood (R) Yes.
Pennsylvania: Specter (R) Not Voting; Wofford (D) Yes.
Rhode Island: Chafee (R) Yes; Pell (D) Yes.
South Carolina: Hollings (D) Yes; Thurmond (R) Yes.
South Dakota: Daschle (D) Yes; Pressler (R) No.
Tennessee: Gore (D) Yes; Sasser (D) Yes.
Texas: Bentsen (D) Yes; Gramm (R) Yes.
Utah: Garn (R) No; Hatch (R) No.
Vermont: Jeffords (R) Yes; Leahy (D) No.
Virginia: Robb (D) Yes; Warner (R) Yes.
Washington: Adams (D) Yes; Gorton (R) Yes.
West Virginia: Byrd (D) Yes; Rockefeller (D) Yes.
Wisconsin: Kasten (R) Yes; Kohl (D) Yes.
Wyoming: Simpson (R) No; Wallop (R) No.


Quotation of the Day
"Some of you may think that Gorbachev is going to crawl on his knees and plead for assistance from leaders of the leading industrial countries. This is just not serious." -- President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union.  [ 5:2. ]


Mitsubishi Lifts Rockefeller Stake
The Mitsubishi Estate Company said it had bought more shares in the Rockefeller Group Inc., which has a large interest in and runs Rockefeller Center.
Mitsubishi, which bought 51 percent of the Rockefeller Group in 1989 for $846 million, just bought an additional 22.4 percent of the company's stock for $416 million.
Last July, Mitsubishi exercised its second option to buy some of the shares in the family trust and bought 6.6 percent, or 80,566 shares, worth about $111 million, the company said.
The recent transaction is the third sale of the company's stock to Mitsubishi.
The Japanese property company has now acquired 80 percent of the Rockefeller Group.
Mitsubishi's 80 percent stake gives it 23 percent of the real estate investment trust that owns Rockefeller Center, the landmark Manhattan office complex.
It also controls Cushman &amp; Wakefield Inc., a brokerage company, and Radio City Musical Hall Productions.


Westinghouse Net Off 49.6%; Further Weakness Is Seen
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said today that its earnings tumbled 49.6 percent in the latest quarter and that they would stay weak throughout the year, as its recession-hit businesses lagged the nation's economic recovery.
The second-quarter net income of $127 million, a drop from $252 million a year ago, was not unexpected, the company's chairman, Paul Lego, said.


Fire at Resort Lodge Kills 7 and Injures 6 At Minnesota Lake
At least seven people were killed today in an early morning fire that destroyed a three-story wooden lodge on a lake on the Canadian border.
The Cook County Sheriff's Office said late tonight that a total of seven deaths resulted from the fire.
The cause has not been determined.


BRIEFS
*
ADT Ltd., Hamilton, Bermuda, a security services company, said it had filed an application for its common shares and American depositary receipts to be listed with the New York Stock Exchange. *
Communications Satellite Corp., Washington, said it would move its corporate headquarters and two of its businesses to Bethesda, Md.


CHRONICLE
BRIAN LURIE has been appointed chief executive of the United Jewish Appeal.
The national organization, which has its headquarters in in New York, had fund-raising goal of $1.3 billion this year.
Mr.
Lurie will take over on Sept. 1 from STANLEY B. HOROWITZ, who is stepping down after eight years.
He is to stay on as a consultant.
Since 1974, Mr.
Lurie, 48 years old, has been executive director of the Jewish Community Federation of San Francisco.
A native of Cleveland, he is also a rabbi.


Yugoslav Truce Plan Accepted
The Yugoslav presidency today accepted a peace plan brokered by the European Community, but ordered changes, including the demobilization of armed groups except the national army and police.
The original plan sought demobilization of fewer forces.
The republics of Slovenia and Croatia declared independence on June 25 but agreed to delay the move for three months after fierce fighting.
The presidency also agreed that community observers should monitor the peace plan.


Case in Slaying of Token Clerk Suffers Setback
The subway token booth clerk who was a crucial witness to the killing of another token clerk this week failed to pick a suspect out of a police lineup, suggesting problems with the case, investigators said yesterday.
"The investigation is not closed by any means," said the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.
He declined to be more specific.


New York City's 'Learn to Swim' Program Looks Good Underwater


Developer Is Indicted in H.U.D. Investigation
A Texas real estate developer has been indicted by a grand jury investigating influence peddling at the Department of Housing and Urban Development in the Reagan Administration, court papers disclosed today.
The developer, Leonard E. Briscoe, 49 years old, of Fort Worth, was accused in a six-count indictment of filing false statements to obtain $2.4 million under the Urban Development Action Grant program in 1986 for a project in Riviera Beach, Fla.


Early Price Gains Erode in Bond Market
Further evidence that the economy is still weak buoyed the prices of Treasury and other fixed-income securities yesterday, but the early gains were somewhat eroded later in the day.
The debt market had expected that the Government would report basically unchanged core producer prices, excluding the volatile food and energy sectors, and it did, although the overall Producer Price Index for June dropped by three-tenths of a percent.
The market also was pleasantly surprised by a drop in retail sales of two-tenths of a percent.


Review/Film; A Spiritual Journey To Medieval Iceland
In the world of Hrafn Gunnlaugsson's medieval adventure film, "The Shadow of the Raven," emotions are as jagged and windblown as the spectacular Icelandic coastline where the movie was shot.
The film's star-crossed lovers, Trausti and Isold, before sealing their vows, engage in an embattled courtship in which Isold, who blames Trausti for the death of her father, repeatedly spits in his face and runs at him with a knife.
The year is 1077, and Trausti, who has just returned to Iceland from a sojourn in Norway where he was infused with Christian ideology, deflects her attacks and wins her with his honesty and gentleness.
Soon they are planning a marriage that will unite their rival neighboring clans and make them the most powerful couple in the region.


Bush School Plan Assaults Public Education; An Expensive Failure
To the Editor:
From "What of the Children Left Behind?" (editorial, June 17), it is clear that you do not trust poor parents to choose that which is best for their children.
But school-choice programs would seem to suffer from the same defect as democracy: they're the worst possible system, except for any other that has been tried.


CYCLING: Tour de France; Dutchman Wins Seventh Stage
Jean-Paul Van Poppel of the Netherlands won the seventh stage of the Tour de France today, and Tierry Marie of France held the overall lead.
Djamolidine Abdoujapalov of the Soviet Union gained bonus seconds in an intermediate sprint and moved out of a third-place tie with Greg LeMond into second place over all.
LeMond, a three-time winner of the Tour, was fourth, 1 minute 7 seconds behind Marie.
Sean Kelly of Ireland dropped from second to third.
The seventh stage was a 104-mile course in Normandy, from Le Havre to Argetan.
Most of the pack, including all the leaders, earned the same finishing time as Van Poppel.
In stage racing, if there is no discernable gap among the riders finishing in a group, all are awarded the same time.
The Tour is heading for an important test: the eighth stage today is a 45-mile individual time trial that will shake up the standings.
In an individual time trial, each rider races against the clock.


Review/Royal Ballet; Nobility And Clarity In Triple Bill
Three generations of British choreographers -- Frederick Ashton, Kenneth MacMillan and David Bintley -- were represented on the Royal Ballet's triple bill this week, with the program's popularity defying box-office wisdom that only full-evening ballets fill the house.
The 1948 Ashton-Stravinsky "Scenes de Ballet" was led on Thursday for the first time at the Metropolitan Opera House by two young principals, Viviana Durante and Bruce Sansom.
There was the same strong male quartet -- Adam Cooper, Alastair Marriott, Michael Nunn and Christopher Saunders -- that had previously backed up Leslie Collier, the troupe's senior ballerina, and Errol Pickford, a rising talent with aptly springy entrechats.


Bulls Sign Paxson
JOHN PAXSON, whose outside scoring in the N.B.A.
Finals helped propel the Chicago Bulls to their first championship, has been signed to a three-year contract, the team announced yesterday.
The deal includes an option for a fourth season.
Paxson, 30 years old, was an unrestricted free agent, meaning the Bulls would not have had a right to match any offer Paxson received from another team.
Terms of the pact were not disclosed.(AP)


CHRONICLE
Discord in the pop-music world:
One of America's most successful songwriting teams is not in tune at home.
CAROLE BAYER SAGER sued her husband, BURT BACHARACH, for divorce on Thursday in Los Angeles Superior Court, after nine years of marriage.
"Our marriage," Ms.
Sager said in a statement, "produced a great son and some good songs."


Review/Theater; Duchamp Thinking About Life
What is art and what is not art?
When you hold a picture frame in front of a chair does that instantly make it art?
Is drawing a mustache on the "Mona Lisa" an act of desecration or a creative masterstroke?
And what does it matter anyway?
Such questions preoccupied Marcel Duchamp, the French Dadaist whose theories helped inspire contemporary performance.
And in "The Mysteries and What's So Funny?," David Gordon's play with music and movement, they are carried from the realm of esthetics into the day-to-day world of personal relationships and family history.
The 90-minute work, which had the first of three performances at Alice Tully Hall as part of Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival on Thursday evening, is a gently humorous, quietly profound meditation on life's uncertainties.
The final performance is tonight.


Go Fish! Your Guide to Four Dream Trips
In recommending good fishing, the metropolitan angler should heed the same advice offered the metropolitan grocery shopper: look for what is abundant and in season.
For the light tackle fisherman or woman, you will find the most consistent and satisfying sport with striped bass, bluefish, trout, and the freshwater basses.
The four trips described in this article are only a few of hundreds of fishing opportunities within a day's drive of New York City.
The best way to find out what's happening is to call everywhere.
Treat the reports like surgery and get a second and third opinion, correct for half-truths and go fishing.
Stripers: The Norwalk Islands, Conn.
The nineties are, so far, the Striper Decade.
The surfcaster can always head for Montauk point where the swirl and heave of the riptide around the rocky finger of Long Island has created one of the most dependable striper grounds, but this year I was attracted by the glowing stories of Long Island Sound flyrodders.


Francis J. Mugavero, 77, Is Dead; Was Bishop of Brooklyn 22 Years
Bishop Francis J. Mugavero, who in his 22 years as the head of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn combined staunch liberalism and a fierce loyalty to the Vatican, died yesterday at the age of 77.
The Bishop, who retired in February 1990, died of a heart attack while vacationing in East Hampton, L.I., said Frank DeRosa, the spokesman for the Brooklyn Diocese.


A Singer Joins Pet Owners In a Fury Over Fake Graves
The lady in black bent beside the open grave, her knee near the earth, the head of the her pet python, draped about her neck, barely brushing the headstone.
"LaToya, LaToya, bend over the grave," photographers had shouted.


Beijing Journal; The Russians Are Coming and Buying and Selling
Like a lot of tourists, Dmitri sauntered through a popular street market on a steamy afternoon, bargaining with the merchants over silk shirts and shorts.
But unlike most visitors, he will not see the Great Wall, Tiananmen Square or the Forbidden City.
In fact, when Dmitri struck his bargain, it was for a dozen shirts.
As he pushed them into a huge, overstuffed nylon sack, he pulled out a handful of cheap watches to sell to the shopkeeper.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about NBC cutbacks misidentified the source of the news announcement in some editions.
It was NBC itself, not its parent, the General Electric Company.


Bond Plan For Bridges Is Thwarted
A Dinkins administration plan to sell bonds to pay for the routine painting of New York City's deteriorated bridges was blocked yesterday by City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman, who was using her powers under the City Charter.
The proposed bond sales -- $20 million this year and $80 million over the next four years -- would have marked the first time since the city's fiscal troubles in the mid-1970's that it sold bonds to pay for routine maintenance.


Slugs and Stashes Prompt Plan for New Subway Token
The "bull's-eye" subway token, introduced in New York City's transit system just five years ago, may be history by January.
The Transit Authority is considering introducing a new token in an effort to reduce counterfeiting and to prevent widespread hoarding of tokens in anticipation of a fare increase next year.


Law Student Shot 3 Times in Chest in Struggle With Robber
A 26-year-old law student was shot three times in the chest in the lobby of his home in Queens early yesterday as he struggled with a robber, the police said.
The student, Kurt Skonberg, was in satisfactory condition at Booth Memorial Medical Center yesterday after four hours of surgery, said a hospital administrator, Fred Sganga.


Backers Say Los Angeles Police Chief Will Quit by Year's End
Amid growing signs that political support for Daryl F. Gates was eroding in the aftermath of a report on racism and brutality in his department, two of the Los Angeles police chief's staunchest supporters on the City Council said today that he would retire by year's end.
While Chief Gates's own comments today were ambiguous, the two supporters, John Ferraro, the Council president, and Joel Wachs, a Council member, said the Chief had agreed to an "orderly process" of change.
As part of the process, they said they would propose a special election this November or December asking voters to limit the tenure of future police chiefs to two terms of five years each.


Bond Traders Suspect Leak
Word of a restructuring plan by Burlington Holdings may have been provided to some investors before the company announced the proposal on July 3, some bond traders said yesterday.
Two New England-based institutional investors tried to buy millions of dollars of Burlington's high-yield bonds at a premium to their market price at about 1 P.M. on July 3, the traders said.
They said they did not know whether the investors were successful.
The company disclosed its proposal at 3:24 P.M. on July 3.


Slippery Banks, Slow Regulators
As far as is known, U.S. banks and bank customers have not been seriously scorched by the scandal-ridden Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
As far as is known.
But more of its murky past keeps coming to light, most recently its evident role in C.I.A. operations.
The full story of the bank's multibillion-dollar rise and fall has yet to be told.
But one important message is already clear: Bank regulators have been too tolerant.


Field of Eight For Yonkers Trot
Jan Nordin, the last driver to win the Yonkers Trot in two successive years, 1984-85, is confident he can return to the winner's circle with Anders Crown on Saturday night at Yonkers Raceway.


Pan Am Will Leave Memories, and Job Hunters
With the anticipated demise of Pan American World Airways, New Yorkers are witnessing the undoing of not just an important employer, but one whose triumphs and tribulations had in many ways become a part of their lives.
For some, there were memories of large seaplanes bobbing beside what is now the Marine Air Terminal at La Guardia Airport and bitter debates over the desirability of a 59-story building looming over the city's grand Grand Central Terminal.


Kirby Peake Executive, 76
Kirby Peake, a former chairman of Carter-Wallace, Inc,, the drug and toiletries manufacturer, died on Tuesday at his home in Irvington, Va.
He was 76 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Review/Opera; A Resourceful 'Tosca' Draws a Lot on the Past
In these times of fiscal constraint, the New York City Opera's production of Puccini's "Tosca" is a model of resource conservation.
The production's realistic sets were designed by Donald Oenslager for a 1966 production by Tito Capobianco, and were retained when Ronald Bentley took over the production in 1981.
When Frank Corsaro restaged the work in 1987, he had Mr.
Oenslager's sets repainted and commissioned new costumes from Andrew Marley and new lighting from Ken Tabachnick.
The production made its first appearance of the season on Thursday evening and reminded one not only how durable Mr.
Oenslager's traditional sets are, but also how effectively Mr.
Tabachnick's lighting -- a ballet of gentle hues and stark, looming shadows -- magnifies the drama.


The Year the Shooting Eased Up
Last year, for the first time, Americans took fewer snapshots than in the year before.
According to the new edition of the Wolfman Report, an annual survey of the photography industry, photographers took 15.72 billion pictures last year, down from 16.12 billion in 1989.
The survey, published yesterday by Popular Photography magazine, also said new camera sales dropped to 18.7 million units, from 20 million in 1989.


Your Taxes; Can I.R.S. Rules Ever Be Simple?
If the term tax simplification does not yet rival, say, jumbo shrimp or guest host as an easily identified oxymoron, it must be gaining fast.
For one thing, legislation aimed at making things simpler is proliferating.
In addition to the consensus simplification bill (HR 2777-S 1394) introduced recently by the chairmen and ranking minority members of the House Ways and Means Committee and the Senate Finance Committee, there were already a half-dozen others.


9 Straight: Jefferies Feels Good, Mets Feel Great
Manager Bud Harrelson slid Gregg Jefferies's nameplate into the starting lineup.
Jefferies took a bat in his hands.
The bat put numbers on the scoreboard.
The chain of events proved plenty timely enough for the Mets last night.
Jefferies, who had been upset and confused when he was held out of the starting lineup Thursday night, homered and drove in three runs to carry the Mets to a 6-3 victory over the Padres in a game that saw Frank Viola pick up his 11th victory and Howard Johnson hit his league-leading 20th homer.


How to Enjoy Blading Without Skinned Knees
In-line skating, on Rollerblades or their competitors, can provide summer fun and low-impact exercise that strengthens muscles.
But for novice skaters who do not take proper precautions, the sport can be dangerous.
Most in-line skating accidents occur with first-time skaters, who often have some experience with roller skating or ice skating and assume in-line skating, which is also known as blading, is the same.


Sara Lee Growth
The Finnish furniture company, Asko Oy, said it had agreed to sell its stake in the clothing company Suomen Trikoo Oy A.B. to the Chicago-based Sara Lee Corporation in a stock deal.
No prices were disclosed, but the deal involves slightly more than 2.5 million Trikoo class A shares and 186,591 class B shares.
The stake represents 64.5 percent of Trikoo's voting rights and 63.9 percent of its shares, the company said.
Sara Lee would make a public offer to other Trikoo shareholders after the deal is completed.
Sara Lee's shares rose 75 cents each today, to $41.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


The Year the Shooting Eased Up
Last year, for the first time, Americans took fewer snapshots than in the year before.
According to the new edition of the Wolfman Report, an annual survey of the photography industry, photographers took 15.72 billion pictures last year, down from 16.12 billion in 1989.
The survey, published yesterday by Popular Photography magazine, also said new camera sales dropped to 18.7 million units, from 20 million in 1989.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
New Jersey officials are preparing to seize Mutual Benefit Life, of Newark.
The nation's 18th-largest life insurer, with $13.5 billion in assets, has been reporting deepening financial problems as a result of its heavy investment in troubled real estate.  [ Page 1. ]


Intricate Trail to Bronx Murder Charges
From livery-cab services along busy avenues to shaded streets lined with two-family brick homes, Alejandro Henriquez moved through the Unionport section of the Bronx with an aura of financial accomplishment, romantic charm and personal intrigue.
But in recent months, his persona of success has been chipped away, as his acquaintance with five murdered young people made him a common denominator in those mysterious killings -- first in the anxious eyes of the neighborhood, and then of the police.


Mary Ann Muller Weds
Mary Ann Muller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred C. Muller of Spring Hill, Fla., was married yesterday to Walter William Grattan Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Grattan of Holiday, Fla.
The Rev.
William W. Jablonski performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church in West Islip, L.I.
Mrs.
Grattan, 33 years old, is an executive assistant at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
She is a graduate of the State University of New York at Albany.
The bridegroom, 36, is a special agent in New York for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
He is a cum laude graduate of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice.


New Pact for Fregosi
Manager JIM FREGOSI was awarded a new contract for the 1992 season yesterday by the Philadelphia Phillies.
Going into last night's game, the last-place Phillies were 30-40 under Fregosi, who took over for the fired NICK LEYVA 13 games into the season. (AP)


INSIDE
Surprising Drop in Sales
Expected to rise in June, retail sales actually fell two-tenths of 1 percent, prompting new doubts about the strength of the recovery.
Page 33.
Boston Dean Steps Down


A Break From Ecclesiastical Duties


Higher Bids Are Possible For Pan Am
While Delta Air Lines now seems poised to end up with the most valuable chunks of Pan American World Airways, other potential buyers could butt in with higher bids for bits and pieces of the ailing carrier.
Likely contenders include United Airlines, which is in talks with Pan Am to buy its Latin American routes; Northwest Airlines, and Jay Pritzker, the Chicago financier whose family once controlled Braniff.


New Jersey Is Preparing to Seize Mutual Benefit, a Large Insurer
Seeking to prevent the largest life-insurance failure to date, New Jersey officials said yesterday that they were preparing to seize control of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company of Newark.
Mutual Benefit, the nation's 18th-largest life insurer, with $13.5 billion in assets, has been reporting deepening financial woes as a result of its heavy investment in troubled real estate.
Senior New Jersey officials said they expected the company to make a formal request for state intervention early next week.
But the officials added that the financial troubles of Mutual Benefit, which traces its roots to 1845 and has 400,000 policyholders around the country, had become so dire in recent days that state action was likely with or without a company request.


Insurers Ignored Law; Drivers Due Millions
Because they disregarded a legal requirement to grant discounts for air bags, automatic seat belts and anti-theft devices, major automobile insurers in New York may owe motorists as much as $30 million, state officials charged.
Their investigation began when a Rochester mechanic found out that he was owed a discount and told one of his customers -- an assistant attorney general.


Fed Acts to Bar Two From Banking
The Federal Reserve Board moved today to bar from American banking two leading international businessmen linked to the growing scandal surrounding the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
The Fed referred the case to the Justice Department for criminal prosecution.
In a complaint issued today, the Fed accuses the two executives, Gaith R. Pharaon, a Saudi financier, and Aga Hasan Abedi, a Pakistani banker, of illegally concealing B.C.C.I.'s acquisition of Independence Bank of Encino, Calif.
In a related criminal investigation, the Manhattan District Attorney is examining whether B.C.C.I. also acquired First American Bankshares of Washington, which is headed by Clark M. Clifford, the longtime Presidential adviser, and his law partner, Robert A. Altman.
Controlling Interest Denied
B.C.C.I. has denied that it had a controlling interest in First American, but agreed earlier this year to divest itself of any interest that it might have.
The Fed has already rejected one plan to resolve its role in First American, and Fed officials say they have not received a second proposal yet.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.76
5.86
8.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.56
7.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.68
7.52
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.12
8.15
8.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.43
8.46
8.45
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.46
9.49
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.15
7.17
7.42
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary yesterday about A. Courtenay Shepard, a former Colgate-Palmolive executive, omitted one of his titles with the company.
He was a former president of both Colgate U.S. and Colgate-Palmolive Canada.


Morton Smith, Columbia Professor And Ancient-Religion Scholar, 76
Morton Smith, a professor of history at Columbia University for nearly three decades and an authority on religions and magic in the ancient world, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old.
He died of heart failure, university officials said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a decision by the Congressional Black Caucus to oppose the Supreme Court nomination of Clarence Thomas misstated the caucus vote in some copies.
It was 19 to 1, with six members not voting.


Get Less, Pay More
To the Editor:
I am a lifelong resident of New York City.
I own a home in Queens and I maintain an office in Manhattan.
I will be confronted with the following:


Grains and Soybeans Surge On Expected Drop in Output
Grain and soybean futures prices shot up yesterday after the Government projected a 26 percent plunge in wheat production and forecasters predicted a return to hot, dry weather in the Corn Belt next week.
A monthly Agriculture Department report released late Thursday projected a 1991 wheat harvest of 2.03 billion bushels, compared with trade estimates averaging 2.09 billion and last year's production of 2.74 billion.


Danbury Savings
The Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency established to solve the nation's savings and loan crisis, has taken over the Danbury Savings and Loan Association Inc. in Danbury, Conn.
A new institution, Danbury Federal Savings and Loan Association, will assume all of the failed savings and loan's deposits, as well as certain assets and liabilities, the Federal agency said.


A Word for the Age Appears Just in Time
To the Editor
Save in instances, such as there be, in which honesty is the best policy, the most frequently indicated strategy in politics is to obscure one's objective.
Up to a point.
The campaign to establish floccinaucinihilipilificationism has reached that point, and it seems only fair to fess up.
It has never been my purpose to create the longest word, simply a new word.


Review/Dance; Joining Hands to Help the Homeless
Dance joined with publishing on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater when Conde Nast presented the first of two modern dance programs called "Full Circle" to benefit Women in Need, which helps homeless women and their families in practical and sensitive ways.
The evening got off to an eloquent, amusing start with Jawole Willa Jo Zollar's "Girlfriends" and Stephan Koplowitz's "There Were Three Men." The first piece, performed by Ms.
Zollar's Urban Bush Women company, is a silent pajama party for four young women who move from giddy bonding to despair and loneliness, then back again in a final burst of actual laughter.
This theater-dance piece, an excerpt from "Anarchy, Wildwomen and Dinah," was evocatively performed by Theresa Cousar, Christina Jones, Christine King and Deborah Thomas.


Budget Gap Projections Grow for New York
The just-adopted New York City budget balances the books for now, but would still leave the city taking in $4.3 billion less than it expects to spend over the next three years, city officials said yesterday.
The difference would be made up in part by $500 million in property-tax increases each year.
In one sense, this disclosure, contained in city budget documents issued yesterday, was no surprise.
The $28.5 billion budget for the fiscal year that started July 1 contains $376 million less in property taxes than Mayor David N. Dinkins had sought.
That means the difference between revenues and spending in each year starting next July will be even greater than the billion-dollar annual gaps the Mayor's proposed budget envisioned in May.


Man Cleared in Tourist-Killing
A Vietnamese immigrant believed to have been the central figure in a gang dispute that led to the killing of a tourist in Chinatown has been cleared in the shooting, the police said yesterday.
They said they questioned the immigrant, Hung Liu, 29 years old, after finding him in Flushing, Queens.
The police said that they believe that Mr.
Hung's presence on a street corner on July 4 led to the dispute that prompted the shooting but that Mr.
Hung did not fire the bullet that killed the tourist from Maryland, Rhona Lantin, as she rode through an intersection.


Head of U.N. Mission in Baghdad Asks Council to Relax Sanctions
The head of the United Nations mission assessing Iraq's humanitarian needs called on the Security Council today to relax sanctions so Iraq can obtain the money to import food, medicine and other essential supplies, saying that otherwise the country is heading for "a major catastrophe."
"Iraqi funds must be used soon," the United Nations envoy, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, said.


Bradley and Alcott Set Pace at an Oven-Baked Open
As efficient par golf became the order of business at the United States Women's Open today, two stars who excel at that underrated but essential skill took center stage.
Pat Bradley and Amy Alcott, longtime rivals who are both on late-career crusades to make their sport's Hall of Fame, have used all their resourcefulness to remain relatively unscathed by the spike-marked greens, slow play and searing heat that have made the Colonial Country Club course a test of character as much as skill.


CHRONICLE
EDWARD M. KENNEDY JR. has spent the last three weeks in a rehabilitation center because of a drinking problem, he said in a statement issued Thursday night.
The stay was completely voluntary, PAUL DONOVAN, a spokesman for Mr.
Kennedy's father, Senator EDWARD M. KENNEDY, said yesterday.
The Senator's office gave no further details.
Mr.
Kennedy, 29, said he was treated at the Institute of Living in Hartford "based on my belief that continued use of alcohol is impairing my ability to achieve the goals I care about." In May, he received a master's degree from the Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies.


Former Publisher to Run Town &amp; Country Again
Hearst Magazines yesterday named David A. McCann, a longtime Hearst executive and a former publisher of three of the company's magazines, as publisher of Town &amp; Country.
It is the second time in the job for Mr.
McCann, who was Town &amp; Country's publisher from 1977 to 1983.
For the past year, Mr.
McCann, who is 62 years old, has been director of Hearst's Gold Package, an advertising and marketing program for the company's magazines.
He has also been publisher of Connoisseur and House Beautiful during his career at Hearst, which began in 1951.


'Bicycle Rapist' Sentenced
A Brooklyn mechanic whom the police called the Bicycle Rapist was sentenced yesterday to up to 66 years in prison for sexually attacking a woman and shooting her father when he came to her rescue.
The police said the defendant, William Gonzalez, 26, on Feb. 25, 1989, forced a woman at gunpoint to carry his bicycle to the roof of her building in the Williamsburg section before raping and sodomizing her.


Bush School Plan Assaults Public Education
To the Editor:
I am disappointed that you have not taken a stronger editorial stand against the educational reform package George Bush has placed before Congress than "What of the Children Left Behind?" (editorial, June 17).
To me, the plan strikes more directly at the heart of the liberal tradition than any other program the conservatives have devised.


Dispute on Pretoria's Stance on Prisoners Persists
The lifting of American trade sanctions against South Africa has failed to end an emotional argument here over whether President F. W. de Klerk has freed all political prisoners.
By removing the sanctions on Wednesday, President Bush essentially accepted Pretoria's contention that all political detainees have been freed.
The release of political prisoners was one of five conditions set by the United States Congress for the lifting of sanctions when it passed the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act in 1986.


Barry Ruling Upheld, but Resentencing Is Ordered
A Federal appeals court upheld the drug conviction of former Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. today but ordered the trial judge to resentence Mr.
Barry.
The former mayor was found guilty last year of possession of cocaine; his lawyers had argued that the judge was biased against their client, who is black, and that a different judge should decide the sentence.
A Subtle Message?
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit rejected the plea for a new judge, but asked the trial judge, Thomas Penfield Jackson, why he chose the sentence, six months in prison, rather than the minimum of probation.
Asking Judge Jackson to reconsider does not mean Mr.
Barry's sentence will be lightened.
The judge could impose the same sentence on the former Mayor.


Republicans in Senate at Impasse On Nature of 'Star Wars' System
Amid signs that two of the Bush Administration's top military priorities face growing trouble in Congress, quarreling Republican senators have struck an impasse over the future shape of the anti-missile system.
The Senate Armed Services Committee narrowly agreed late Thursday to build four more Stealth, or B-2, bombers, but the dispute over the "Star Wars" anti-missile system held up final committee approval of a $291 billion military budget bill for the fiscal year 1992 until at least Tuesday.


Fixed-Price Stock Plan Expected
Time Warner Inc., seeking to satisfy regulators and quell a shareholder rebellion, now plans to raise $2.75 billion by selling new shares at a fixed price of $80 a share, according to an investment banker involved in the offering.
The decision reverses an original plan to ask shareholders to buy $2 billion to $3.5 billion in stock at a price to be determined only after they signed up.
The price would have been somewhere between $63 and $105, depending on whether some or all of the company's investors subscribed.
Under the new offering, the banker said, shareholders would receive the right to buy a sixth of a share for each share they owned.


Defector From Cuba Dreams of the Majors
A pitcher who defected from the Cuban national team during a visit to the United States said today that he was hoping to get a shot at the major leagues.
"He has always had the dream of playing in the majors; now he has the opportunity to play," said Thomas Regalo, an interpreter for the pitcher, Rene Arocha.


Sixers Sign Shackleford
Free agent CHARLES SHACKLEFORD signed a three-year contract yesterday with the Philadelphia 76ers, who needed a center to shore up a lackluster rebounding force.
Shackleford's agent, SAL DiFAZIO, declined to disclose terms of the deal.
The 76ers had freed up $1.3 million under the N.B.A.'s salary cap with the release of forward-center RICK MAHORN.


The Postal Service as Stationer
An unlikely stationer, the United States Postal Service, will print return addresses on envelopes embossed with either a regular 29-cent stamp, which shows a blue star, or a flashier 29-cent one emblazoned "Love."
Post offices can supply the order form and Notice 18, "Printed Embossed Stamped Envelopes from the U.S.P.S." Delivery takes about six weeks.


Observer; Sass With Bile
In recent weeks this column has spoken harshly of the National Rifle Association and sympathetically of Senator Edward Kennedy.
These pieces have produced a high volume of mail that is interesting for its earnest and sometimes vituperative passion.
One knows that barrels of angry letters will be the punishment for derogatory remarks about the N.R.A.
Intemperate mail from supporters of the gun lobby is so inevitable that I rarely beat this drum.
This is not because I can't take the heat, but because the issue is so hopeless.


A.L. President Reduces Belle's Suspension
American League President Dr.
BOBBY BROWN reduced the suspension of Cleveland outfielder ALBERT BELLE from one week to six games yesterday, after the Indian rookie's appeal of his punishment for throwing a ball at a fan on May 13.
Belle began serving the suspension last night.
Brown also ruled that the equivalent of one week's salary would be donated by Belle to a local charity of Belle's choice.
Belle makes the major league minimum of $100,000 a year, so the fine comes to $3,846.


Summer Music at Bard
The music of Felix Mendelssohn and his contemporaries is to be the focus of the second annual Bard Music Festival at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The festival, which will be held on the weekends of Aug. 16 and 23, will present lectures, symposiums, and orchestral, choral, chamber and solo concerts.
Among the highlights will be a performance of Mendelssohn's rarely heard Incidental Music to Sophocles' "Antigone" for men's chorus, with Claire Bloom as narrator, and a performance of "Das Jahr" by Fanny Mendelssohn, published for the first time in 1989, played by the pianist Sarah Rothenberg.
Other performers will include the resident Ridge String Quartet, the soprano Benita Valente, the tenor John Aler and the pianist Ursula Oppens.
Information: (914) 758-6822.


Robert DeLigter, Executive, 73
Robert DeLigter, an executive who for 25 years was vice president of the Cresca Company, the New York food importing concern, and who had his own credit and mail-order catalogue businesses, died on Wednesday at the New Rochelle Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Approved by Senate, Anti-Crime Bill Faces Fierce Test in the House
The anti-crime legislation that the Senate passed overwhelmingly on Thursday night faces its toughest hurdle in the House, where the wide-ranging bill must go through two subcommittees, a full committee and a House floor debate.
And after all that, the bill's sponsors in the House and Senate will still have to negotiate on the differences that remain on everything from capital punishment to gun control before anything reaches President Bush's desk.


Review/Pop; Youth and Tradition Mix In Cheb Khaled's Sound
Cheb Khaled's late set on Wednesday night at S.O.B.'s sketched the path of rai, a kind of Algerian pop, as it was transformed by contact with Europe.
Rai is the music of Oran's younger generations -- cheb means young -- and incorporates electric instruments, but Cheb Khaled showed he is grounded in older styles.
He is one of rai's biggest stars; the audience cheered the beginning of every song and danced throughout the set.
Although rai doesn't call for a wide vocal range -- Mr.
Khaled sang almost his entire set within less than an octave -- it calls for ardent tone and precise intonation, so that even the slightest microtonal turns and shakes ring with passion.


Rockwell To Sell Unit To Alcatel
Alcatel N.V. said today that it had agreed to buy a division of the Rockwell International Corporation for $625 million, a move analysts said would enhance the position of the French telecommunications company in the United States.
Alcatel is buying Rockwell's Network Transmission Systems division based in Dallas, a leading North American supplier of transmission systems for handling voice, image and data traffic.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Feud Ends in Slaying, Police Say
Jose Flores and Louis Fernandez did not like each other.
When the two 16-year-olds met in their Bronx neighborhood on Thursday night, the police said, one had an attitude and the other had a gun.
Now Mr.
Fernandez is under arrest for murder.
The fight between the teen-agers started over a cigarette, the police and neighbors said yesterday, but the bad blood went back some time.


Pittston's President Is Elected Chairman
The directors of the Pittston Company elected Joseph C. Farrell chairman and chief executive officer yesterday.
Pittston, based in Greenwich, Conn., has operations in coal mining, air freight, armored transport and home security.
Mr.
Farrell, a 55-year-old former Navy submarine commander, has been serving as Pittston's president and chief operating officer since last year.
He will take over from the current chairman, Paul W. Douglas, when Mr.
Douglas retires on Oct. 1.


Sports of The Times; My Kingdom For a Horse That Can Run
Secretariat was actually more of a virtuoso as a race horse than he was as a sire, but you can't have everything.
He was 19 years old when he died on Oct. 4, 1989, and that was the end of the line for his line, so to speak: In the following spring, his 16th and last crop of foals was born, his final 46 children arriving to carry on the memory, and maybe the tradition.
They are yearlings now, and they are exactly the type of young horses that will become the focus of the breeding and racing world in the next few days when Lexington again becomes the capital of the auction world and the barometer of the horse business.
Investors from the Arab nations, Japan, England, Ireland and Kentucky, too, are flocking to the Keeneland race course for the summer yearling sales, people with dreams and bankrolls searching for the best pedigrees and prospects.
Yes, shopping for the next Secretariat.


U.S. GIVES SOVIETS A NEW PROPOSAL FOR NUCLEAR PACT
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d presented Foreign Minister Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh of the Soviet Union with a new approach today for settling the issues holding up a nuclear arms reduction treaty, but the two ministers wrangled over the details all day, Administration officials said.
The two sides broke up their third day of talks late in the evening and scheduled an unexpected bargaining session for Saturday.
One official said that Mr.
Baker and Mr.
Bessmertnykh appeared to be narrowing their differences on two critical issues: how to define new types of missiles for the purposes of the treaty and how to monitor each other's missile tests to insure compliance with the treaty.
But the third and final major issue -- "downloading," or how many spare spaces for warheads each side can keep on its missiles -- remained an obstacle, with the Soviets rejecting Mr.
Baker's proposals.
All or Nothing
In proposing a new, comprehensive approach for settling the treaty issues, the Americans told the Soviets that they must accept the plan in full, officials said, or its separate elements would be invalid.
The package incorporates some of the new proposals that Mr.
Bessmertnykh brought from Moscow.
Mr.
Baker and Mr.
Bessmertnykh are to meet on Saturday to see if they can finally close the treaty.
American officials said they could not predict whether the ministers would reach agreement Saturday on all the basic elements of the treaty or declare that further talks would be needed.
The Soviet Foreign Minister had originally planned to leave Washington today.
If they cannot bridge their differences on Saturday, the two sides may try to settle them when President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev meet for a two-hour lunch in London on Wednesday, officials said.
Summit Hinges on Treaty
A full, two- or three-day summit meeting of the two leaders in late July or early August in Moscow will only be scheduled if the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, known as Start, is completed.
Under the proposed treaty, which has been under negotiation since 1982, the Soviet Union would reduce its arsenal of strategic nuclear warheads from 11,000 to 7,000 while the United States decreased its stocks from 12,000 to 9,000.
Mr.
Baker has been accompanied at the talks by a joint team from the State Department, Pentagon, Central Intelligence Agency and National Security Council staff.
Mr.
Bessmertnykh has been advised by his arms control experts as well as the chief of staff of the Soviet armed forces, Gen.
Mikhail A. Moiseyev.
Experts Work on Details
Neither Mr.
Baker nor Mr.
Bessmertnykh would comment on their discussions as they left the State Department this evening.
Experts from the two sides stayed behind to continue working on the details through the night.
Depending on how the Soviets respond on other issues, the two sides appear to have reached a compromise formula for resolving the dispute over new types of missiles, American officials said.
Under the proposed treaty, neither side can test a missile with more warheads than it is defined to have, unless it is declared a "new type." The Soviets have sought a narrow definition of what constitutes a new type of missile so that they could easily add spare capacity to an existing missile and then test it with only a minor modification in design.
For example, American officials said, the Soviet Union could take its SS-25 long-range missile, which carries one warhead, and with a small expansion in payload capacity declare it to be a "new type" and then test it with three warheads.
A Potential Danger
The Bush Administration sees this as a potential danger.
If the Soviets were tempted to break out of the treaty in a crisis, they would then be in a position to quickly triple the number of warheads on all 700 of the single-warhead SS-25's that they are expected to deploy under the treaty.
The United States has sought a requirement that a missile undergo at least a 30 percent change in its payload capacity before it can be classified as a new type.
The Americans have also insisted that there be a change in the diameter of the missile's first stage, so that the Soviets would be prevented from quickly expanding capacity by turning a few screws.
The Soviets wanted to require only a 15 percent change in payload and a percentage change in only the length of the first stage, which would be easier to modify.
The two sides now appear to be ready to split the difference, officials said.
Experts See Little Risk
Most arms control experts feel that even with a compromise on this issue accepting the lower Soviet number, the United States would be risking little.
"I think there is room for compromise on this issue without drastically compromising our security," said Dunbar Lockwood, a senior analyst at the Arms Control Association.
"Because even a 15 to 20 percent change in payload capacity would require a fairly substantial change in the missile design that would be difficult to do quickly."
The other issue on which differences have apparently narrowed is telemetry encription, also known as "data denial." This involves determining how much, and by what means, data from missile tests are beamed back to earth, so that each side can easily monitor the other's tests and insure that the other side is not developing missiles restricted by the treaty.
The United States wants a ban on encoding missile test data for the purpose of denying it to the other side, a prohibition established by the draft treaty.
But because the two sides use different frequencies, power levels and techniques, they must work out common standards, which can involve major and costly electronic adjustments.
After much wrangling over that issue, the Soviets have agreed to an American proposal that the two sides exchange tapes of data from missile tests, officials said.
But they are still discussing how much data should be put on each tape and whether tapes would have to be exchanged on every test -- as the Americans want -- or only on some tests, as the Soviets prefer.
A Fine Balance
This is a complicated issue not only because it is highly technical -- Mr.
Baker and Mr.
Bessmertnykh acknowledge that they do not understand the details -- but also because it means striking a very fine balance.
It is difficult to come up with language that is tight enough to guarantee both sides that they will get all the basic telemetry information they need from the other to verify compliance with the treaty, yet loose enough to avoid surrendering any information on their missile systems beyond what is required.
The main sticking point at the talks tonight was on the issue of downloading, which involves the limits set by .  the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty on the number of nuclear warheads for both sides.
Many missiles now carry 10 warheads.
Both sides would prefer to reduce the number of warheads without having to build new missiles expressly designed for only a certain number of warheads.
The more missiles each side has to spread out its warheads, the more difficult it is to destroy them and the less incentive there is for a first strike.
But to accomplish a reduction in the number of warheads, , missiles capable of carrying 10 warheads would have to be "downloaded" to carry fewer.
Under the treaty they would be counted as if they carried fewer -- even though they would have spare capacity.
But if one side or the other broke out of the treaty, that capacity could actually be "uploaded" to carry 10 warheads again.
How Many Spaces
The Soviets wanted to download all of their SS-N-18 submarine-launched ballistic missiles from 7 warheads to 3 warheads -- for a total of 896 spaces -- plus an additional 750 warhead spaces on three other types of missiles.
They argued that since they had already stopped deploying the MOD-3 version of the SS-N-18, which carries seven warheads, and were only deploying the single-warhead MOD-1's, those should not even count as being downloaded.
The United States argued that only 1,000 warheads should be downloaded and that the Soviets should count all of their SS-N-18's, plus one other missile.
The United States proposed to accomplish its own downloading by removing two out of the three warheads in each of its 550 Minuteman missiles.


Law Ignored; Now Drivers Due Millions
Seven years ago, New York passed a law requiring automobile insurers to grant discounts for safety devices like air bags.
But, state officials said today, most companies didn't.
New York motorists have been overcharged as much as $30 million -- $25 or $50 on a policy -- by major insurance companies since the law took effect, the state officials said.


Miss Lind to Wed Michael Danziger
Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Lind of Winnetka, Ill., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Neal Lind to Michael Paskus Danziger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Danziger of New York.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Lind, 27 years old, graduated from Princeton University and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
She teaches the third grade at the Dedham County (Mass.) Day School.


HOW SHORT IS TOO SHORT?
At Marco Oriti's age, I knew I was genetically programmed to be short ("How Short Is Too Short?" by Barry Werth, June 16).
My father stood 5 feet 4 inches; my mother, 4 feet 9.
I guessed (correctly) that I'd be lucky to reach 5 feet -- too short to be a fashion model or a pilot.
There went my American dream of growing up to be anything I chose.
This is America, and
bigger
is
better
.
I hope Marco achieves his desired height.
Many experts would probably recommend therapy to help the child adjust to being short rather than trying to change it.
But I strongly support the availability of human growth hormone for children whose futures might be limited because of short stature.
I would have pleaded for it, regardless of risks.
PATRICIA CLAYTON
Cranford, N.J.


CHILDREN'S: Bookshelf
OINK.
Written and illustrated by Arthur Geisert.
Houghton Mifflin. $13.95. (All ages) While their mother naps, the eight piglets set off to explore the farm by themselves.
Seven of them have a wonderful time jumping from the haystack to the apple tree.
One doesn't jump, but is rescued in the end anyway.
Only one word of dialogue here, inflected many ways: "Oink."
A TOMCAT'S TALE.
By Hanna Johansen.
Translated by Susanna Fox.
Dutton.
Illustrated by Kathi Bhend. $13.95. (Ages 10 and up) Felis, the hero of this Swiss novel, has devoted human attendants and modest feline adventures.
His dreams of hunting mice are particularly appealing in the well-translated prose and charming black-and-white illustrations.


A Touch of Home on Dlouha Street
PRAGUE is changing so rapidly that the availability of rental apartments is news to American tourists.
On an April visit I circumvented the frustrations of dealing with Cedok, the formerly all-powerful Czechoslovak state tourist agency that insists on putting Americans in overpriced, out-of-the-way hotels, by using a free-market alternative.
For one-third of the price of a comparable hotel room, I rented a furnished flat in the heart of the Old Town.
My home away from home was a minute's walk from a historic square via a cobblestone street where Franz Kafka once lived with his parents.
I called twice from New York and sent a couple of faxes to confirm my reservation with Top Tour, a private agency at 3 Rybna.
When I arrived at its storefront office from the airport, my name was in the computer and my apartment was ready.
Since I had agreed to pay upfront in American dollars, I felt it was prudent to take the key and investigate before handing over the money.


The Perils of Being a Purist
The news that Beate Gordon is retiring as program director of the Asia Society came as a shock.
Ms.
Gordon, who is 67 years old and wants to spend more time with her grandchildren, will still travel the world as a consultant for the society.
But for about as long as the toothiest of us can remember, she has been the primary provider of exotic Asian music, dance, theater and film to our fading imperialist stronghold here in New York.
What next?
Ms.
Gordon was no mere impresario, booking the latest hot acts cobbled together by some Thai folkloric agency.
She went out in the field herself, following tips from friendly ethnomusicologists, saw firsthand the Vietnamese water puppets or Balinese gamelan ensembles or Mongolian dancers she had heard about, and brought back only those in whom she believed.


North America Hostels Guide
American Youth Hostels (A.Y.H.) and the Canadian Hostelling Association (C.H.A.) have joined for the first time to publish "Hostelling North America 1991: A Guide to Hostels in Canada and the United States." The 352-page handbook provides details and pictures of over 280 hostels in North America, with details on access for handicapped people, family rooms, transportation and nearby attractions.
Overnight fees range from $5 to $18.75 a person.
The average is between $7 and $14.
The handbook is sent out free to members of A.Y.H. and C.H.A.
Nonmembers can purchase a copy for $7, including postage and handling.
Membership in A.Y.H. for ages 18 to 54 costs $25 for 12 months (renewal costs $15); for ages 55 and up, $15; for 17 and younger, $10.
For additional information or to order a handbook, contact: American Youth Hostels, Dept. 482, Post Office Box 37613, Washington, D.C. 20013-7613; (202) 783-6161.


All About/Candy Makers; America's Chocoholics: A Built-In Market for Confectioners
Even Willy Wonka, the mythical chocolate maker in the Roald Dahl novel, would be impressed by the size of the American candy industry.
It is an $8.7 billion business that is highly concentrated.
Two giants -- the Hershey Foods Corporation, in Hershey, Pa., and the privately held M&amp;M/Mars of Hackettstown, N.J. -- together have nearly 70 percent of the market.
The candy business is virtually immune to the ups and downs of the business cycle.
And this year, when the price of the average candy bar sold in a vending machine went from 55 cents to 60 cents -- the first increase since 1986 -- sales remained steady.


Concerned About Role, Women's Caucus Meets
Twenty years after the National Women's Political Caucus was established to advance the election of women, the group's founding members say the road to political equality has been tougher than they expected.
Speakers at the caucus's four-day convention here, which ends Sunday, expressed frustration that at a time of national debate over abortion rights, family-leave policies and health care, only 17 percent of the members of Congress are women, up from 1 percent in 1971, when the group was founded.


'Entertainment' Not Wanted on Bus
Re the June 16 article "For Some Bus Drivers, the Extras Are Essentials of the Trip":
A highly objectionable form of noise pollution consists of unsolicited "entertainment" inflicted on captive audiences in commuter buses.


Birds Are Good Guests (Pretty Ones, Too)
ONE day while relaxing between outdoor chores, I detected some movement among the bright red impatiens in a flower border.
What was making the motion?
An awfully big bug?
As I watched carefully, I realized that it was a hummingbird darting from flower to flower.
The bird was so speedy and so small, it seemed to behave more like a huge insect.
The shy creature disappeared almost as quickly as it was spotted.
It could have visited the garden and never been noticed.


Missy Llewellyn Wed To Nicholas R. White
Missy Llewellyn and Nicholas R. White were married yesterday by the Rev.
Richard J. Bourgeois at St.
Paul's Roman Catholic Church in Hingham, Mass.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Llewellyn Jr. of Hingham.
Her husband is a son of Vincent S. White of Buffalo and the late Ruth White.
Mrs.
White, 27 years old, graduated from Holy Cross College in Worcester, Mass.
She was until recently an art director at Lawner, Reingold, Britton &amp; Partners, an advertising agency in Boston.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Ocean Spray Cranberries in Lakeville, Mass.


Sunday Brunch; 3 Standbys When Dining Downtown
One of the most buoyant summer scenes in Manhattan is the imposing World Financial Center at the southwest tip of the island, with its marina, sprawling waterside plaza, restaurants, bars and shops.
Next weekend the center's Summer Fair will bring merchants, mimes, magicians, artists and musicians to the plaza.
For those who plan to visit then or anytime this summer, here are three worthwhile restaurants in the vicinity. (First of two columns on lower Manhattan.) Hudson River Club
250 Vesey Street, World Financial Center, (212) 786-1500 -- The Hudson River Club is a handsome, comfortable dining establishment facing New York Harbor, with the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island off in the distance.
The food can be as inspiring as the setting.
Appetizers on the Sunday menu include a crab-and-scallop bisque, duck liver mousse, a salad of greens with goat cheese, and duck-and-cabbage soup.
Among main courses are corn-crusted scallops; a boiled dinner of lobster, shellfish and chicken; filet of salmon in a woven potato crust, and Black Angus steak.
For something sweet, there is a dessert buffet.
Dinner on Sundays is prix fixe at $29.50.
Service is from noon to 6 P.M. (Review, Feb. 16, 1990.) The Odeon
145 West Broadway, at Thomas Street, (212) 233-0507 -- The no-frills Art Deco cafeteria on lower West Broadway is virtually considered the Fraunces Tavern of trendy TriBeCa.
One element that fosters the Odeon's pioneering image is its stylishly threadbare appearance.
The place looks as if it has been there since Jimmy Walker's administration, with its speckled linoleum floor, faded vinyl banquettes, steel-framed Formica tables and overhead fans.
Over the years the bistro food has remained fairly reliable.
Sunday dinner might start with a salad of fried baby artichoke, country pate, warm goat cheese salad or steamed mussels in white wine and garlic.
Among the main courses are a vegetarian plate combining steamed asparagus, roasted peppers and couscous; linguine with a fresh tomato sauce; sauteed brook trout with almonds and mint, and roast leg of lamb with fava beans.
Two of the desserts are creme brulee and strawberry shortcake.
Appetizers range from $5 to $7.75; entrees, $12.50 to $20; desserts, $4.50 to $5.50.
Sunday dinner is from 7 P.M. to midnight. (Review, Aug. 11, 1989.) TriBeCa Grill
375 Greenwich Street, at Franklin Street, (212) 941-3900.
This upbeat restaurant is orchestrated by Drew Nieporent, the indefatigable professional who also owns the nearby Montrachet.
The big, partly brick-lined dining room is generously spaced, and the noise level, while moderately high, is not distracting.
The cynosure of the room is the big mahogany bar in the center, which revelers from the 1970's may recognize as the original bar from Maxwell's Plum.
Sketches and large paintings done by Robert DeNiro Sr. adorn the walls. (His son Robert, the actor, is a partner in the restaurant.) Among starters on the current menu are fried oysters with thyme-marinated vegetables, grilled quail salad, tuna carpaccio with a citrus vinaigrette and crabcakes with avocado remoulade.
Main courses include crisp honey-mustard duck with black pepper spatzle; grilled mahi-mahi with eggplant and tomato; capellini with seared scallops and basil, and lobster, a Sunday special, served with smoked-shrimp ravioli in a mushroom broth.
In desserts, there are hazelnut cake stuffed with banana and wrapped in phyllo, baked-apple ice cream cake and glazed citrus cream with a poppy-seed crust.
Appetizers range from $6 to $12, main courses $18 to $27; desserts are $6 each.
Sunday dinner hours are 5:30 to 10 P.M (Review, July 27, 1990.) This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times, and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location (New York City and suburbs), from articles published in the last 18 months.
Touch-tone telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 a minute).


Results Plus
GOLF  Two Share PGA Lead


Camera
Knowing what causes a bad picture is the first step toward becoming a good photographer.
"It is amazing that so few photographers know the limitations of hand-holding a 35-millimeter camera," said Mike Matzkin of Canon Inc.
He described a roll of night pictures, made at a one-second exposure, that was recently sent to him.
"Street lights were turned into blurry, colorful snakes," he said.
"Nothing else was readable. The photographer did not know that he couldn't keep the camera steady at a slow shutter speed."


Yugoslav Presidency Accepts Peace Plan


Doctors Who Help The Needy
I am pleased to note the recognition of a law firm that offers free legal assistance (New Jersey Q &amp; A, "An Experiment in Free Legal Assistance," June 9).
Lawyers have "pro bono," hospitals have "uncompensated care" and yet the front-line physician doesn't even have a name for what we have donated for so many years.


The Vanishing Footnote
To the Editor:
Cheers to Gertrude Himmelfarb for her cogent complaint about the fate of footnotes in these degenerate times.
If she wants to start an Association for the Rehabilitation of Footnotes (ARF, or, maybe, ARF! ARF!), I'm ready to become a member.


Mozart-Minded


Talking: The Elderly; Residents Who Pose Problems
AN old man in Florida starts throwing large objects from a fourth-floor balcony into the pool below.
A woman in a co-op in Queens no longer remembers to pay her monthly maintenance fees.
A woman in lower Manhattan forgets to turn off the faucets in her bath.
As the nation ages, so do the residents of condominiums, co-ops and rental buildings.
Most are not sufficiently impaired to need nursing home care or professional social service assistance, but they can be so forgetful or disoriented at times that their actions become hazardous to themselves or others.


We Didn't Get Into This Ecological Fix by Lack of Technology
To the Editor:
In "From Brilliant Pebbles to Brilliant Eyes" (Op-Ed, June 23), Edward Teller attempts to link protection of the environment with the construction of a network of 1,000 satellites, whose primary purpose is military.
It would be heartwarming indeed were this illustrious American scientist to become a champion of the ecosystem.
Alas, a closer reading of Dr.
Teller's proposal shows an attempt to hitch the setting star of the "Star Wars" program to ecological awareness.
This would not be a match made in heaven.


The Vanishing Footnote
To the Editor:
Gertrude Himmelfarb's heartfelt lament to the vanishing footnote transported me back to the 1950's and the vow of a band of doctoral program sufferers at the University of Iowa to desert academic basic training and to strike it rich by marketing a line of "Dainty Kate" products.
Although many specific product concepts were discussed at our organizational meeting, only one remains firmly in mind: the "Turabian Square" was visualized as a plastic gizmo designed to frame 8 1/2-by-11 sheets for the purpose of determining whether any letters, words or phrases of the scholar's arduously written prose had strayed into "no Kate's land," thereby rendering the entire page intellectually null and void.
GERALD R. MILLER  East Lansing, Mich.


TV Gets a New Poltergeist: Stephen King
With his cinderblock build, thick glasses and mix-and-match attire of blue jeans, Dance of Death T-shirt and faded purple high tops, Stephen King has the look and demeanor of a middle-aged Bart Simpson.
But when Mr.
King flew here from his Maine home in May for the filming of his first original project written for television, his point of reference was not "The Simpsons" but "Twin Peaks." With television's more adventurous fare disappearing like victims in one of his own horror epics, this may not be a time to expect much innovation on television, but Mr.
King thinks "Twin Peaks" may have cracked open a door for offbeat drama at the networks.
At least he hopes so.


Sports of The Times; Simms: Nothing To Prove
WHEN the Giants put on their shoulder pads Tuesday, the best quarterback in the history of the franchise will have to prove himself.
Again.
Phil Simms had to prove himself in 1979 as a rookie.
By midseason he was the starter, but shoulder, knee and thumb injuries disrupted his development.


HOW SHORT IS TOO SHORT?
Marco Oriti is a good-looking boy.
But the poor kid must have height on his mind morning, noon and night!
What is most important is that he not be made so terriby aware of the "problem." Why doesn't someone give him a little self-esteem -- try to make him not so conscious of himself?
HARRIET F. RAPAPORT
Buffalo


Political Talk
Early Line on Bottom Line
In the first test of the relative strength of New York's four prospective Democratic candidates for the United States Senate, the least-known, Representative Robert J. Mrazek of Suffolk County, has emerged as a viable fund-raiser, the prerequisite for any high-level candidacy.


World Markets; Opportunity in Bundesbank Inaction
The Bundesbank surprised some financial market participants on Thursday by deciding not to raise Germany's interest rates.
But, more important, by sitting on the sidelines it offered Britain and France an opportunity to lower interest rates.
The British took advantage quickly.
The Conservative Government of John Major reduced its base lending rate on Friday by a half a percentage point, to 11 percent.


Reporter Leaves Newspaper After Dispute Over an Article
The chief of The Washington Post's bureau in Miami, Laura Parker, left the newspaper on Friday after the publication of an article that included quotations and other information that had been previously published in The Miami Herald.
Ms.
Parker did not credit The Herald in her article, a lighthearted account of mosquito and grasshopper infestation in Florida that was published last Sunday.


The Cultivated Gardener; For Roses, Sharp Shears in a Firm Hand
Last weekend, I decided to overhaul the rambler roses that tumble over a decrepit fence in front of my cottage on Long Island.
The weather was muggy and hot.
It was the kind of day when most people ride waves or lie in hammocks, but I roast turkeys; I prune roses.
My mother was coming, and suddenly I saw the ramblers through her eyes.
A tangle of Virginia creeper and wild grapevines almost engulfed the bushes, whose faded blossoms had turned a dreary brown.


New Eden in New England
"IT is very remotely placed, without a road, surrounded by a beautiful green landscape of fields and woods, with the distance filled up with some of the loftiest mountains in the State." So wrote a correspondent to Henry David Thoreau, describing the utopian community Fruitlands in Harvard, Mass.
The town of Harvard -- 30 miles west of Boston -- is still on the way to nowhere, with just a few rural highways lacing through serene woods and pastures.
One feels perfectly safe ambling down the middle of its back roads, the encircling hills shutting out the noise of the world.
Up on Prospect Hill, looking west across the Nashua River valley, the blue shapes of Wachusett, Watatic and faraway Monadnock shift color with the passing hours.


Northeast Notebook: Philadelphia; Negotiating Land Swaps
THE University of Pennsylvania is conducting negotiations here with city and Federal officials on land swaps that would enable the university to expand its recreation space and build a new student center and garage.
If the exchanges are realized, they would radically alter the seven-block University City campus.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Injuries Imperil Career
American League Umpire STEVE PALERMO's chances of ever returning to work are uncertain, according to the president of the umpires' union, PAUL RUNGE.
Palermo has been unable to move his legs fully after being shot in the back last Sunday, when he and two other men came to the aid of two waitresses who were being robbed in Dallas.


Altitude and Opponent Can't Overcome Breland
Mark Breland was just as worried about the altitude here Friday night as he was about his opponent, Julian Samaha.
This resort town is 6,300 feet above sea level -- a lot higher than Breland's native Brooklyn -- and that taxes a man's aerobic capacity.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front- page article last Sunday about economic reform in Eastern Europe misidentified Karel Dyba in some copies.
He is the Economics Minister of the Czech republic.


Sarah Batcheler Marries Philip Mintz
Sarah Stroud Batcheler, a daughter of Barbara Batcheler and Wayne E. Batcheler, both of New York, was married yesterday at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University to Philip Stephen Mintz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Mintz of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Joseph Britton, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
The bride, 24 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's in architecture from Columbia in June.
Her father is a member of the law firm of Sullivan, Donovan, Hanrahan &amp; Silliere in New York.
Her mother is the administrator of the department of art history and archeology at Columbia.


Ms. Welch Weds Edward Mikus Jr.
Barbara Ann Welch, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Francis A. Welch of Boston, was married yesterday at Our Lady of Victory Roman Catholic Church in Centerville, Mass., to Edward Mikus Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Mikus of Montvale, N.J.
The Rev.
John A. Perry performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
John E. Priest, a Lutheran minister.
The bride is an assistant vice president in investment banking at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Vassar College and received master's degrees in statistics from the University of Pennsylvania and in business administration from Columbia University.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending June 29 MANHATTAN Carnegie Hill 1.5 million
52 East 91st Street  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, single-family, 4-story town house; dining room, library, eat-in kitchen, 4 fireplaces, 18.4- by 100.8-ft. lot; taxes $12,100 (Broker: Leslie J. Garfield-Halstead Property Co.)  Chelsea 650,000
35 West 23d Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 3,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a former commercial building; elevator, dining area, fireplace, tin ceilings, 3 exposures; common charge $600, taxes $600 (Broker: J.I. Sopher Co.) Greenwich Village 342,500
35 West 9th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; part-time doorman, dining area, fireplace, restored herringbone floors, 3 exposures; maintenance $960, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia-Stribling &amp; Associates)  Upper East Side 465,000
17 East 84th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; maid's room, dining room, windowed kitchen, fireplace, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,564, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty)  West Village 325,500
166 Bank Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, exposed-brick walls, fireplace, Hudson River view; maintenance $760, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Eychner Associates) BRONX Gun Hill Road 150,000
3334 Hone Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, attached 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  Riverdale 310,000
25 West 263d Street  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick Colonial, dining room, breakfast room, den, sunroom, art studio, hospitality suite, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,800 (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors) BROOKLYN  Bay Ridge 400,000
122 83d Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, terrace, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,400 (Broker: Velsor Realty)  Marine Park 140,000
1625 East 35th Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $880 (Broker: Dwork &amp; Korn) Park Slope 417,000
197 6th Avenue  2-family, brownstone; 4 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, dining room in primary triplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 1/2 baths in other; fireplace in each; deck, rear garden, 17.8- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,490 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Real Estate)  QUEENS  Elmhurst 128,000
80-06 47th Avenue  (Greenhouse)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar condo; dining foyer, gym, roof spa, parking space provided; common charge $235, taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Real Estate)  Rego Park 220,000
85-77 67th Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, detached, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Grasmere 285,000
76 Briarcliff Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, Hi-Ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, hospitality suite, 105- by 61-ft. lot; taxes $2,385 (Broker: RE-Max Preferred)  West Brighton 172,000
38 North Mada Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, 50- by 135-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


Data Bank/July 14, 1991
Consumer Credit
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
--1.0
1.9
--0.5
Producer Price Index
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
-0.3
0.6
0.2
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
--0.2
0.8
--0.3
30-Year Treasury Bonds
July 12
July 5
June 28
Yeild in percent
8.43
8.49
8.40
Truck Prodctuion
In units, weekly total
40,281
33,093
78,010
Electric Power
July 5
June 28
June 21
Millions of kilowatt hours, weekly total
63,304
62,984
62,839
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,573
1,593
1,556
Paperboard
June 28
June 21
June 14
Thousands of tons, weekly total
7,637
7,844
7,627


The Nation; Groping for Ways to Break the Siege Mentality of the Police
OF the mountains of facts gathered by the Independent Commission on the Los Angeles Police Department that issued its final report last week, its chairman, Warren Christopher, said that he was particularly struck by one: officers must pass marksmanship tests every two months, but they face no psychological testing after they are hired.
That seemed extraordinary for a stressful, dangerous profession that, more than almost any other, can have a transforming effect, changing a young idealist into a sullen cynic or worse.
"It's very understandable because of the nature of police work," said Georgette Bennett, a sociologist who has helped the New York Police Department reorganize its structure to improve police behavior.
"They lose belief in human innocence and goodness. All they are ever exposed to is the worst of human nature. They become psychologically brutalized. They come in as idealists and when you test two years later there is a complete change."


Karen Oeschger Marries
Karen Grace Oeschger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Oeschger of Old Lyme, Conn., was married yesterday in Westbrook, Conn., to Ethan Michael Aneshansley, the son of Linda Hewson of San Diego and James Aneshansley of Brooklyn.
Peter Trantino, a justice of the peace in Old Saybrook, Conn., officiated at the Water's Edge resort.
Mrs.
Aneshansley, 34 years old, is a computer graphics artist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Mr.
Aneshansley, 33, is a senior programmer analyst for the State Street Bank in Quincy, Mass.
He is a graduate of the Berklee College of Music in Boston.


When Lowly Tin and Homely Wood Burst Into Bloom
Exuberantly painted coffeepots and document boxes were peddled door-to-door in 19th-century America.
An impressive variety of such color-splashed tin and wood objects, produced in rural workshops from Maine to Maryland, are assembled in "Paint, Powder and Leaf: Selections From the Historical Society of American Decoration," an exhibition at the Museum of American Folk Art, Columbus Avenue at 66th Street, through Sept. 15.
To show the differences between what was done on either side of the Atlantic between 1820 and 1860, the museum presents 70 American and 14 English decorated artifacts.
Fussily ornamented British tinware fills one large showcase, while more boldly embellished Americana is displayed in four showcases of metal objects and two open platforms of wood furnishings.
All are part of a gift of more than 600 items donated to the museum in April by the Historical Society of Early American Decoration, which has its headquarters in the home of its president, Dolores Furnari, in Brandon, Vt.


Investments and Nuclear Trusts
To the Editor:
"First-Generation Nuclear Retirement" (Forum, June 2) misstates the real issue regarding attempts to liberalize the investment restriction on funds set aside to cover future costs of decommissioning nuclear power plants.
Vermont Yankee's request to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission for permission to invest in common stocks suggests good business sense, not a departure from "pension grade" investments.


The Paradoxes of Help
To account for my affirmative answer to the former question I have to answer the latter first.
Too many people took for granted that I meant economic help, which I did not -- that is, not only, not even mainly.
I meant that it was in the interests of my country, of Europe and of the whole world to help make the Soviet Union a more free, more democratic and more stable place, with the emphasis on democracy.


Hyperkinesis


Interns Also Participate At SUNY Purchase
I read with interest the article "Interns Seek Edge in a Tough Job Market"  [ May 19 ] .
But why look only at six private colleges?
As the only public four-year undergraduate institution in Westchester County, SUNY Purchase has had an extremely successful internship program since 1981.
Our office of career development places about 70 students each semester in credit-bearing internships as diverse as the National Dance Institute, the Joan Rivers Show, General Foods, Ms. magazine, the Metropolitan Opera, Readers' Digest, Manhattan Theater Club, Shearson Lehman Brothers, New York Hospital, Fever Films, Representative Nita M. Lowey's Washington office, the Westchester District Attorney's Office, the Center for Preventive Psychology and the Guggenheim Museum.


The World; 10 Die a Day, Or Disappear, And Peru Goes Numb
FOR Peruvians, killings by guerrillas, the police and the military have become so common that any such death gets little reaction.
It is the kind of news that papers often relegate to the inside pages, and that television news broadcasts have come to limit to one minute of air time.
Peru is a nation numbed by statistics.


CORRECTIONS
An article on June 23 about the TVN Entertainment Corporation and the pay-per-view satellite business misstated the relationship between C-band and Ku-band transmissions.
As the industry expands, C-band dishes will be used to receive Ku-band programs, not vice versa.
A brief accompanying article stated incorrectly that the cable companies involved in the Primestar Ku-band venture were not known.
They are Tele-Communications Inc., American Television and Communications, Comcast Cable, Continental Cablevision, Warner Cable, United Artists Entertainment, Newhouse Broadcasting, Viacom Cable and Cox Cable Communications.


Postings: Marquee Restoration; A Brighter Look for the 1906 Langham
If the sky over Central Park West seems just the slightest bit brighter in coming months, it will be due to the replacement of the marquee at the Langham apartments, between 73d and 74th Streets.
The glass roof of the old marquee, which covers a 15- by 30-foot stretch of sidewalk, was tarred over decades ago.
The roof of the new marquee will have unobstructed glass panes.
It is otherwise to be a virtual replica of the elaborate old marquee.
"Except for the cast-iron side brackets, everything will be new -- but exactly as it was," said Jeffrey Manocherian, of Manocherian Brothers, the Manhattan-based real estate concern that has owned the Langham since 1952.
Although it is a rental building in which there are "limited sources of cash" for restoration, Mr.
Manocherian said, the marquee project was critical because the original was in a "state of severe deterioration" and posed a "dangerous condition."


Jennifer Hokanson to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Harry A. Hokanson of Miami have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Ruth Hokanson, to Marshall Kelton Essig, a son of Lois R. Essig of Mechanicsburg, Pa., and Thomas K. Essig of Indianapolis.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Hokanson, 29 years old, graduated from Cornell University.
Mr.
Essig, 30, is an economist at the Institute of International Finance in Washington.
A summa cum laude graduate of the University of Pittsburgh, he received a master's degree in international relations from Johns Hopkins University.


Pressing Their Noses To the Inside of the Glass
Live long enough and some of your dreams are bound to come true, Joyce Roman was saying the other afternoon as she sat in Macy's window.
"I remember pressing my nose against these windows when I was a child and longing to be on the other side and I can't believe that at my age I'm really here," said Mrs.
Roman, who lives in Miami Beach, where she is a land developer.
"Every woman wants to look more youthful," Mrs.
Roman ("I'm 62 but feel 18") said as Jeanette Martin, Lancome's resident makeup artist, set about blending soft earth tones for Mrs.
Roman's face.
"No frosted colors for you," she commanded.
"Hunter green is good; it works well with any ensemble."


A Fall Wedding For Miss Corby
The engagement of Kristin Ray Corby to Richard Justin Lumelleau, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Richard Lumelleau of Mendham, N.J., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Karl W. Corby 3d of Bethesda, Md.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Corby, 23 years old, graduated from Brown University, as did her fiance.
She is a sales assistant at the Old Kent Bank in Chicago.
Her father is the president of the Karl W. Corby Construction Company in Washington.


Sports People: TENNIS; Three Set to Enter Hall
ILIE NASTASE of Romania, GUILLERMO VILAS of Argentina and ASHLEY COOPER of Australia were inducted into the Tennis Hall of Fame at the Newport Casino in Rhode Island yesterday.
Nastase, 45 years old, was among the top 10 in the world from 1969 to 1977 and was No. 1 in 1973, and holds 57 career singles titles.
He earned more than $2 million in prize money in his career.


It's a Revolution


Dorothy Escher, Travel Coordinator, Is Wed to Gilbert A. Kerr, a Producer
Dorothy Schuyler Escher, a daughter of Mrs.
David A. Escher of Englewood, N.J., and the late Mr.
Escher, was married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Englewood to Gilbert Alan Kerr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Kerr of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Anne E. Cox, an Episcopal priest, and the Rev.
Joseph A. DeSanto, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
The bride is a graduate of the Masters School in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., and Wheaton College.
She is a coordinator of corporate travel at the New York law firm of Davis, Polk &amp; Wardwell.
Her father was a vice president of the Lexington Management Corporation, an investment counseling concern in Englewood.


Pamela VanderKloot to Wed William G. Bartel Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic J. VanderKloot of Warwick, N.Y., have made known October wedding plans for their daughter, Pamela Jane VanderKloot, to William George Bartel Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bartel of Wayzata, Minn.
Ms.
VanderKloot, 24 years old, is a sales manager of Ballistic Products, a sports mail-order company in Wayzata.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is the president of VanderKloot Associates, real-estate consultants in Warwick.
Her mother, Joanne VanderKloot, is a social worker and consultant at Parnell &amp; VanderKloot, consultants on cultural relations in New York.


After 2 Years, A Compromise Sets Up Rise In Sales Tax
THEY had met many times before, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, a Republican, and his Democratic political rival, Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, in a futile effort to find a compromise over an increased sales tax that Mr.
O'Rourke considered essential to Westchester's fiscal health but that Mr.
Brodsky insisted was unnecessary.
This time, in the Skyway Steak House outside Albany, there was a third participant: Assemblyman Gregory P. Young, a Democrat.
He was carrying the outline of a compromise in the two-year struggle over the unusual sales tax proposal, which would provide new revenues not only for the county government but also for towns and villages, most school districts and two small cities that do not impose their own sales taxes.


On the Street; Some Don't Deign To Just 'Do' Lunch
The ritual of dressing up for lunch adds a dash of glamour to the city.
Women who have the luxury of time make a big effort for an important luncheon date, favoring well-cut summer suits with contrasting color bands or patterns.
They give careful thought to accessories: the well-proportioned handbag, the elegant shoe, the dramatic decorative hat that causes heads to turn and strangers to smile.
Imagine their surprise when the woman in the photograph at lower center passed by with a pair of blue eyes appliqued on the back of her jacket.


Debra Lee Zipes Planning to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Douglas P. Zipes of Carmel, Ind., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Debra Lee Zipes, to Alan Eric Eskenazi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sy Eskenazi of Brooklyn.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Zipes, 27 years old, graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in psychology from New York University.
She is a mental health counselor at Grand Academy, an affiliate of the Grand Street Settlement in New York.
Her father is a professor of medicine at Indiana University.


Design; Ou est la chaise? Ou est la brosse a dents?
Finding the essence of contemporary French design is easy -- even common objects have whimsicality and exuberance, but within a clear historical context.
Karl Lagerfeld has dreamed up a line of fabrics inspired by 18th-century designs.
Patrick Naggar looks to Greek mythology, making tables and chairs decorated with wings and horns.
French designers love to experiment.
After designing everything from hotel lobbies to plastic water bottles, Philippe Starck has produced a simple object for everyday use: a toothbrush.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 14, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE VOICE OF THE NIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.95.) A reprint of a 1980 novel, published under a pseudonym, about a shy boy and his evil best friend.
2
8
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
3
3
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Guests from many parts of the world get together in a small Scottish town.
4
4
DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $5.95.) Dirk Pitt tries to save America from an extremist.
5
4
SECOND CHILD, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) A horrible crime committed 100 years ago comes back to haunt a quiet Maine village.
6
3
BREATH OF SCANDAL, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) The nightmare a woman suffered in a Texas town and how she gets even years later.
7
8
SECRETS OF THE MORNING, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.95.) A young music student is haunted by the ghosts of her lovers, present and past.
8
3
MOUNTAIN LAUREL, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.50.) An Army officer's assignment, on the eve of the Civil War, to escort a glamorous singer during her tour of the Colorado gold fields.
9
39
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
10
2
DYING YOUNG, by Marti Leimbach. (Ivy, $5.95.) While devotedly caring for a man dying of leukemia, a woman has an affair with a stranger.
11
1
ALWAYS AND FOREVER, by Cynthia Freeman. (Jove, $5.95.) When a woman's comfortable marriage turns sour, she flees it, only to find happiness with an old, long-lost flame.
12
6
THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $5.99.) Murder and chicanery amid the mansions of California's Orange County.
13
8
"G" IS FOR GUMSHOE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.95.) On her 33d birthday, the private eye Kinsey Millhone finds herself on a hit list.
14 *
18
RED DRAGON, by Thomas Harris. (Dell, $5.95.) An F.B.I. agent hunts a serial killer.
15
7
ONCE A PRINCESS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.95.) A woman in Mississippi is visited by the European prince to whom she was affianced.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
8
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
3
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
3
86
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
4
7
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
5
401
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
6
17
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
7
1
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
8 *
12
MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff describes the craft of the game.
9
3
DAVE BARRY TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Fawcett, $10.) Reflections on the crises of middle age by the syndicated humorist.
10 *
41
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
50
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
12
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
3
30
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
7
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
5
17
THE REVENGE OF THE BABY-SAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Midlantic's 'Credit Czar'
Hurt by heavy losses on delinquent loans, bankers are taking a hard look at the nuts and bolts of their lending business -- how to avoid making loans that turn bad, and how to spot problems quickly.
At the Midlantic Corporation, an Edison, N.J., banking company that lost $195 million last year, mostly from bad commercial real estate loans, the introspection led to the hiring of Alfred J. Schiavetti Jr. to fill the newly created job of chief credit officer.
Mr.
Schiavetti, 52, had been at Chemical Bank for 29 years, most recently as a managing director in the company's Realty Group.


Trickle Down; At the Summit, A Chance to Set the Stage For Growth
WHEN President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union arrives this week in London to ask leaders at the economic summit conference for help with his sinking economy, his presence will stand as a dramatic symbol of the West's victory in the cold war.
But even without Mr.
Gorbachev, this year's assembly of the leaders of the seven most powerful industrial democracies would be of unusual significance.
With nationalism and economic regionalism on the rise and the world economy practically at a standstill, the Western powers can lead the way toward closer integration and more stable and vigorous growth, helping to create conditions for an enduring peace.
Or they can let the world economy stagnate and fracture into competing trade blocs, setting the stage for future national and regional conflicts.


Iannone Smoke, N.E.H. Fire
No one expected bitter controversy when President George Bush nominated Carol Iannone to the council that advises the National Endowment for the Humanities on what scholarship, research and public programs deserve Federal money.
Such nominations usually sail through Senate confirmation.
But Ms.
Iannone's name has been stalled for months amid stormy opposition from some lawmakers and scholarly organizations.


Eagle Scout


Sports People: FOOTBALL; Watters Breaks Foot
The San Francisco 49ers' quest for a successor to ROGER CRAIG at running back was set back yesterday when the team learned that rookie RICKY WATTERS will be out for six to eight weeks with a broken right foot.
Watters, a second-round pick from Notre Dame, was injured Friday during the team's first workout in pads at Santa Clara, Calif.
He twisted the foot as he turned and planted it to try to gain more yardage.


Katherine Grant Engaged to Wed
Berenice Spalding of Hillsborough, Calif., has made known the September wedding plans of her daughter Katherine Grant and George Burr Carver, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. H. Carver of Scarborough, Me.
The future bride, a photographer, is also the daughter of the late Spencer Grant Jr., who was a vice president of the Marsh &amp; McLennan insurance brokerage in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of Oregon and received an associate degree in nursing from the College of Marin.


Commercial Property: Nonprofit Offices; New York Proposes a Center for the Tax-Exempts
A DECADE ago, with all the businesses whose headquarters it claimed, New York City also called itself home to the American Cancer Society, Girl Scouts of the U.S.A., National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, United Presbyterian Church and Young Men's Christian Association -- among other leading nonprofit groups.
Today, you would have to go to Atlanta to find the Cancer Society, Baltimore to find the N.A.A.C.P., Louisville to find the Presbyterians and Chicago to find the Y.M.C.A.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Glastonbury, Conn. 190,000
136 Mountain Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 51-year-old Cape Cod; stone fireplace, family room, formal dining room, 1.8 acres; taxes $2,793.
Ridgefield, Conn. 265,000
8 Colonial Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 27-year-old Cape Cod; screened porch, 2 fireplaces, 1.1 acres; taxes $3,650.
Southington, Conn. 85,000
57 Crissey Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; unfinished basement, detached garage, needs work, 0.33 acre; taxes $1,997.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 400,000
641 Douglas Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; slate entry, study, family room, deck, new eat-in kitchen, 2.1 acres; taxes $8,183.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 291,250
Shad Road West 3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; screened porch, dining room, 2,438 square feet, 2.3 acres; taxes $4,745.
Waccabuc, N.Y. 900,000
Mead Street 3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 51-year-old colonial; den, fireplace, screened porch, boathouse, studio lake, 10.4 acres; taxes $8,580.
OTHER AREAS Glen Head, L.I. 215,000
13 Hill Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 63-year-old colonial; dining room, porch, basement, attic, 2-car detached garage; taxes $2,600.
Livingston, N.J. 230,000
105 Wast McClellan Avenue  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-half bath, 49-year-old colonial; 3-car garage, fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,728.
Ramsey, N.J. 398,000
24 Joshua Drive  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; sauna, fireplace, new kitchen; taxes $6,589.


Linda Caron, Editor, Weds Jonathan Slater, Manager
Linda Caron, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Caron of St.-Hubert, Quebec, was married in St.-Hubert yesterday to Dr.
Jonathan Slater, the son of David Slater of New York and the late Beulah Eisner Slater.
The Rev.
Raymond Gregoire, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at L'Eglise St.-Thomas-de-Villeneuve.
The bride, 25 year old, is a contract translator in Montreal and the editor of L'Antenne, the monthly newsletter of the Quebec Translators Society.
She graduated from the University of Montreal.
The bridegroom, 34, is the president of Slater Market Management, Canadian-American trade consultants in Champlain, N.Y.
He graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in administration and a doctorate in communications from New York University.


Anne Toubassi Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Toubassi of Paradise Valley, Ariz., have made known the September wedding plans for their daughter Anne Elizabeth Toubassi and Dana Chase Troxell Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Troxell of Short Hills, N.J.
Miss Toubassi, 28 years old, is an investment manager in the corporate finance department of the Equitable Capital Management Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Mr.
Troxell, 29, is a vice president of Alta Limited Partnership, a bank buyout and restructuring firm in New York.
He graduated from the University of Virginia and received an M.B.A. from Columbia.


Poll Finds G.O.P Growth Erodes Dominant Role of the Democrats
After a decade of party growth, Republicans have drawn almost even with the Democrats nationally, and ahead, though barely, in the allegiance of whites and adults under the age of 40.
The dominance in party identification that Democrats established in the aftermath of the Great Depression has evaporated.
Polls by The New York Times and CBS News over the first half of this year show that 34 percent of the 14,695 people interviewed now call themselves Democrats and 31 percent call themselves Republicans.
The margin of sampling error in the combined polls was plus or minus 1 percentage point.
Republicans Viewed Favorably
President Bush's continuing popularity gives these trends a major lift, but the party's strength runs beyond him personally, though it does not appear to have reached the point of threatening the Democrats' sway over Congress, where the House has gone Republican just once in four decades.


BASEBALL: Notebook; A.L. Has 'Balanced' Schedule, Skewed Results
For years now, the American League has perpetrated a hoax on the American baseball public.
Come October each season, the league tells its fans that the best team in the Eastern Division is playing the best in the Western Division to determine the best in the league.
But the teams are not necessarily the best in their divisions.
What really happens is that the so-called best teams in each division are determined more by games against teams in the other division than by games against teams in their own division.
In other words, a team can have a mediocre record against teams in its division but a very good record against teams in the other division and win the championship in its division.
In this season's first half, the Minnesota Twins had a 17-22 record in their own division but a 30-14 record against the East and were in first place for three weeks before the All-Star Game break.


Topics of The Times; Buckling Up
Tucked into the Senate's transportation bill are new incentives for states to adopt mandatory helmet and seat-belt laws -- and penalties for those that don't.
The measure could be even stronger.
But it's a welcome step toward saving thousands of lives and billions of dollars.
The provision requires states that do not enact mandatory helmet and seat-belt laws by 1995 to divert 1.5 percent of their Federal transportation money to highway safety programs.
States that enact the laws will be rewarded with extra money to devote to highway safety.
Even though thousands of motorists die because they fail to buckle up, 10 states still do not have laws requiring that seat belts be used.
Belts cut the risk of fatal injury in half and save billions in medical costs, lost productivity and other injury-related expenses.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate


Answering The Mail
Q.
My house has wood windows that have what appears to be a varnish finish.
Many of the window frames have water stains caused by condensation that occurred in the winter.
I am afraid that, should I do nothing about this, the wood will rot.
What do you suggest?
A.
The water stains are probably in the finish, not in the wood itself, so chances are that refinishing or painting would take care of that problem.
But you should try to do something about the condensation, because it could lead to more serious problems with rot.
One factor that will help is to install storm sash on the outside of all windows.
Another is to lower the humidity inside the house in the winter.
That might include turning down or shutting off the humidifier, if you have one, and making sure the bathrooms and kitchen have exhaust fans going when those rooms are in use.


Flying Eye Hospital Uses Tact to Reach Cuba
Stepping briskly from his sleek white DC-8 aircraft, Oliver Foot, director of Project Orbis, the flying eye hospital, immediately sought to put a receiving line of Cuban doctors and Government officials at ease.
Bringing relieved smiles to the faces of his hosts, Mr.
Foot told them, "We are coming to Cuba to share knowledge and to learn from each other so that what we learn can be disseminated around the world."


To Give Bastille Day Its Due, Brioche
IT'S Bastille Day. Let them eat cake. Or, one might translate literally and say gateau.
Actually, the term is brioche.
Jean Jacques Rousseau, the 18th-century French author, recalled the Queen's "thoughtless saying" as "Qu'ils mangent de la brioche." So to give the day its due, it should be brioche.


Sara C. Curtis Engaged To Benjamin R. Robinson
Mrs.
Joseph P. Brent and Dr.
Don T. Curtis, both of Amarillo, Tex., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sara Catherine Curtis to Benjamin Rowland Robinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel R. Robinson 3d of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Curtis, 24 years old, is an assistant to the curator of the Asiatic department of the Boston Museum of Fine Arts.
A graduate of Pine Manor College, she was presented at the International Debutante Ball in New York in 1987.
Her father is a surgeon.


Kelly Saletan to Marry Richard Grunther in March
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Saletan of Upper Saddle River, N.J., have announced the engagement of Mr.
Saletan's daughter Kelly Ruth Saletan to Richard Scott Grunther, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard Grunther of New York.
A wedding in March 1992 is planned.
Miss Saletan, 24 years old, is also a daughter of Susan DiFuria of Syracuse.
A graduate of the University of Rochester, she is an account executive with Diana M. Orban Associates, a public relations concern in New York.
Her father owns a live poultry distributorship in Brooklyn.


Baseball; As Cone Goes Crazy, Mets' Fans Go Wild
"Yeah, I am perhaps borderline berserk," David Cone said.
"But if you can get away with that anywhere, I think you can in New York. I think New York understands borderline berserk. I think New York respects borderline berserk."
The city certainly doesn't have any argument with an 8-5 record, and if Cone, a right-hander for the Mets, got a little crazy in the course of arriving at that mark, so be it.
Or so the pitcher says he's been told.


U.N. Expects a New Iraqi Nuclear List
Iraq is expected to submit by Sunday a new document that may list clandestine nuclear installations and equipment that it failed to declare to the United Nations a week ago, the chief United Nations nuclear inspector announced here today.
The inspector, Demitri Perricos, said the new list could give details of Iraqi nuclear installations where research and development was carried out as well as specialized nuclear storage sites and manufacturing plants.


Give Architects Their Due
The Times has recently published two articles on the new transitional housing for the homeless project in Greenburgh.
Both articles had photographs of the center.
Many of the people associated with the project were identified, including Andrew M. Cuomo, its instigator.
A great deal was said about the building's sensitive relation to its context.
But the architects who designed this innovative complex were never mentioned.
Such failure to identify architects by name is something I associate with provincial newspapers, not The New York Times.


Of Course Race Governed Bush's Nomination; Why Must He Explain?
To the Editor:
"A Justice Until 2030?" (editorial, July 2) states that "because of the history of oppression against his race," Judge Clarence Thomas, President Bush's Supreme Court nominee, "owes the Senate and public an explanation of why he differs so strongly with civil rights advocates about the right remedies for proven discrimination." This prompts questions.


Flirting With .400: Carew Has Two Favorites
When Rod Carew batted .388 for Minnesota in 1977, he won back the rooting interests of all those who had long before given up on seeing any player ever hit .400 again.
Imaginations started churning, thanks to Carew.
He and hitters like George Brett helped feed the hunger to see what would have been a marvel in the 1970's or 1980's.


Birds Are Good Guests (Pretty Ones, Too)
ONE day while relaxing between outdoor chores, I detected some movement among the bright red impatiens in a flower border.
What was making the motion?
An awfully big bug?
As I watched carefully, I realized that it was a hummingbird darting from flower to flower.
The bird was so speedy and so small, it seemed to behave more like a huge insect.
The shy creature disappeared almost as quickly as it was spotted.
It could have visited the garden and never been noticed.


Of Empty Skies, Small Towns and Two-Lane Roads Chris Whitley's
On a hot Saturday afternoon, Chris Whitley walks into the Cafe Figaro on Bleecker Street and takes a seat next to an open window.
He wears faded black jeans and a loose white tank top that covers little of his bare chest.
His long blond hair is tucked behind his ears; his teeth are uneven and gray.
Around his neck is a silver pendant on a black string.
"I used to come to this place by myself when I first moved to New York in the late 70's," he says, gesturing somewhat apologetically at one of Greenwich Village's most crowded tourist joints.
"I played at all these Bleecker folk places. Me and this other guy used to play one of them for $5 a night. At the end of the night, we'd take our money and get a slice of pizza."


Youth Camp Given Goods By Merchants
Airsickness bags, toothpaste, glue, laundry detergent and orange juice -- an odd assortment of goods, but all useful for the more than 2,000 children who will attend the Fresh Air Fund's summer camp in upstate New York this year.
What makes the goods all the more special is that all of them are donated by scores of companies and small businesses.
So far this year, the companies have donated more than $50,000 worth of such supplies to the fund.


Three Acts Add Up to Murder in Each
"THREE ACTS OF MURDER," at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale through Aug. 4, is a trio of clever, well-constructed, one-act mystery plays by Henry Slesar.
Although each play can stand alone, they are connected by virtue of the fact that each murder has a wry, O. Henry-type of plot twist.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-9
Progress on the arms control pact was reported in Washington, but by late afternoon, Secretary Baker and Foreign Minister Bessmertnykh of the Soviet Union were unable to announce an agreement.
Page 1


Wall Street; Seeking Global Rules for Brokers
How strong should a brokerage firm have to be to do business in the global marketplace?
That question, which has been a point of friction at least since the 1987 market crash, will dominate the agenda tomorrow when the executive committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions convenes in Paris.
The executive panel, officially called the Technical Committee, is headed by Richard Breeden, chairman of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
Last week, in an interview, Mr.
Breeden said he was hopeful that the talks would move regulators closer to an agreement on some minimum capital-strength standards for the world's securities industry.


Noted With Pleasure
How to Make a Meadow
Many plants depend on insects to spread the pollen needed for fertilization.
When we see a meadow thick with wildflowers, we're actually looking at a landscape made possible and farmed by a variety of flying insects.
Friedrich G. Barth explains in "Insects and Flowers: The Biology of a Partnership" (Princeton University, paper).


Different Troupes, Different Missions
To the Editor:
The subject Anna Kisselgoff wrestles with in her essay "Are Dance Troupes Lost Without the Legends?"  [ June 23 ]  is crucial.
The dance field is indeed at a crossroads, having lost countless important artists to AIDS and age in recent years.
It is a time for examining options, considering alternatives, perhaps consolidating forces.


As Soviets Wait Tremulously, Ailing Economy Struggles On
Gasoline is scarce, but cars choke Moscow's dusty streets.
Prices have tripled, but shelves stand empty.
The country has been without a national budget for months, but vast state bureaucracies lumber on.
At the free-market exchange rate for the ruble, the average monthly wage is below $10 and shrinking, and supply lines are breaking down.
But armies of workers still go through the motions of reporting to work each day in exchange for rubles printed in huge quantities by the Government.


A la Carte: Combining The Casual and Formal
FLIPPER'S FISH HOUSE in Wading River is everybody's idea of a casual Long Island seaside restaurant.
From the outside the white-clapboard former beach cottage looks more like a snack stand than a serious restaurant.
Situated across the street from a small Riverhead Town beach, the restaurant's sandy parking lot is studded with clam and mussel shells.
Corona Extra and Rolling Rock beer signs, stuck to the side of the building, are interspersed with notices, no doubt aimed at the beach crowd, reminding all who enter "Shoes and Shirts Required" and "Restrooms for Patrons Only."


The Nation; Can Shoppers Tell if Something Is Really Good for the Planet?
A TRIP to the supermarket, once an apt reminder of American abundance and choice, has turned into a nerve-wracking experience.
Not only must shoppers worry about the unhealthy effects of fat, cholesterol and sweeteners.
Now they are being urged to take responsibility for the health of the planet.
"Compostable," "recyclable," "photodegradable" and "biodegradable" are the advertising industry's latest pitches to consumers who grew up believing that tossing everything out was a basic American right.
"Dolphin safe" stickers are affixed to cans of tuna.
"CFC-free" appears on spray cans, assuring buyers that no chlorofluorocarbons are lurking within, ready to gnaw away at the ozone hole.
"Environmentally friendly" labels are as ubiquitous in the 1990's as smiley faces were in the 1970's.
But how is a shopper to know whether the claims are true?


Virtuous Cycles: Police Warm to 2-Wheel Patrols
THE suspects neither saw nor heard the patrolman coming.
Officer Peter Slocum of the East Hartford Police Department said he spotted the men and coasted alongside their car on his 21-speed mountain bicycle.
"They were cutting cocaine, and I arrested them on the spot," the officer said.
"If I had been in a radio car, I couldn't have pulled it off, because they would have seen and heard me."


Low-Voltage Lighting Easy to Install Outside
LOW-VOLTAGE outdoor lighting is easy to install, and also safe, efficient and inexpensive to operate.
Although it does not provide bright light, it furnishes sufficient illumination to accent architecture, improve security and light walkways, patios and similar areas for safety.
Hardware stores, home and garden centers and discount department stores carry low-voltage lighting kits that include basic components and instructions.
Before buying a kit, evaluate what is needed and plan a lighting layout so that you know what items are required, including accessories.


Beware of the Hazards Of Canada Geese
Canada geese are a health hazard and a nuisance to more than golfers  [ "Geese Are Multiplying, Thanks to Protection," June 2 ] .
Last summer I was crossing the field from the tennis courts behind the Town Hall West in Islip to the parking lot.
Several young boys were playing basketball on the asphalt court.
It was hot, and they were sweating.
The ball bounced on goose droppings.
The boys wiped their hands on their shirts and shorts and then their faces.
Some of the gym classes at the Islip High School presented comparable scenarios.


Chinese Dig to Prevent Flooding of Big Cities
Millions of Chinese dug earth and filled sandbags today in a desperate effort to protect the big eastern cities of Nanjing and Shanghai from the worst floods in a century.
From the far northeast to Sichuan in the southwest, rising floodwaters have killed more than 1,300 people since late May.
Chinese officials say that more will die from disease and hunger, and have appealed to other nations for help.


NBC News 'Professionals' Fight to Decline Honor
Writing the words that Tom Brokaw reads to nearly 15 million Americans weeknights on the NBC Nightly News might sound like a terrific job.
But Jack Freeman, who writes those words, has a different view.
He calls it routine, formulaic, highly supervised and unimaginative.
Mr.
Freeman is not your average office griper.
Along with some colleagues, he has taken his complaints to Federal court.


2 Brooklyn Men Held in Slaying and Torching of Pregnant Woman
Two Brooklyn men were charged yesterday with strangling a pregnant woman and setting her body afire in a vacant lot in the Greenpoint section, the police said.
Police officials said they believed that the woman, whom they had not been able to identify, was a prostitute and that the two men had killed her after she resisted their attempts to rob her.


Making a Difference; Mr. Hashimoto's Problem
With his slicked-back hair and forceful speaking style, Ryutaro Hashimoto is easily among the most recognizable of Japan's politicians, and until a few weeks ago he was often talked about as a candidate to become the country's next Prime Minister.
That was before the 53-year-old Finance Minister got caught in a storm that every other politician in the country wants to duck: the biggest stock scandal in postwar Japanese history.
When the scandal broke -- with its charges that Japan's major brokerages lent money to gangsters and gave upward of $900 million in "compensation" to their biggest clients -- Mr.
Hashimoto said his ministry was shocked and appalled.
While the schemes violated no laws, they were clearly improper, and contributed to the widespread belief that the Tokyo Stock Exchange is a clubby place where big players get taken care of and little ones should get out of the way.
The ministry, Mr.
Hashimoto was quick to add, had no hints that such improprieties were widespread.


Stanley A. Kaplan, 80, An Authority on Ethics
Stanley A. Kaplan, professor of law emeritus at the University of Chicago and an authority on ethnical and professional responsibility, died yesterday at his home in Chicago.
He was 80 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Baseball; 1 Game / 4 Arms = Orioles No-Hitter
No-hitters, seemingly a dime a dozen nowadays, were in desperate need of a new twist.
Baltimore provided that yesterday with the rarest of the rare as four Orioles pitchers combined on a no-hitter against the Athletics in Oakland, Calif.
"I think it was kind of strange for them," Oakland Manager Tony LaRussa said.
"Everybody congratulated different people. Nobody knew who to shake hands with. But it all counts."


D. M. Sigal Weds Virginia Randall
Virginia Elizabeth Randall, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Randall Jr. of Brookville, L.I., was married in Port Washington, L.I., yesterday to David Martin Sigal, a son of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Max V. Sigal Jr. of Indianapolis.
Mayor Michael Galgano of Brookville performed the ceremony at the North Hempstead Country Club.
Mrs.
Sigal, 29 years old, is to join the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York as a management development associate in September.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is a manager of the Stark Carpet Corporation in New York.
Her mother, Nina Randall, is the owner of Harriet &amp; Nina Interiors of Brookville.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My house has wood windows that have what appears to be a varnish finish.
Many of the window frames have water stains caused by condensation that occurred in the winter.
I am afraid that, should I do nothing about this, the wood will rot.
What do you suggest?
A.
The water stains are probably in the finish, not in the wood itself, so chances are that refinishing or painting would take care of that problem.
But you should try to do something about the condensation, because it could lead to more serious problems with rot.
One factor that will help is to install storm sash on the outside of all windows.
Another is to lower the humidity inside the house in the winter.
That might include turning down or shutting off the humidifier, if you have one, and making sure the bathrooms and kitchen have exhaust fans going when those rooms are in use.


Mazes
To the Editor: I enjoyed the article on mazes (Travel, June 9).
However, you do not have to travel to England to find mazes.
Last year a maze was completed in Lancaster, Pa.
The design of the maze was inspired by that of Chartres Cathedral.
It is unusual as it is set in a garden with trees, flowering bushes and seats.
The paths are made of 10,000 bricks.


Tompkins Square
To the Editor:
The photograph of the Tompkins Square Boys' Lodging House in 1890 with the Streetscapes column on March 31 caught my attention, but I was surprised to learn its original purpose as it is the main locale of a memoir I have almost completed.


Ann Phelps Is Engaged to John Jacobs
September wedding plans for Ann Larkin Phelps and John Shanley Jacobs, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
William L. Jacobs of Des Moines have been made known by her parents, Mary Lynd Phelps of Hingham, Mass., and Richard J. Phelps of Watertown, Mass.
Miss Phelps, 32 years old and a graduate of Wake Forest University, is the advertising manager at the Converse athletic footwear company in North Reading, Mass.
Her father is the president of Superior Brands, a pet-food company in Quincy, Mass.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE QUEST FOR EL CID, by Richard Fletcher. (Oxford University, $8.95.) More mercenary than liberator, El Cid, the 11th-century warrior and Spanish national hero, was less interested in defeating Islam than in stealing the Moors' gold.
Richard Fletcher "has sought to put the record straight in his splendidly readable and insightful new book," Ian Gibson said here last year.
GIRL WITH CURIOUS HAIR, by David Foster Wallace. (Avon, $9.95.) In "Little Expressionless Animals," the first story in this collection, Julie Smith, a beautiful young lesbian, is the queen of "Jeopardy" and the obsession of the game show's host, Alex Trebek.
In this and other stories, David Foster Wallace "proves himself a dynamic writer of extraordinary talent," Jenifer Levin said here in 1989.
"Ever willing to experiment, he lays his artistic self on the line with his incendiary use of language, at times seeming to rip both the mundane and the unusual from their moorings, then setting them down anew, freshly described."


Of Course Race Governed Bush's Nomination; A Helper to Others
To the Editor:
I was fascinated by the fervor and fist-to-mouth hesitations as Judge Clarence Thomas spoke before cameras and press when presented by President Bush.
Judge Thomas was overwhelmed as he thanked his grandparents, parents and, then, the nuns, who helped him.


A Soggy Saturday by the Seaport


Hers; Who Needs Gus?
It is below freezing, and my daughter is outside without a coat.
But she is warm with anticipation and the excitement of waiting.
Waiting for Gus.
My daughter is 5 years old, with a deep hankering for Gus's company -- I don't like to buy into this boy-girl stuff so early as to call it a crush.
Gus, a bespectacled fifth grader, lives about a half mile away.
Hannah knows him from community gatherings and from school.


Soraya J. Mariel Wed To Arthur D. Robinson
Soraya J. Mariel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Serafin U. Mariel of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Arthur D. Robinson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry S. Robinson of Dumont, N.J., by Justice Harold Silverman of State Supreme Court at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, she is an associate at the Financial Relations Board, an investor relations company in New York.
Her father is president of the New York National Bank in the Bronx.


Sports People: GOLF; Nelson to Sit One Out
LARRY NELSON yesterday became the latest American golfer to pull out of the British Open.
Nelson, gave no explanation for his withdrawal, simply sending his regrets.
PAUL AZINGER and SCOTT HOCH pulled out on Friday. (AP)


Campus Life: Massachusetts; A Time Capsule Helps Archivists To Look Back
The fragile paper read: "Our nation has but begun to work out her possibilities richly endowed by nature. The wealth of her resources remains to be harvested."
This assessment by the class of 1878 at what has become the University of Massachusetts here was lost to the ages until this spring.
It came to light on May 14, when university archivists and archeologists unearthed a 113-year-old time capsule planted below the class tree.


Patient Autry Still Waiting and Hoping for Title by Angels
The Singing Cowboy doesn't sing anymore, but he still comes to watch his team play.
Gene Autry is 83 years old and the California Angels haven't given him a World Series championship to call his own, not in the 30 years he has owned the team, but perhaps they will this season.
And perhaps not.
The Angels, who spent one day in first place earlier this month, have been striking some sour notes lately, although they remain one of six contenders in the balanced American League West.


Harriette Mauran Weds in Vermont
Harriette Ames Mauran, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Duncan H. Mauran of Providence, R.I., and Strafford, Vt., was married yesterday in Strafford to Peter Keniston Merrill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Keniston P. Merrill of Randolph, Vt.
The Rev.
Timothy C. Eberhardt, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Strafford Town House, a meetinghouse.
The bride and bridegroom are 30 years old and 1983 graduates of Middlebury College.
She is a development officer at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
Her father is the president of the Providence Steamboat Company, operators of tugboats in Providence.


Foreign Affairs; A Summit Flop On Soviets
The London summiteers will produce a flop this week on the most important issue before them -- helping the Soviet Union transform itself into a democracy and free economy.
Despite the careful staging -- the reform package Mikhail Gorbachev will present to the seven leaders of the industrialized world and the goodies they will give him in return -- the London agreements will flop in due course.
Here's why:


Making a Difference; Digital Diplomat
Just a trade show or two ago, executives in the electronics industry were steadfastly adhering to their blood oath not to pay royalties to the music industry.
But in a remarkable sea change last week, the industry agreed to compensate rock stars, songwriters and music publishers for profits lost to home recordings made using the latest digital technology.
The recession and the need to spark life into the consumer electronics business are getting some of the credit for the landmark agreement.
So is John V. Roach, the 52-year-old chairman and chief executive of the Fort Worth-based Tandy Corporation.


Small Agencies Succeed at Housing
Your story "Progress in Moving Homeless From Motels"  [ May 26 ]  was unfortunate in its failure to acknowledge the credit due to the over 35 small nonprofit agencies in Westchester County.
Credit for the turnaround solely to the two Westhelp and Westhab agencies demonstrated a narrow knowledge of the situation.
A vast amount of the credit for improvements in housing for homeless families has been due to the tremendous efforts of small, nonprofit agencies in establishing apartment programs in two- or three-family houses or in providing valuable re-housing assistance.
Without the advantages of political and corporate connections because of public names, these small agencies have endured tremendous hardships to continue to provide services.
For instance, for over two years, the founders of the Family Resource Center have contributed their own personal funds to keep alive their efforts to renovate a seven-apartment unit in Peekskill while state officials have fallen over themselves with bureaucratic roadblocks.


Susan Bernfield, An Actress, Weds
Susan Bernfield, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Merton R. Bernfield of Boston, was married yesterday to Claude Millman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Isaac Millman of New York.
Judge William C. Conner of Federal District Court in Manhattan officiated at the New York Academy of Art.
The bride, 27 years old, is an actress and a founder of Theater Labrador, a nonprofit company in New York.
She is a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania and the Circle in the Square Theater School.
Her father is the Clement A. Smith Professor of Pediatrics at the Harvard University Medical School, where her mother, Audrey Bernfield, is the associate director of student affairs.


PEACE'S PROSPECTS IN CAMBODIA GROW
After more than a decade of unrelievedly vicious fighting and months of stalled peace talks, there is now a possibility that the end of the Cambodian civil war is imminent.
Probability is not the word, at least not yet.
The Cambodian Government and rebels seeking to overthrow it have accused each other of violations of the cease-fire they agreed to only last month, and Western and Asian diplomats have been embarrassed before in predicting a quick end to the war.


Sports of The Times; Politics, The Knicks And N.Y.C.
"I think New York's the greatest place to play in the world. You play before the most knowledgeable fans in the country, you play in the media capital of the country so that your success is amplified. You also play in the most critical place in the country, that means you can't pull anything over people's eyes. They respect effort, humility, winning -- and style. They love style." -- Senator Bill Bradley
In October 1967, an unassuming, self-assured forward from Princeton reported for his first season with the New York Knicks, who were coming off a dismal fourth-place finish.


'Gypsy' Proves a Coup For Theater in Elmsford
IF you are looking for an accomplished leading lady for a musical, get Beth Fowler and you won't go wrong.
That's been a dependable assumption for producers and casting agents for some time now.
But can she surprise us and do Mama Rose, the summit role in musical theater?
So fearsome is the character's far-reaching stranglehold that her mere presence on the stage of "Gypsy" is a warning signal.
"There's the mother," says one observer when Rose appears, and that says it all.


Stepping Lively: Bold Leaps in Leggings
The slim taper created by black leggings is a classic year-round look.
But in summer, many women add a little zest to the cat-burglar guise with novel prints, colors and textures.
For some, summer means a small step, say, a floral print against that black background.
Bolder souls add a dash of white, with checks or dot prints.
Others abandon black altogether; for weekends, this might include a tropical print.
And for weekdays, under a blazer, there are larger-than-life prints -- medallions, jewels, chains, paisleys, and coins.


Making a Difference; Half Smiles on Flat Panels
Last week's ruling by the Commerce Department on the dumping of flat-panel computer displays by Japanese manufacturers had something to please and disappoint nearly every interested party.
James M. Hurd was no exception.
Mr.
Hurd, the 42-year-old president and chief executive of Planar Systems Inc. of Beaverton, Ore., spearheaded the formation of the Advanced Display Manufacturers of America, a group of seven small manufacturers of flat panels that brought the dumping case.
The panels are key components of laptop and notebook computers.
The American group charged that Japanese manufacturers were selling the panels here at unfairly low prices.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Computers Still Can't Do Beautiful Mathematics
MATHEMATICIANS often say that their craft is as much an art as a science.
But as more and more researchers are using computers to prove their theorems, some worry that the magic is in danger of fading away.
In the past, mathematicians could count on being able to sit down with a newly published proof and carefully follow the researcher's logic, determining whether the derivations held true, relishing particularly clean and clever arguments.


T. G. Enright Wed To Miss Woznick
Alexandra Woznick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin J. Woznick of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday in Belvedere, Calif., to Thomas Gerard Enright, the son of of Gerard J. Enright of San Rafael, Calif., and the late Marie Connolly Enright.
The Rev.
Bryon Dickey, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the China Cabin.
The bride, 28 years old, is the publicity coordinator for the Rosebud Agency, a booking agency for musical performers in San Francisco.
She graduated from the Milton Academy and Brown University.
Her father is a software development manager for Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman in Cambridge.
Her mother, Carolyn Woznick, is a reprints-permissions editor.


A Warmer, Fuzzier Arnold
Arnold Schwarzenegger flashed that wide, good-natured grin, but he wasn't kidding when he told David Letterman that he plays a "kinder, gentler Terminator" this time.
In "Terminator 2: Judgment Day," Mr.
Schwarzenegger looks like the same old villainous cyborg from "The Terminator," the 1984 film that made him a star.
The original-flavor Terminator, of course, was sent back from a post-apocalyptic future to wipe out Sarah Connor before she could give birth to one of mankind's saviors.
Back then he was the type of machine who murdered a couple of other Sarah Connors, just in case.
But in "Terminator 2" he saves the world without even killing anyone, takes orders from a boy, and turns out to be the most tenderhearted alien since E. T. When the first Terminator said, "I'll be back," Mr.
Schwarzenegger's monotone delivery, Austrian accent and quaintly charming growl made it his signature line: "Uh'll be bek." But we never thought he'd be bek like this.


Jersey's Not-So-Public Television
To the Editor:
"Trimming the Sails at Public TV's Flagship" (Making a Difference, June 23) reminds me that New Jersey's public television system, New Jersey Network, just got cuts of 50 percent -- but this time the cuts were well deserved.
Perhaps the only publicly reviled PBS station -- it had to give back viewer contributions in 1986 after canceling its most popular program -- NJN may not survive much longer.
It has no one to blame but its own management.
NJN's programming is bland and duplicates other PBS fare.
Garden State taxpayers no longer like being forced to pay for a series on the history of wine when property taxes are skyrocketing.


In the 90's, The 80's Turn to Junk
In "Regarding Henry," Harrison Ford does literally what a lot of other 90's movie characters will be doing figuratively: he pauses while walking past his secretary, who is wearing a corsage, and leans over to smell the flower.
As a former fast-lane champion forced by circumstance (in this case a gunshot wound inflicted by a mugger) to take a new look at his life, Mr.
Ford as Henry Turner is right in tune with what is sure to be a coming cinematic vogue.
He is ready to reassess the mad excesses of 80's materialism from an aggressively mellow 90's point of view.


INDIA HOLDS DOZEN IN GANDHI KILLING
Seven weeks after the assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, security officials have arrested more than a dozen Sri Lankans and Indians on suspicion of being accomplices and have begun a widespread hunt in southern India for a Tamil militant from Sri Lanka who is believed to be the central plotter in the carefully planned killing.
An official of the Central Bureau of Investigation said the key planner in the conspiracy is believed to be a bespectacled man in his 30's who was photographed at the assassination site; the photographer who took the picture was one of the 17 people killed in the bomb blast on May 21.


Sports People: BASKETBALL; Rockets Invite Soviets
The starting guards from the 1990 Soviet Union national team are being invited to the summer camp of the Houston Rockets, General Manager STEVE PATTERSON said Friday.
SERGEI BAZAREVICH, 25 years old, and GUNDARS VETRA, 24, helped the Soviet team earn the bronze medal at the 1990 Goodwill Games and the silver at last year's world championships in Argentina. (AP)


Lisa Ryan Is Married to Peter Boyle
Lisa Margaret Ryan, a daughter of Mrs.
Michael M. Weatherly of Southport, Conn., and Cornelius T. Ryan of East Norwalk, Conn., was married yesterday at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport to Howarth Perry Boyle Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Boyle of Oberlin, Ohio.
The Rev.
Robert J. Miner performed the ceremony.
The bride, 27 years old, is a law student at Georgetown University.
She is magna cum laude graduate of Brown University.
Her father is a founding partner at Oxford Partners, a venture capital company in Stamford, Conn.


Quotation of the Day
"We're making progress on all of the major issues that are outstanding." -- Brent Scowcroft, national security adviser, describing negotiations on a treaty reducing long-range nuclear missiles.  [ 1:6. ]


Ideas &amp; Trends; B.C.C.I.'s Fall Shows Gaps In Policing Global Fraud
THE fall of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International has left a trail of scandal, billions of dollars in losses, tarnished reputations and unanswered questions.
The shadowy banking empire exploited holes in the net of global banking supervision for years.
Yet for banking regulators, there has been one measure of comfort: unlike notorious international banking failures in the past, the collapse of B.C.C.I. did not prompt a scare in the world's financial markets or banking system.
The coordinated swoop on July 5 by Britain and other countries to seize the bank's assets was a byproduct of reforms in international banking supervision in the wake of two previous major bank scandals, the 1974 failure of Germany's Bankhaus I.D.
Herstatt and the 1982 collapse of Italy's Banco Ambrosiano.
The worldwide seizure was timed just before the financial markets opened that morning.
"It relied on a very high degree of cooperaton by the central banks," said E. Gerald Corrigan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which orchestrates global banking regulation.


Boating; Sailors Are Reveling in Playing to Crowds at the Starting Line
A revival of racing among one-design sailboats has increased the size of fleets in the United States.
But all is not clear sailing.
With the growing numbers have come congested starting lines and headaches for race organizers.
Sailors set an attendance record last year in the Volvo Newport Regatta in Rhode Island.
Ninety-one J/24 Class sailboats, the largest gathering in the 12-year history of the international class, crossed the starting line at one time.
The 24-foot keelboats lined up along a quarter-mile imaginary starting line in Narragansett Bay.
The crush created at the line was the sailing equivalent of New Year's Eve in Times Square.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
NECESSARY ANGELS  Tradition and Modernity in Kafka, Benjamin, and Scholem.
By Robert Alter.
Harvard University with Hebrew Union College, $19.95.


The Vanishing Footnote
To the Editor:
As a new Ph.D. from the University of Chicago, I wish to assure Gertrude Himmelfarb that standards there are at least as onerous today as ever they were during the reign of Kate L. Turabian.


Practical Traveler; Tracing the Trail Of Black History
THE opening this summer of the Civil Rights Museum at the motel where the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in Memphis will add another site to a growing list of places where travelers may examine African-American history and heritage, the tragic as well as the glorious.
Following is an abbreviated list of prominent tourist sites of particular interest to blacks.
Addresses and phone numbers are given for ordering brochures or other information.


Blair Nichols Is Engaged To Wed Peter C. Chandler
Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Walter Nichols 3d of Katonah, N.Y., have made known the October wedding plans of their daughter Stephanne Blair Nichols and Peter Cromwell Chandler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen C. Chandler of Bethel, Me.
The prospective bride, 29 years old, is known as Blair.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is a vice president at the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in New York.


ONTO THE BOOKSHELF
I found it insulting to gay men that Edmund White's fine article "Out of the Closet, Onto the Bookshelf" (June 16) had to be undermined by the full-page illustration of a lavender book surrounded by numerous pansy flowers.
As most anyone over the age of 5 knows, a pansy has always been a derogatory term for an effeminate gay male.
Additionally, I was sorry that White made only a passing reference to gay women writers.
While he does mention classic authors like Virginia Woolf, he neglected to list any contemporary female writers -- they do exist (i.e., Rita Mae Brown, Sandra Scoppetone et al).
R.
MARLOWE
New York, N.Y.


Summary of Action in New York State Legislature's 214th Session
In the crush of activity at the end of its 214th session, the New York State Legislature approved measures to place strict limits on the hours that teen-agers may work, to allow terminally ill patients to use life insurance benefits to pay for medical treatment and to streamline the process for disciplining physicians.
But the session was so dominated by the state's budget problems that many significant pieces of legislation were overlooked.
And two laws that were expected to be renewed this year -- one that allowed cameras in state courts and another that required supermarkets to place prices on individual items -- were simply allowed to lapse.


Headliners; Finding New Tracks on Iran-Contra Trail
FOR many Americans, it has always been a little hard to swallow the Reagan Administration's version of the Iran-contra affair: a rogue operation run by a few zealous members of the National Security Council operating out of the White House basement without anyone else's knowledge.
Last week, the admissions of a former intelligence official led prosecutors up from the White House basement and out to Langley, Va.
The plea-bargained testimony of Alan D. Fiers Jr. indicated for the first time that some senior Central Intelligence Agency officials knew more they let on about how the Nicaraguan rebels secretly received arms purchased in part with profits from the covert sale of arms to Iran.
Mr.
Fiers, who directed the agency's operations in Central America between 1984 and 1986, said that he had learned of the diversion and told three of his superiors about it months before the scheme was publicly disclosed in November 1986.
Moreover, Mr.
Fiers said that Clair E. George, the agency's deputy director of operations and the C.I.A.'s No. 3 official, had instructed him to mislead Congress about how much the agency's senior officials knew about the operation.
A prosecution document alleges that when Mr.
Fiers told Mr.
George about the diversion, Mr.
George replied, "Now you are one of the handful of people who know this."


Review/City Opera; Grandiose Yet Intimate, A 'Turandot' Returns
The New York City Opera's 15-year-old production of "Turandot," with sets and costumes by Beni Montresor, has held up well despite, if not because of, recent competition from a Franco Zeffirelli extravaganza next door at the Metropolitan Opera.
Last seen in 1987, it was revived on Friday evening with new direction by Jonathan Eaton and new choreography by Shi Zheng Chen, both in their debuts with the company.
As before, the stage is filled to overflowing, and yet amid the grandiosity, each of the principal characters has moments of real intimacy.
This performance, moreover, was well sung in many pivotal roles.
It should have been a good evening, yet the lasting impression was of the ruckus raised in the pit under the baton of Guido Ajmone-Marsan.
Most of the time, the orchestra raised an opaque sonic curtain before the proscenium that some voices penetrated with difficulty, others hardly at all.
Even the chorus, in its first entry, was all but inaudible over the instruments.


Chess
In chess as in football (probably the most positional of physical sports), there are days when the maximum determined efforts by both sides fail to tip the balance; in football you get a tie, in chess, a draw.
In chess, the onlookers are cynically quick to criticize the players for shirking, for agreeing to the so-called "grandmaster draw" in which both players are so full of respect for each other that neither wants to risk anything and the game ends in a flaccid handshake before 20 moves are made.
Of course, that does happen, but not as often as chess audiences would like to think.
Much more often, the two players have gone at each other like fighting cocks, but the defense has subtly triumphed and brought the attack to a standstill.


Headliners; All in the Voice
Mary Hart may have been asking herself last week why it couldn't have been Barbara Walters, or maybe Vanna White.
In an article in The New England Journal of Medicine, Dr.
Venkat Ramani, a professor of neurology at the Albany Medical College, told of a highly unusual case in which a woman's epileptic seizures were triggered by the sound of Ms.
Hart's voice.
Neither Ms.
Hart nor her show, "Entertainment Tonight," were mentioned in the article, but Dr.
Ramani confirmed that his patient's "reflex seizures" were indeed brought on by Ms.
Hart's voice.
He said that when the patient first came to him he asked what set off the seizures.
"With great hesitation," he recalled, "she said 'You're not going to believe it.' " Dr.
Ramani said that her epilepsy predated her watching "Entertainment Tonight," and that the connection between the seizures and Ms.
Hart's voice was a mystery.
A spokeswoman for the show said that Ms.
Hart had no comment.


'Fences,' a Haunting Depiction of Family Turmoil
SHAKESPEARE aside, the state's professional summer theater season seems spare and trivial.
It takes a mighty play like "Fences" to lend it stature.
In an overdue New Jersey premiere, Montclair State College's Theaterfest is presenting August Wilson's prize-winning work, wisely if none too well.
Four years in evolution, from a staged reading in 1983 to a triumphant Broadway opening in 1987, with stops in five regional theaters along the way, "Fences" is the very model of the nurturing of a play, from partial fulfillment to near greatness.
The result can hardly have been so luminous if the original cast, which was headed by James Earl Jones and Mary Alice, had not been regrouped, at various intervals, over a two-year period, under the same director, Lloyd Richards.


Restaurant Workers at United Nations Strike
Virtually every day demonstrators shout across First Avenue to protest some crime or injustice in a faraway part of the world.
But in recent days several have rallied to protest what they say is an injustice much closer by -- at the United Nations itself.
Employees at the eight restaurants, cafeterias and coffee shops at the United Nations have gone on strike, charging unfair labor practices and calling for higher pay, better benefits and recognition as a union.


Contract Collusion? Some Think So
Though neither side is willing to make a definitive statement on the matter, National Football League teams and the representatives of players who are negotiating contracts with the various clubs suspect one another of collusion.
When the Players Association functioned as a union, it could pool salary information and then share it with players and their agents.
The N.F.L.
Management Council functioned in the same capacity for the league's teams.
Now that the Players Association has declared that it is no longer a union, it is not supposed to be a clearinghouse for salary information.
It denies that it is.
The management council also denies that it is supplying salary information to teams.


The Vanishing Footnote
To the Editor:
With all due respect to Gertrude Himmelfarb, I want to object to her appeal for more footnotes ("Where Have All the Footnotes Gone?," June 16).
When I was a young innocent at Harvard, I was dismayed to learn that one-third of the grade on my honors thesis on Cardinal Richelieu would be based not on anything I might say about Richelieu but on my mastery of what was called "the scholarly apparatus" -- footnotes, op. cit., cf., ibid. and all that.
There was no Kate L. Turabian, the University of Chicago dragon whom Miss Himmelfarb venerates, to enforce the system; the system enforced itself.


Q and A
Home Exchange Sources
Q.
Is there an agency that lists people interested in exchanging homes abroad and in the United States? -- B. Erb, Palmyra, Pa.


Postings: Digging Deep in the Region; High-Rent District
New Yorkers have long known that the privilege of living in their region costs them dearly.
New proof of that truism now comes from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, whose latest look at family spending patterns shows that residents of the New York region -- the city and 21 contiguous New York, New Jersey and Connecticut counties -- spend a lot more on housing than most Americans.
In the period covered by the most recent analysis, 1988 and 1989, residents of the region spent 40 percent more than the national average for housing.


Cunningham's Long-Range Plans
To the Editor:
In her article, Anna Kisselgoff raises the question of whether -- or which -- dance companies can (or should) survive the demise of their creators.


Nature Courses At College
For those longing to leave the urban landscape for a weekend of nature exploration, the Massachusetts Audubon Society at Arcadia will hold its 25th annual Focus: Outdoors Natural History Conference from Aug. 2 to 4 at the New England campus of Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass.
Adult nature enthusiasts may enroll for the weekend, where they can choose from two dozen courses .
Children from 6 to 11 years old can join the Nature Day Camp for games, field walks and campfires while their parents attend courses or go on treks.
There's also a nature nursery.


A Walker's Haven On the Coast of Devon
AT dusk, I liked to walk from our rented cottage down to Lynmouth's tiny harbor.
"Beware the twin honey pots of Lynton and Lynmouth," an English guidebook warned me before my first visit to these two small towns (combined pop. 2,100) in Exmoor on the North Devon coast.
I was intrigued by caveats, however, and once I saw Lynmouth, whose whitewashed and half-timbered cottages nestle at the foot of high hogback cliffs, I knew I would return again and again.
In high season, both Lynmouth and Lynton, a slightly larger town spread out on the plateau above, are full of vacationers who seek out the surrounding hills, moors and deep valleys of what has been called England's Little Switzerland.
Tourism is, in fact, the only significant local industry.
But in early summer or fall, the honey pots, sweeter than ever, do not attract so many buzzing tourists.
Last September, my husband and I settled happily a third time in Lynmouth, where, in addition to the pleasures of the village itself, we found we could enjoy all kinds of walking excursions, both short jaunts and longer hikes.


Cali, the 'Quiet' Drug Cartel, Profits by Accommodation
Translating the slogan "Support your local police" into bricks and mortar, the leaders of Cali's cocaine cartel reportedly helped pay for the tidy police posts that dot this Colombian city's middle-class neighborhoods in a drive to suppress street crime.
In contrast, the capos of the rival Medellin cocaine cartel adopted a different policy toward their city's police force last year: a $4,000 bounty for each officer killed.
By the time the offer was withdrawn, about 400 policemen in the Medellin area were dead.


Hoboken Night Life: Another View
It's unfortunate that the article about Hoboken (Hoboken Journal, "Night Life With 'Music Coming Out of Every Doorway,' " June 2) followed the young crowd of bar-hoppers but didn't mention what the people of the community think about the situation.
True, "residents of Hoboken don't mind visitors," as the article said, but not the types written about.
The fact is that many of us have been complaining for months about these young drunks who come into Hoboken on Friday and Saturday nights.
They scream obscenities all over our neighborhoods until 3 or 4 A.M., litter our streets with beer cans, break beer bottles all over our sidewalks, urinate in our hallways and ring bells of our senior citizens, waking them up and scaring them half to death in the middle of the night.


Birds Are Good Guests (Pretty Ones, Too)
ONE day while relaxing between outdoor chores, I detected some movement among the bright red impatiens in a flower border.
What was making the motion?
An awfully big bug?
As I watched carefully, I realized that it was a hummingbird darting from flower to flower.
The bird was so speedy and so small, it seemed to behave more like a huge insect.
The shy creature disappeared almost as quickly as it was spotted.
It could have visited the garden and never been noticed.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ANTIQUES EXHIBIT
Fifty-two exhibitors who are members of the Antiques Dealers of America will participate in the vetted antiques show at the Westchester County Center in White Plains from noon to 8 P.M.
Friday and Saturday and from noon to 5 P.M. next Sunday.


Q and A
Reallocation of Shares Question: I own two co-op apartments that have been combined.
The certificate of occupancy has been changed and it is now legally considered one unit.
But I am still paying two maintenance fees.
Am I entitled to a reduction in my maintenance now that I have one apartment instead of two? . . .
Janet Reyes, Manhattan  Answer: Probably not.
But you might check the bylaws to find out how share allocation and maintenance is determined.
In most co-ops, it is determined by a formula that considers size, location in the building and such amenities as balconies and terraces.
Even if your work to join the two units has been considerable, most of those variables probably have not changed.
According to Mary Ann Rothman, executive director of the Council of New York Cooperatives, it is not likely that the board of your co-op would be able to justify a reduction in your maintenance.
"There is no easy way around the issue of share allocation and absolute equity when it comes to maintenance distribution," said Mrs.
Rothman.
"When changes are made, shares just don't dissapear into outer space.
If a board reduced the maintenance in one apartment it would have to have increases somewhere else to compensate for the lost income."  'For Sale' Signs
Question: Is it true that in New York City only realty companies and real estate brokers, not homeowners, can post a "For Sale" sign on the front lawn of a house? . . .
Ike Friesem, Fresh Meadows, Queens Answer: No.
City regulations pertaining to "For Sale" signs in residential areas do not prohibit homeowners from putting out signs themselves.
However, there are other regulations regarding such signs.
The code permits small signs as long as they are for "the direction or convenience of the public." The sign must refer to the property where it appears and it cannot be more than five square feet (2 1/2 by 2 feet, for example).
Rent Regulation Rules
Question: I would like some printed information on New York City's rent control and rent stabilization.
Where would I go? . . .
Robert Hotman, New Hyde Park, N.Y.
Answer: To the offices of the state's Division of Housing and Community Renewal, the agency that has jurisdiction over rent regulation.
The main New York office is at Gertz Plaza at 92-31 Union Hall Boulevard in Jamaica, Queens.
You can get a copy of the 1990 Guide to Rent Regulations.
Although complete, the language is technical and not easy to read without a familiarity with legal language.
More readable, however, are Fact Sheets that the Department of Housing and Community Renewal publishes.
There are 24 bulletins providing information on on matters ranging from rent overcharge complaints to the legal procedure for evictions.
The agency is now preparing a new brochure called "Twenty Questions: Answers to Tenants' Most Frequently Asked Questions on Rights and Protections," which it expects to start distributing after Labor Day.
"The new booklet has been designed to be the most up-to-date, acessable and user friendly package of information so far," said Alan Hammerman, a spokesman for the agency.
"It will be available both in English and Spanish versions."
There are no charges for any of these materials and they are available in the rent administration offices in each borough as well as at the main office.


A Fall Wedding For Ellen Hughes
October wedding plans for Ellen Zeller Hughes and David Joel Mushlitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Mushlitz of Newburgh, Ind., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Hughes of New Canaan, Conn.
Miss Hughes, 28 years old, is the marketing services manager at Golf Digest in New York.
She is a Lafayette College graduate.
Her father is a group vice president of the Hearst Corporation in New York.


HOW SHORT IS TOO SHORT?
I am grateful to Barry Werth for making the point that short children ultimately are taking human growth hormone "because there is H.G.H. to give them."
It's not just Genentech.
If we as a society didn't buy into this silliness about physical perfection, Genentech wouldn't have the lucrative market it does.
MARY JOHNSON
Hortonville, N.Y.


Germany
To the Editor: I was surprised to note in your article about Potsdam (Travel, June 9) that no mention was made of the landscape architect and designer who was responsible for the magnificent gardens and grounds of Sans Souci under Frederick William III and IV.
Peter Joseph Lenne (1789-1866) was born into a family of landscape designers and during his lifetime had a hand in planning innumerable parks and gardens in Germany, Austria and parts of what is now Poland.
He was general director of the Royal Prussian Gardens and was responsible for the total redesigning of the grounds of Sans Souci from the 1820's to the 1850's; indeed, many of Schinkel's buildings were designed to allow full vistas of Lenne's gardens.
HELEN R. KAHN Montreal
Mr. Bernier replies:
Unfortunately Lenne's designs are hard to see today, in part because they were severely modified between 1880 and 1914, in part because the parks at Potsdam have scarcely been kept up at all.


The Executive Computer; What's in I.B.M.'s and Apple's Gunsights? Microsoft
The real significance of the recently announced treaty between the International Business Machines Corporation and Apple Computer Inc., some analysts say, is that it is likely to end the industry's dependence on the Microsoft Corporation and the Intel Corporation, which started out supplying key components of the original I.B.M.
PC and eventually wrested control of the personal computer industry and its profits.
Since I.B.M. introduced its PC 10 years ago, personal computers and software have grown into a $60 billion annual market.
But I.B.M.'s share of the PC market has been reduced by hungry rivals, and Apple has been hurt by its inability to gain a foothold in the corporate market.
Through their alliance, they hope to reassert control.
In the proposed deal, Apple would become, in essence, a software company competing directly against Microsoft.
I.B.M. would provide the microprocessor technology for a generation of powerful desktop business computers.
The chip itself is to be built by Intel's archrival, Motorola Inc., as well as by I.B.M. itself.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
May 91
Apr. 91
May 90
New York
3,104
2,827
3,302
New Jersey
1,313
1,447
1,795
Connecticut
778
702
945
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.86
9.88
10.32
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.29
7.30
8.56
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.69
9.72
10.10
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.34
7.31
8.26
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.72
9.74
10.18
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.14
7.14
8.48
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
10.02
10.11
10.49
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.73
7.71
8.65
*2Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
6.40
6.36
8.06
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.23
9.23
9.83
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Baseball; Yanks Hit .500 and Then Gaze Higher
Ninety-six days after the season began, the Yankees finally scaled their personal mountain, reaching .500 and then looking over the top, where they saw the Toronto Blue Jays.
There was no time to rest.
"I don't want to talk about .500," Don Mattingly said late Friday night after the Yankees had beaten the California Angels, 2-1, in 10 innings to reach 40-40 with their 12th victory in 15 games.


Citing Caseload, Federal Judges Assail 2 Provisions in Crime Bill
Under the crime bill that passed the Senate on Thursday, thousands of crimes involving violence and drugs would become Federal offenses.
That has already brought opposition from Federal judges concerned that drug dealers and killers would crowd their courtrooms, pushing out the civil rights, antitrust and fraud cases that are their bread and butter.
Two of the bill's provisions, both sponsored by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, would create new categories of Federal crimes: homicides committed with a firearm and possession of a firearm while committing a violent crime or trafficking in drugs.
The death penalty would be an option for the homicide; the other crime would carry a mandatory sentence of 10 to 30 years.


Of Course Race Governed Bush's Nomination; Blessing in Disguise?
To the Editor:
The retirement of Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall may be seen as a blow to liberals, as your June 28 front-page headline states, but in the long run it may prove a blessing in disguise to their cause.


Campus Life: Georgia; Student Paper Files Suit For Access to Hearings
A lawsuit seek ing to force Uni versity of Georgia officials to open student disciplinary hearings and records to the public was filed here this month by The Red and Black, the university's student-run newspaper.
Jennifer Squillante, the editor in chief of the newspaper, which receives no university financing, said the suit stemmed from the university's refusal to allow student reporters access to hearings and documents involving charges of fraternity hazing.


On Thomas's Climb, Ambivalence About Issue of Affirmative Action
Judge Clarence Thomas, who came to prominence as a fierce black critic of racial preference programs, was admitted to Yale Law School under an explicit affirmative action plan with the goal of having blacks and other minority members make up about 10 percent of the entering class, university officials said.
Under the program, which was adopted in 1971, the year Judge Thomas applied, blacks and some Hispanic applicants were evaluated differently from whites, the officials said.
Nonetheless, they were not admitted unless they met standards devised to predict they could succeed at the highly competitive school.


New York Farmers Vote to Raise Milk Prices
A price increase on milk that was approved by New York farmers this week has caused turmoil in the dairy industry, one of the state's largest agricultural businesses.
In a vote counted on Thursday, dairy farmers supported the State Agriculture Commissioner's recommendation of an increase of about 6 cents a gallon on the milk they sell for bottling.
The 6,377-to-2,927 decision came after farmers petitioned for higher prices several months ago.
It was the first time that they had been asked to vote on an increase.


Listen to the Baroque Mocking Bird
To the Editor:
Apropos "Listen to the Backhoe Bird" (editorial, July 5), about the mocking bird's powers of mimicry: Last month I went home to Virginia, for the wedding of my nephew.
The Episcopal ceremony was performed on the deck of their new house overlooking Gaston Lake, in upper North Carolina.
The only music was a Telemann Suite and Purcell's Trumpet Voluntary, played on a flute by a young woman.


Town Official on L.I. Acquitted
A municipal official on Long Island has been acquitted of charges of income-tax evasion and taking an unlawful gratuity, and is said to be considering returning to his old job.
When the official, Robert Francis, Commissioner of Planning and Economic Development in the Town of Hempstead, was indicted last year, Town Presiding Supervisor Joseph Mondello transferred him to a post in the Commerce and Industry Department at the same salary, $92,405 a year, pending the outcome of the case.


Style Makers; Joni Carter, Computer Artist
Joni Carter, who uses computers to create images of athletes, may not be famous, but her art soon will be.
Yesterday, stamps honoring the 1992 Olympic Games went on sale at post offices nationwide  [ Stamps column, page 42 ] , and the five images on the stamps are hers.
About 190 million stamps were printed, Ms.
Carter said.
Her fee for all five images was "$13,750 total." she said.
"The U.S. Postal Service pays the same amount to any artist." There are no royalties, nor can the artist sign the work.
"But you get a lot of prestige."


Ellen Shumaker Weds E. F. Evans
Ellen Cleveland Shumaker, a daughter of Dorothy M. H. Shumaker of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday at her mother's home to Edward Forrest Evans, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Earl Evans Jr. of Mountainside, N.J.
The Rev.
Richardson W. Schell, an Episcopal priest and the headmaster of the Kent School, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Evans is a consultant in marketing, communications and design in Darien.
She graduated from the Kent School, as did her husband, and from Boston University.


Hanif Kureishi Trades Pen For the Director's Lens
In a West London house whose cream-colored elegance has been temporarily disrupted by camera crews, trailers and technology, the screenwriter Hanif Kureishi ("My Beautiful Laundrette") is becoming a director.
Mr.
Kureishi watches avidly as the actor Roshan Seth -- playing Dr.
Bubba, a teacher of Islamic Sufi principles -- leads 16 performers in a session of Sufi dancing.
Urging informality, Mr.
Seth speaks to the assemblage during a break in filming: "It might be even nicer," he says, "if it doesn't look like a class." Mr.
Kureishi nods, the cast forms a circle and another scene of "London Kills Me" begins to take shape.


Bravo Iowa for Banning Teen-Age Smoking!
To the Editor:
You report that as of July 1, Iowa's legislature has put into effect a law barring those younger than 18 from smoking (news article, July 1).
Violation of this law carries a $100 fine, a painful bite out of the budget of almost all teen-agers.
Iowa should be commended for its initiative and encouraged to enforce the new law.


An Anti-Gang Movie Opens to Violence
Gunfire and pandemonium broke out at movie theaters around the nation Friday night at the opening of an urban drama with an anti-gang message.
Much of the violence appeared to have been started by rival gangs, and much of it took place in Los Angeles, where the film, "Boyz N the Hood," is set.
But a man was fatally shot after a midnight showing in Riverdale, Ill., near Chicago, and at least 23 people were wounded in incidents from Seattle to Minneapolis to Commack, L.I.


Margaret Frank Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Lloyd Frank of New York have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Dr.
Margaret L. Frank and William I. Echt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Echt of Fort Worth.
The prospective bride, 31 years old, is a member of the research faculty in the department of obstetrics and gynecology at the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.
A summa cum laude graduate of the University of Maine, she received a master's degree in health science from New Hampshire College and a doctorate in public-health management and policy from the University of Texas.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Chapin Flattau &amp; Klimpl.
Her mother, Beatrice S. Frank, is a professor at the New York University School of Law.


About Cars; New Faces At the Top
Placing first in the J. D. Power quality index is akin to winning an Emmy, and Honda's Acura division has managed to star for the last four years.
For 1991, though, there are two new faces on stage, and they knocked Acura down to fourth place.
The new players are Lexus from Toyota and Infiniti from Nissan, and they completed their first year of business by tying for top place in Power's prestigious Customer Satisfaction Index.


Food; Les Delices Did Not Delight
I WAS 9 WHEN MY PARENTS MOVED TO Paris and insisted that I go with them.
It took only a few days to discover that I now lived in a city where there was absolutely nothing to eat.
I had whined, sobbed, begged and sulked, knowing that I was leaving, perhaps forever, my best friend, Cercie Miller, and "The Man From U.N.C.L.E." But until I got to Paris, it was beyond my fourth-grade imagination to consider a universe without Bosco, cheeseburgers or SpaghettiOs.


Low-Voltage Lighting Easy to Install Outside
LOW-VOLTAGE outdoor lighting is easy to install, and also safe, efficient and inexpensive to operate.
Although it does not provide bright light, it furnishes sufficient illumination to accent architecture, improve security and light walkways, patios and similar areas for safety.
Hardware stores, home and garden centers and discount department stores carry low-voltage lighting kits that include basic components and instructions.
Before buying a kit, evaluate what is needed and plan a lighting layout so that you know what items are required, including accessories.


Airlines
To the Editor: Your readers are no doubt aware that a price war recently broke out between British Airways and United Airlines on the Kennedy International-Heathrow route.
The lowest (nonrefundable) fares dropped by more than 15 percent.
I was surprised to learn that while both airlines had similar fare structures, they differed greatly in the treatment of nonrefundable tickets purchased before the reduction.
United was willing to reissue the ticket at the lower fare, giving the customer a refund of the difference, if the itinerary qualified for the new fare.
British Airways would not reissue the ticket or refund the difference.
ROBERT V. KOHN New York, N.Y.
John W. Lampl, director of public affairs, U.S.A., for British Airways, replies: On June 5 we changed our policy.
We now allow V-class ticket holders to trade down and receive a refund for the difference in fare so long as they do not change their itineraries.


2 Would-Be Spies Bumble and British Foil Scheme
The M.I.5 security service emerged briefly from its customary secrecy this week, showing itself to be almost as bumbling as the two British would-be spies it foiled in a plot to sell nuclear submarine secrets to the Soviet Union.
M.I.5, which only came out of the cold three years ago to be legally acknowledged by the British Government as "the Security Service," routinely monitors calls to the Soviet Embassy in Kensington Park in London.
That is what people in the intelligence business say, but the service would never admit it.


Barcelona
To the Editor: After reading the letter about being mugged and robbed in Barcelona (Travel, June 16), I had to follow up with my own.
While photographing the Cathedral in Barcelona I was tackled by two men and robbed of most of my camera equipment.
Since I spoke no Spanish, the Barcelona police were of no help and sent me to the United States Consulate.
There I waited in line to file a report and was told that I was the sixth or eighth to report a similar incident that morning.
The report even included a standard form with blocks to check listing common circumstances.
I quickly found one that exactly fit my situation.


Birds Are Good Guests (Pretty Ones, Too)
ONE day while relaxing between outdoor chores, I detected some movement among the bright red impatiens in a flower border.
What was making the motion?
An awfully big bug?
As I watched carefully, I realized that it was a hummingbird darting from flower to flower.
The bird was so speedy and so small, it seemed to behave more like a huge insect.
The shy creature disappeared almost as quickly as it was spotted.
It could have visited the garden and never been noticed.


Keyboard Quirks


Youth Accused of Raping Child
A Long Island teen-ager has been arrested and charged with raping a 4-year-old girl his grandmother was baby-sitting, the police said.
Reginald Alexandre, 16 years old, of 222 Urban Street in New Cassel, was arrested on Friday and charged with first-degree rape, said Detective Thomas Washington of the Nassau County police.
Mr.
Alexandre is accused of raping the child on Thursday at his home.
The girl was treated at Nassau County Medical Center.


Janet A. Blume Weds A. F. Bower
Dr.
Janet A. Blume, an associate professor of engineering at Brown University, was married last evening in Providence, R.I., to Dr.
Allan Francis Bower, an assistant university lecturer in engineering at Cambridge University.
The Rev.
Charles Edwards, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the nondenominational ceremony at the Biltmore Hotel.
The bride, 29 years old, is the daughter Dr.
Sheila Blume and Dr.
Martin Blume of Sayville, L.I.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received a doctorate in applied mechanics from the California Institute of Technology.
Her father is the deputy director of the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, L.I.
Her mother is the medical director of addiction programs at South Oaks Hospital in Amityville, L.I.


Review/Dance; A Benefit With Humor And Mystery
A fine assortment of solos helped make the second and last of the "Full Circle" programs especially exciting on Thursday night at the Joyce Theater.
Both events, produced by Gina Gibney, were benefits for Women in Need, an organization founded in 1982 to help homeless women and their families.
Claire Porter deftly satirized all charitable appeals in an excerpt from "Fund Raiser." Portraying a well-meaning but often bumbling speaker, she fumbled with her notes and fussed with her reading glasses, then employed wile after rhetorical wile -- from threatening the audience with belligerence to luring it with sexy slinkings -- in the hope of aiding whatever worthy cause her character represented.
The audience at this particular fund-raising gala quite understandably adored "Fund Raiser."


Business Diary/July 7-12
COMPANIES The Dismantling of Pan Am


Mark A. Rosenfeld, Exporter Detained By Iraqis, Dies at 54
Mark Allan Rosenfeld, a businessman who exported motor vehicles and who was taken prisoner by Iraqi soldiers while in Kuwait on business last year, died on Thursday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 54 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of lymphoma related to AIDS, his family said.


Whatever Became of . . .
To the Editor:
In his article, Theodore Roszak asks what the name was of the star of the cliffhanger serial "The Perils of Nyoka." It was, and is, Kay Aldridge.
If Mr.
Roszak had read my book "Lure of the Tropics," he would have learned all about her; in fact, Miss Aldridge was gracious enough to write the introduction to it.


Harvey E. Chappell, Real-Estate Broker, 72
Harvey E. Chappell, a Long Island real-estate broker for four decades, died on Monday at Huntington Hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in Huntington, L.I.
He died of a heart attack and a stroke, his family said.


To Give Bastille Day Its Due, Brioche
IT'S Bastille Day. Let them eat cake. Or, one might translate literally and say gateau.
Actually, the term is brioche.
Jean Jacques Rousseau, the 18th-century French author, recalled the Queen's "thoughtless saying" as "Qu'ils mangent de la brioche." So to give the day its due, it should be brioche.


Miss Gamberdella to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Gamberdella of Hamden, Conn., have made known plans for a September wedding for their daughter Vanessa Gamberdella and Mark Gerard Carroll, a son of Alice Johnston Carroll of Greenwich, Conn., and Charles R. Carroll Jr. of Jupiter, Fla.
Miss Gamberdella, 28 years old, is a nurse coordinator with the Aetna Life and Casualty Company in Middletown, Conn.
She graduated from Boston College.
Mr.
Carroll, 29, is an account representative for the Metro-Mobile Corporation, a cellular telephone company in Norwalk, Conn.
He is a graduate of Lynchburg College.


Gabrielle G. Stanton Is Married in England
Gabrielle Gail Stanton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Stanton of South Orange, N.J., was married yesterday in Oxford, England, to Harry M. Werksman Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Werksman of Rancho Mirage, Calif.
The Rev.
Stephen Tucker, an Anglican priest, performed the ceremony in the chapel of New College at Oxford University.
The bride, 24 years old, was until recently the national publicity coordinator in New York for the Public Broadcasting Service.
She is a graduate of the Kent Place School and Barnard College.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.


Kerstin A. Kennedy to Marry Lieut. Patrick Boyer
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Stanley Kennedy of Danbury, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kerstin Aileen Kennedy, to Second Lieut.
Patrick Michael Boyer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael R. Boyer of Westport, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Kennedy, 20 years old, graduated cum laude from Marymount College.
Her fiance, 22, graduated from the United States Military Academy and is attending the Army Flight School at Fort Rucker, Ala.


Of Course Race Governed Bush's Nomination
To the Editor:
How dare President Bush insult the intelligence of the American people by asserting that race played no role in his selection of Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court (front page, July 2).
Regardless of Judge Thomas's qualifications, it cannot be seriously argued that the selection of a man of color following the resignation of the Court's first and only Justice of color is a coincidence.


U.S. AND SOVIETS REPORT PROGRESS ON NUCLEAR PACT
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh, made progress today toward completing the treaty to reduce long-range nuclear missiles, but by tonight were still unable to announce agreement on the accord.
"We're making progress on all of the major issues that are outstanding," the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, said in an interview broadcast on the Cable News Network.
Mr.
Scowcroft, who was in Kennebunkport, Me., with President Bush, added, "While we have not come to closure yet, there is still reason for encouragement."


Enough Reruns Of McEnroe-Borg
To the Sports Editor:
The NBC Wimbledon tennis was super, particularly when one has the opportunity to turn off the sound of Jimbo's pontificating.
But the coverage comes to a crescendo (for me) when the 1981 McEnroe-Borg match is stuffed down my tennis throat again.
Enough already!
ALBERT CULLUM Brockton, Mass.


Jill Rosenfeld and Mitchell Silverman Are Wed
Jill Staci Rosenfeld, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin E. Rosenfeld of North Woodmere, L.I., was married last evening at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., to Mitchell Lee Silverman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Silverman of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Silverman, 24 years old and a graduate of the University of Hartford, is studying for a master's degree in early childhood education at Long Island University.
Her father is a first vice president in the Hewlett, L.I., office of Gruntal &amp; Company, stock and bond brokers in New York.
Her mother, Phyliss Rosenfeld, is a real-estate broker with Marjorie Hausman Inc. in Cedarhurst, L.I.


Lucy Eden Prager Plans Fall Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Prager of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lucy Eden Prager, to Benjamin Weintraub, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Weintraub, also of New York.
A fall wedding is planned.
Ms.
Prager, 30 years old, graduated from the Spence School and Princeton University She recently received an M.B.A. from Columbia University and is to join the Lederle Laboratories division of American Cyanamid Company in Wayne, N.J., as a marketing associate this month.
Her father, a lawyer, is a former president of the Municipal Art Society.
Her mother, Annabelle Prager, is a writer and illustrator of children's books.
She is the founder of InterSchool Orchestras, a nonprofit organization that provides instrumental programs for school children.


New Life in Cafes Of Eastern Berlin
THE grand cafes that once glittered along the Unter den Linden -- the Bauer, Cafe Westminster, Victoria-Cafe -- are long gone, victims of Allied bombing during World War II and socialist urban renewal afterward.
But the niceties of coffeehouse culture are beginning to stage a quiet comeback in the heart of East Berlin now that the Wall is down.
"Ossies," as Easterners are known, only hope that one day they will be able to afford them as easily as "Wessies" do now.
Indeed it is Westerners, West German, West European and American tourists and business people, who tend to fill east side cafes these days as the establishments throw off decades of central planning to experiment with ideas of their own.
The most noticeable change is in the quality of food and beverages offered.
Gone, for example, are the bitter ersatz coffees, the weak Chinese teas, the counterfeit cola drinks, the sugar lumps that refused to dissolve.
In their place are Western products whose higher prices insure better quality but also serve to erect a new wall, a financial barrier that many Easterners cannot hope to surmount in the near future.


Myths Translated Into Weavings
THE exhibition entitled "Costume as Communication," currently at the Jersey City Museum, tells its story in the silent voices of hand-woven textiles.
Mythical animals and ancient signs have been translated into the bright threads of more than 100 weavings from Peru, Bolivia, Guatemala and Mexico.
As a Guatemalan poet, Miguel Angel Asturias, once wrote of Mayan weaving: "So many symbols, spells, sayings, stars and speculations are warped in their cloth."


The Region; The Libraries, Squeezed by Hard Times, Shut Children Out
AS an institution, the New York City public library may appear to be hallowed, but at the same time it is also handicapped.
In the competition for clemency in budget cuts, the three library systems that serve New Yorkers with food for thought cannot quantify their contribution to improving urban life as other departments claim by fighting crime, extinguishing fire, coping with disease and appeasing hunger.
The library is about quality of life, that tenuous attribute that makes the difference between the city as a random congregation of masses and the city as a civilized expression of society.
It is a difficult point to underscore, and the New York, the Queens Borough and the Brooklyn public library systems have made it in a barely survivable condition, in the light of the final budget figures announced recently.
Even with the partial restoration of proposed cuts, the three systems are suffering a slash of nearly $25 million in the money they will be able to allot for books, staff, programs and hours for the city's 202 branch circulating libraries, as well as for central and research units.


Auto Racing; New Leader Sets Sights On Restructured CART
Picture the National Basketball Association with no salary cap or any other cost controls, and with its showpiece event -- the championship final -- being run by an entirely different league.
That is the kind of sports organization that A. William Stokkan took over a little more than a year ago when he became chairman and chief EXecutive officer of Championship Auto Racing Teams, the governing body for Indy-car racing.


Big New Casino For Las Vegas
MGM Grand Hotel has announced plans for the construction of a $910 million entertainment and resort complex in Las Vegas that will include the world's largest casino, a 5,800-room hotel and a 35-acre amusement park based on the MGM back lot.
The MGM Grand Hotel and Theme Park, being built by Kirk Kerkorian, whose company also owns MGM Grand Airline, will feature a roller coaster and a carousel of slot machines shaped like cartoon characters that perform mechanical tricks when winning combinations are reached.
The complex will also have three water rides, a wedding chapel, nine restaurants, two theaters seating a combined total of 2,500 people and a 15,000-seat arena for sporting events, concerts and trade shows.
The hotel will have more than 5,000 rooms and 800 suites.


Katherine B. Mast, Broker, 84
Katherine Byrne Mast, one of the first female sugar brokers in New York City, died on Wednesday in a nursing home in Devon, Pa.
She was 84 years old and lived in Naples, Fla.
Mrs.
Mast died of Parkinson's disease, said her nephew, John Ferguson of Greenwich, Conn.


Choirs Asking One and All to Join In
PLAYING in an instrumental ensemble is beyond the ability of most people, but almost anybody can sing and for the next few weeks two choirs are holding summer sings.
The Westchester Choral Society has chosen Haydn's "Creation" for its session at 8 P.M.
Tuesday at the Hoff-Barthelson School in Scarsdale, with a triple-header (Mozart's "Ave Verum," the Vivaldi "Gloria" and Haydn's "Lord Nelson" Mass) closing out the season on July 23.
Judith Clurman and Daniel Paget are the respective guest conductors; the $5 admission charge includes the use of scores, and even refreshments.
Those who prefer just to listen are equally welcome.
For information, call 693-2453.


Kim Kachulis Wed to Terence Canavan
Kim Kachulis, the daughter of Joann Narkis of Middlebury, Conn., and Chris Kachulis of Waterbury, Conn., was married yesterday in Middlebury to Terence Christopher Canavan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Terence Coonan Canavan of Chatham Township, N.J.
The Rev.
Stephen P. Natsis performed the Greek Orthodox ceremony at St.
Margaret's Chapel at the Westover School.
Mrs.
Canavan, 30 years old, is an assistant treasurer of the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She and the bridegroom are graduates of Oberlin College.
Her father is a real-estate broker at Norman Ltd. in Watertown, Conn.
Her mother teaches English at the Pomperaug High School in Southbury, Conn.


New Voices From Latinolandia Whisper in America's Ear
I am Hispanic and an artist.
They are both of profound importance to me.
But until now, very few people have asked my opinion about what they mean.
I was certainly both before "Mambo Mouth," and its existence does not suddenly make me a Latin oracle.
Yet all of a sudden my opinion seems to matter.
Even though I am one voice.
In the Age of Marketing, John Leguizamo has achieved shelf life.
For how long may even be up to me.
What a concept.
Everyone in this country is a product and must be labeled for proper marketing and distribution.
Especially when comparative shopping is the rule: he's the Hispanic Eric Bogosian, the male Whoopi Goldberg, the non-singing Frank Sinatra, the non-athletic Jose Canseco.
For me it was never like that.
I used to put my own spin on America's need to label people -- I would rename my world, make it Latinocentric, a place where I was equal.
Some of my historical remakes were Vincent Van Gomez, Franklin Delano Rodriguez and Martinez Luther King.


Stacey Mundt and Robert Womsley Jr. Marry
Stacey Corbin Mundt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry M. Mundt of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to Robert Brand Womsley Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Womsley of Dayton, Ohio.
The Rev.
Anne B. Kimball performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
The bride, 24 years old, was until recently an account executive at the Chicago office of the Bozell advertising agency.
She and the bridegroom, 27, are graduates of Vanderbilt University.
Her father is the international consulting partner in KPMG International, management consultants in New York and Amsterdam.


Best Little Bank? Or Banc?
To the Editor:
Your article ("The Best Little Bank in America," June 30) did not answer an interesting question about Banc One: Why our name seems to keep getting misspelled in that it appears as Bank One and Banc One.
The reason is that Ohio law only permits operating banks to use the word "bank" in their names.
Holding companies, which own banks but do not operate as a bank, must use "banc." Therefore our operating banks are called Bank One.
Our holding companies and other subsidiaries are called Banc One.
JOHN A. RUSSELL  Columbus, Ohio, July 10
The author is a vice president of the Banc One Corporation.


A Day For Reflections, Puddles and Not Much Else


Miss Zaldastani Weds James Napier 3d
Elizabeth Reily Zaldastani, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Othar Zaldastani of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married there yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer to James Campbell Napier 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Napier Jr. of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Stephen J. White and the Rev.
Samuel S. Rodman 3d performed the ceremony.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from Brown University, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Dartmouth College.
She is to join General Mills in Minneapolis as an assistant marketing manager in September.
She was presented at the Boston Cotillion in 1982.
Her father is the chairman of Zaldastani Associates, a consulting engineering concern in Boston.


The Vanishing Footnote
To the Editor:
My adored aunt Kate Turabian was my mother's dearest friend for 82 years.
Aunt Kate herself was financially unable to attend the University of Chicago.
But without personally experiencing the rigors of a formal education, she created a standard against which students throughout the world were judged.
It is true that she was known as Terrible Kate on the University of Chicago campus, but only because she insisted on compliance with her exacting standards.
She was an erudite woman with an extraordinary breadth of knowledge.
BETTY HEADLAND OOSTENBRUG  Hinsdale, Ill.


Where the Food Outshines the Service
SUMMER in Bayville has an Italian accent this year.
A new Italian seafood restaurant, Aragosta, has opened across the street from Ransom Beach.
Diners can enjoy spectacular sunsets and watch parades of beachgoers in this cool elegant oasis.
The two focuses in the spacious airy blue-and-white dining rooms are pictures of brilliantly hued sailboats and an icy display of fresh seafood.


Monica Melady to Wed Jeffrey Micklos
Ambassador and Mrs.
Thomas Patrick Melady of Rome have made known the engagement of their daughter Monica Belisle Melady to Jeffrey George Micklos, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward F. Micklos of Trumbull, Conn.
A wedding in August 1992 is planned.
The prospective bride, 23 years old, and her fiance, 24, are 1989 graduates of Villanova University.
She is studying for a master's degree in social work at Catholic University of America, where the future bridegroom is a law student.


Football; Questions Arise as Handley Takes Control of Giants
For eight years, the man who made the Giants go was Bill Parcells.
He yelled at his players.
He cajoled them.
He needled them and laughed with them and found ways to get them to play their best.
He produced six winning seasons and two Super Bowl titles.
But the job wore him down and two months ago he quit.
Tomorrow, a new head coach, Ray Handley, will be there when the Super Bowl champion Giants open training camp on the Fairleigh Dickinson University campus in Florham Park and Madison, N.J.
And everyone will compare Handley with Parcells.


The World; Trade Embargoes: Do They Work?
A lot of attention was given to economic sanctions here last week -- the lifting by President Bush of sanctions against South Africa, a vote in Congress to impose high tariffs against China and the nagging question of whether anything short of violence can bring Saddam Hussein to heel.
But for all of that, the lessons America can draw from its experience with sanctions remain unclear.
Sanctions have been used by the United States 77 times since World War II but they have been applied unevenly, administered chaotically and lifted haphazardly.
Their goals and duration have varied widely.


The Vanishing Footnote
To the Editor:
I applaud Gertrude Himmelfarb's observations on disturbing trends in footnotes, endnotes and no notes.
Though as an author I have long been pliant in regard to the form imposed upon documentation, permitting editors to set style according to current fashions, I have recently been impelled to resist their dictates.
The cause of my new militancy is an editorial fad that impairs content.


Postings: Roosevelt Island; Tennis by the Tram
Hoping to capitalize on a growing interest in tennis and improved transportation to Roosevelt Island, developers have broken ground for the Roosevelt Island Racquet Club, with 11 dome-covered courts and a 7,000-square-foot clubhouse.
The club is scheduled to open in October on a two-acre site on the New York State-owned island directly under the Queensboro Bridge.
"This is the first business on Roosevelt Island that is designed to attract people from Manhattan," said Skip Hartman, one of the developers.
Mr.
Hartman and a partner, Robert Kelton, have obtained the use of the site in an 11-year concession agreement with the state.
The club is next to the Roosevelt Island tram station and 600 feet from the island's new subway station, its first such link with midtown.


Anonymous, Sequestered Jury Asked in Gotti Trial
Asserting that John Gotti tries to kill witnesses and obstruct justice, Federal prosecutors have requested an anonymous and sequestered jury for his trial on racketeering charges.
The request was disclosed in documents last week in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, where the trial is to begin on Sept. 23.
The charges include an allegation that Mr.
Gotti became boss of the Gambino crime family by ordering the murder of Paul Castellano.


Campus Life: Columbia; 'Ombuds Officer' Named to Broaden Grievance Options
Columbia University last week named its first "ombuds officer" as a reference point on campus for people who have grievances within the university and are looking for options to deal with them.
The new ombuds officer, Marsha Wagner, who has worked at Columbia for 16 years and currently heads the East Asian Library, will begin the assignment on Nov. 1 after she defines the Ombuds Office's functions and publicizes them.


A PERSISTENT AMERICAN YEARNING
I've often wondered why we always worry about everyone else's backyard when ours is such a mess.
My conclusion: Children told to clean their rooms usually occupy themselves with other things first, leaving undone the chore at hand.
And we are a nation of children.
How long can you call someone a baby boomer before he starts acting like one?
PETER DURANTINE
York, Pa.


Inside a Disappearing Country
BERLIN JOURNAL
1989-1990.
By Robert Darnton.
Illustrated. 352 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.
AFTER THE WALL
East Meets West in the New Berlin.
By John Borneman.
Illustrated. 258 pp.
New York: Basic Books.


Headliners; In Reverse
Rudolph W. Giuliani can keep the cap he was wearing when he left office, but he may have to give back some of the feathers.
As United States Attorney in Manhattan in the mid-80's, Mr.
Giuliani made headlines by bringing insider trading cases against a slew of Wall Street executives, but many of the convictions from those cases have been reversed.
Last week, the court threw out the conviction of John A. Mulheren Jr., who was found guilty last year of of conspiring with Ivan F. Boesky to manipulate stock prices.
In throwing out the case against Mr.
Mulheren, who was sentenced to a year and a day in prison and fined $1.6 million, the court said the evidence against him was "threadbare" and that the verdict "defies reason." Some lawyers said this and other reversals cast a shadow on Mr.
Giuliani's tenure as a prosecutor.
But Mr.
Giuliani noted that he was no longer in office when cases were tried.
"It's silly to hold me responsible for errors made after I left the U.S. Attorney's office," he said.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SHARKEY'S KID  A Memoir. By Leroy Ostransky. Morrow, $23.


The World; India Peers at Its Future With a Sense of Gloom
THE monsoon rains have failed to arrive on time in northern India, a bleak sign for the nation's food crop and an ominous portent for the new Government.
With temperatures hovering around 110 degrees, electricity and water supplies in the capital disappeared for hours in recent days.
As India's 10th Parliament opened last week, the newly elected lawmakers hugged each other, exchanged greetings and placed garlands of flowers around their leaders' shoulders.
But the mood was decidedly sour.
"All of us have proved unequal to the challenges that are before the nation," grumbled Chandra Shekhar, the former Prime Minister.
"If the leadership fails at this hour, I think we are entering into an era of total uncertainty. I do not want to be a prophet of doom, but the situation will be beyond redemption if this time we should fail."


With Maturity Comes Compassion
Our son who has Down sydrome has certainly encountered his share of student cruelty in the form of teasing, name calling, ostracism and students putting him up to do foolish or embarrassing things  [ "Schools Try to Reduce Acts of Student Cruelty," June 2 ] .
This was much more prevalent in middle school and, thank goodness, seems to have improved quite a bit now that he is in high school.
A colleague of mine at Sesame Street once took particular interest in Jason, showing him around the studio and taking time to explain many of the technical aspects of the production.
He came to me later and shared why he had felt the strong need to spend time with Jason and make sure he had a good time at the studio.


Ryan's Bid for Victory No. 308 Is Foiled as Jays Win 6th Straight
Kelly Gruber hit a two-out, two-run homer in the eighth inning today, rallying the Toronto Blue Jays past the Texas Rangers, 3-2, for their sixth straight victory.
The Blue Jays, held to one run for six and one-third innings by Nolan Ryan, bounced back to win for the 18th time in 21 games.
John Olerud was hit by a pitch from Jeff Russell (3-2) with one out in the eighth and Gruber atoned for an earlier error by hitting his seventh home run.


ONTO THE BOOKSHELF
I read with interest White's essay.
I think there is no question that books by gay writers are being read by a wide and diverse audience.
As a heterosexual woman who is disabled, I have certainly seen my own doubts about my right to be sexual, and my exclusion from many traditional courtship rituals, reflected in the words of gay writers.
STEPHANIE PATTERSON
Philadelphia


The Down Side of the Donald
TRUMPED!
The Inside Story of the Real Donald Trump -- His Cunning Rise and Spectacular Fall.
By John R. O'Donnell with James Rutherford.
Illustrated. 348 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.95.


In Stratford, Seafood and a Riverfront View
FAGAN'S RIVERVIEW, at the base of the Washington bridge, has been a Stratford institution for years, the place to go for seafood and a water view.
The restaurant changed ownership some time ago, so we decided to pay a return visit.
The place looks much as we remembered it, with a less than prepossessing entryway.
Once you arrive at the hostess's station, you can see the two-tiered dining room beyond and, on the left, a new lounge and barroom with a few tables for dining.
The desirable place to dine is the lower tier, two steps down, dubbed the Riverview Room.
Adding considerably to a dining experience is the wide-angle view, through picture windows, of a grassy lawn, shaded by maple and pine trees, leading down to the Housatonic River, with glimpses of the entrance to Long Island Sound.
As you dine, you'll enjoy the boats cruising past.
The windows are so wide, they create the effect of open space, and, until you notice the ceiling fans overhead, it is easy to have the illusion of eating on a spacious, open porch.
The upper tier, separated by lattice work and a row of hanging plants, is somewhat drab, without full access to the pleasant summery view.


Jack Tauber, Rabbi, 75
Jack Tauber, rabbi of the Synagogue Avenue Z Jewish Center in Brooklyn, died on Thursday at Coney Island Hospital.
He was 75 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Tauber was the victim of a hit and-run automobile accident on May 6 as he was walking to service at the synagogue, his son, Stuart, said.


Low Units of Aspirin Found to Cut Pregnancy Risks
Low doses of aspirin were found to be effective in preventing pregnant women from developing high blood pressure and in reducing their risk of giving birth to low-weight babies, according to a report based on previous studies.
But the report cautioned that is was still too early to recommend low-dose aspirin therapy routinely for women at high risk for those two problems.
The doses used in the studies were equal to almost one-fifth to nearly one-half of the aspirin found in a single standard pill or tablet sold over the counter.


The Victim Wore a Crown of Thorns
ON THE THIRD DAY
By Piers Paul Read. 259 pp. New York: Random House. $20.


Of Course Race Governed Bush's Nomination; Facing the Issues
To the Editor:
On the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, "liberals" have been spoken of as finding a difficulty in confronting a black man on issues about which they would not blink to confront a white man -- or, presumably, woman.


Manhattan Man, 21, Killed During Dance at City College
A Manhattan man was killed during a fight at a dance at City College, the police said.
The victim, Anthony Perez, 21 years old, of 517 West 135th Street near Amsterdam Avenue, died early yesterday at Harlem Hospital after being shot once in the chest during a dispute with another man, a police spokesman, Sgt.
Norris Hollomon, said.


Wine; Winerunning
VIN DE TABLE, VIN DE GARDE -- no matter what's in the bottle, buying wine in France is fun.
This is not because the wine is better than anywhere else -- quite often it isn't.
It's the way the thing is done.
Take the Burgundy run, for example.
In this country, when your cache of Gevrey-Chambertin and Volnay Les Caillerets begins to dwindle, you mortgage your home, head for your favorite wine shop and stock up.


Customer Is Killed and Clerk Is Wounded in Store Holdup
A man robbing a bodega on the Lower East Side of Manhattan early yesterday shot and killed a customer buying cigarettes there and critically wounded a clerk, the police said.
The customer, Raul Nasario, 45 years old, was shot once in the head about 3:20 A.M. and pronounced dead at the scene, the Rodriguez Food Market, at Clinton and Henry Streets, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Grace Ridley.
The clerk, Jose Rodriguez, 37, was shot twice in the head and listed in critical condition at New York Infirmary-Beekman Downtown Hospital.


A Lesson In Succession
To the Sports Editor:
In "A Rest Day for Tennis Tradition" (The Times, June 30), George Vecsey asks the question, "How do the English know how cold it was back in the mid-17th century, as Charles I gave way to his son, Charles II?"


Anne Foxley to Marry Nicolas P. Kerno in October
The engagement of Anne Foxley to Nicolas Pierre Kerno, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ivan V. Kerno of New York, has been made known by her parents, Mrs.
Kenneth W. Washburn of Providence, R.I., and William C. Foxley of Omaha.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Foxley, 27 years old, is a graduate of the Canterbury School in New Milford, Conn., and the University of Colorado at Boulder.
She is a decorating editor at House and Garden magazine in New York.
Her father is the founder and chief executive of the Foxley Cattle Company of Omaha and the founder of the Museum of Western Art in Denver.


Cole Porter's Centennial Celebrated in a Review
VIEWING "Cole," the Music Theater of Connecticut's contribution to Cole Porter's 100th birthday bash, a naive visitor might well wonder why producers have to make a "special arrangement" -- the euphemism that means paying for the rights -- just to put on a potpourri of the composer's songs, cum narration.
One ingenuous theater buff might ask another, "Couldn't enthusiasts like us collect our own chosen songs and then write the connecting material -- better?"


Northwest Noir: An Art of the Serious Goofy
In the basement of Gus Van Sant's creaking old house on a hill, a producer is trying to reach a yodeler.
Not just any yodeler, but one from the old school, the lederhosen and beer mug set.
Central Casting will not do.
The producer, Laurie Parker, finds her yodeler in Wenatchee, Wash., an apple-orchard town in the foothills of the Cascade Mountains.
"Can you come in, say, Tuesday, and do some yodeling for the sound track?" she asks on the phone.
"Oh, wonderful. We'll see you then."


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Agreed to terms with Linzy Collins, wide receiver.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Timothy Edwards, defensive tackle.


Low Units of Aspirin Found to Cut Pregnancy Risks
Low doses of aspirin were found to be effective in preventing pregnant women from developing high blood pressure and in reducing their risk of giving birth to low-weight babies, according to a report based on previous studies.
But the report cautioned that is was still too early to recommend low-dose aspirin therapy routinely for women at high risk for those two problems.
The doses used in the studies were equal to almost one-fifth to nearly one-half of the aspirin found in a single standard pill or tablet sold over the counter.


Washington Talk; Deficit Up, But in '91 The Furor Has Passed
This time last year the budget was front- page news.
President Bush and Congress were deadlocked in negotiations that had been going on for months.
When Richard G. Darman, the President's budget director, submitted his annual midyear fiscal review, the deficit projected for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1 seemed shockingly large -- $231 billion.
Drastic consequences would occur if a way could not be found to reduce that deficit, Mr.
Darman asserted.
Under the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings budget-balancing law, many air traffic control installations would be closed.
Meat inspection would be ended for five months.
Vaccinations for a million children would be canceled.


Amanda G. Lewis Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Lou Lewis of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amanda Garland Lewis to First Lieut.
Thomas Love Springer of the Army.
He is a son of Margaret Springer of Durango, Colo., and William Springer of Concord, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lewis, 23 years old, is a cum laude graduate of Wellesley College.
She is an editor and designer at Designworks, an editorial design concern in Somerville, Mass.
Her father is the senior partner in the Poughkeepsie law firm of Lewis &amp; Greer.


Debt-Ridden Resort Closes On St. Croix
Faced with severe losses in the aftermath of Hurricane Hugo and the recession, the Carambola Beach Resort, the largest hotel in St.
Croix in the United States Virgin Islands, has closed and gone into receivership.
The closing of the 158-room resort, which opened four years and a half years ago, reduces the number of hotel rooms available in St.
Croix to fewer than 1,000.
Before the island was devastated by the hurricane in September 1989, there were nearly 1,800 tourist rooms.
After the hurricane it took 14 months to repair the upscale, 28-acre resort, which reopened in November 1990.
But the 1990-91 tourist season in St.
Croix, as in much of the Caribbean, was hurt by the recession and the Persian Gulf war.


To Give Bastille Day Its Due, Brioche
IT'S Bastille Day. Let them eat cake. Or, one might translate literally and say gateau.
Actually, the term is brioche.
Jean Jacques Rousseau, the 18th-century French author, recalled the Queen's "thoughtless saying" as "Qu'ils mangent de la brioche." So to give the day its due, it should be brioche.


U.S. Is Urged to Speed Progress on Satellites to Study Climate
An expert panel has recommended that the space agency move quickly to develop and deploy a system of Earth-monitoring satellites.
But the panel cautioned that management of the program, intended to study the Earth's climate, needed to be flexible to adapt to changes in knowledge and technology over the 30-year life of the effort.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My house has wood windows that have what appears to be a varnish finish.
Many of the window frames have water stains caused by condensation that occurred in the winter.
I am afraid that, should I do nothing about this, the wood will rot.
What do you suggest?
A.
The water stains are probably in the finish, not in the wood itself, so chances are that refinishing or painting would take care of that problem.
But you should try to do something about the condensation, because it could lead to more serious problems with rot.
One factor that will help is to install storm sash on the outside of all windows.
Another is to lower the humidity inside the house in the winter.
That might include turning down or shutting off the humidifier, if you have one, and making sure the bathrooms and kitchen have exhaust fans going when those rooms are in use.


A Quirky Loner Goes Mainstream
When Apple Computer Inc. announced its all but unthinkable partnership with the International Business Machines Corporation earlier this month, some Apple employees coverd up the rainbow-colored apple in front of their building with a new logo - also an apple, but one done in the characteristic blue stripes of i.B.M.
It might have been meant as a protest or merely as a joke.
But it was certainly symbolic - Apple is changing its stripes.
The agreement is only one piece, albeit the biggest, of a huge transformation that the personal computer pioneer is undertaking.
Long content with being the BMW of the computer industry, suppying finely crafted machines to a relatively small number of fanatic customers, Apple now wants to become a Ford or Toyota, to move into the mainstream.


Head Injuries and The Larger Picture
"Trying to Heal Effects of Head Injuries"  [ May 26 ]  was most interesting to me.
You see, my son many years ago suffered such an injury -- but from a cerebral hemorrhage.
To some of us who must cope with the effects of loss of memory and personality changes, it is a necessity to reassess ourselves and to decide what our priorities are.
Our true values become different, more fundamental; our place in this world is clarified.
The concept of his care as something special was, of course, completely strange to me.
Everything seemed to be a struggle, a bitter conflict between imposing limits and learning infinite patience.


Company Insiders Are Cashing Out
A funny thing happened this year, as stock prices first soared and then stabilized.
The insiders bailed out.
The rush to exit is especially notable in the area of secondary offerings, where shares are sold in public offerings with the proceeds going not to the company but to selling shareholders.
Steve Leuthold, an adviser to institutional investors who monitors such things, says the number of secondary offerings hit a level last month that has not been seen since 1986.


Ms. Jensen Weds R. M. Wisniewski
Margaret Eliza Jensen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Grady E. Jensen of Scarsdale, was married yesterday in Elmsford, N.Y., to Ryszard Marek Wisniewski, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Boguslaw Wisniewski of Torun, Poland.
The Rev.
Donald R. Cutler performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of St.
Joseph of Arimathea.
Ms.
Jensen, who is 33 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Beloit College and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
She is an editor at the Oxford University Press in New York.


Berkshire Bound


New Yorkers, etc.
Some everyday occurrences cause acute discomfort and embarrassment to many people.
Making a fuss over money, particularly comparatively small amounts of money, is generally one of them.
It's always been acceptable to query the accuracy of even a small amount on a bill sent by mail.
Not so acceptable was holding up a supermarket line over a small overcharge.
This doesn't mean it wasn't done -- many people quite justly insisted on it -- but there was usually both resentment and disdain from a great proportion of the line.


Amid Romantic and Sacred, a Pop Soul
At the age of 50, Aaron Neville still possesses the voice of an angelic child whose purity of faith transcends the world's darker realities.
What is even more distinctive is the complexity of the delicate, half-yodeled melismas that Mr.
Neville interpolates into many of his songs.
These interpolations are so refined as to carry doo-wop vocal ornamentation into an operatic realm without seeming at all affected.
The crowning quality is a clear, crying falsetto that is as plaintive as any heard in the heyday of doo-wop ballad singing.
Although Mr.
Neville's gifts became evident 24 years ago, when he scored a Top Five hit with "Tell It Like It Is," it wasn't until he teamed up with Linda Ronstadt for four duets on her 1989 album, "Cry Like a Rainstorm -- Howl Like the Wind," that he began to gain long-deserved recognition.
Two of their duets won Grammy Awards.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Brooklyn Philharmonic misstated the projected deficit of the Brooklyn Academy of Music this year.
It is $250,000, not $1.1 million.


Headliners; Diplomacy Inc.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev may or may not get the billions of dollars in aid he wants from the West, but he could ask the new American ambassador-designate to Moscow, Robert S. Strauss, to lend him a couple of million until Washington sends the first check.
In preparation for his confirmation hearings, Mr.
Strauss filed a financial disclosure statement that was made public last week.
While it came as no surprise that he was wealthy -- he is a long-time senior partner in one of the highest-powered of law firms -- the statement offered a titillating glimpse of the extent of his holdings.
Between the homes, race horses, corporate stocks and oil and gas investments, Mr.
Strauss is worth at least $13 million and probably a lot more.
In just the last 18 months, he earned $4.5 million from his law firm and $2.5 million from other sources -- including the Archer-Daniels-Midland Corporation and Pepsico, which do big business with the Soviet Union.
He said he would discuss how he plans to avoid conflicts of interest after his confirmation this week.


Donors Look for Benefit From Charities
In "United Way Warns Agencies of Drop in Allocations"  [ June 16 ] , the president of the Westchester/Putnam branch of the organization says, "Something interesting is happening out there." Certainly is.
Contrary to the sense of the article, 1990 was the best year in United Way's history.
Nationally, it topped $3 billion for the first time.
Locally, it raised over $15 million or 0.8 percent more than in 1989.


In the Nation; 'Pounding' Mr. Bush
On the day he lifted sanctions against South Africa, George Bush complained that he was taking a "pounding" from black leaders who did not think he cared about blacks or civil rights.
It might well be replied: Why should they?
Mr.
Bush not only seemed wounded by the obtuse world he sees out there; he indulged himself in Bushspeak -- a language, or something -- a local alderman might not dignify with use.


A Plague Awaits
If you don't see the coffin, you shed no tears. -- Thai proverb.
FOUR THAI MEN, CIGARETTES IN hand, sit on a rough bamboo bench, staring across a packed dirt floor.


How Absurd


Style Makers; Martin Gardlin, Wedding Photographer
Martin Gardlin creates black-and-white portraits with a point of view more likely to be found in fashion magazines than in traditional wedding albums.
"Italian Vogue is a favorite inspiration," he said.
"I study all the European fashion magazines -- and Avedon's early work, on location. I want to capture that in my wedding shots. I tell them, 'Think Armani ad!' "


Harness Racing; Precious Bunny Wins Million-Dollar Pace
Precious Bunny took the lead at the halfway mark and captured the $1 million Meadowlands Pace on Friday night, upsetting Artsplace, the overwhelming favorite.
With Jack Moiseyev driving, Precious Bunny set a record time for the mile for night racing with 1:494/5 .
The race also produced the fastest fractions.


At Summit, Leaders Face Changed World
In some ways, the gathering of the leaders of seven industrial democracies tomorrow in London shows how little was accomplished a year ago.
But in other ways, the world has changed, particularly the political balance inside the Soviet Union.
News analysis, page 3.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Rose Petal Search
Q.
My Greek mother used to make a delicious rose jam from rose petals.
The roses bloomed in May, but we cannot identify the plant from which the jam was made.
Can you help?
G.
Thomas Catherines, Lloyd Harbor, N.Y.


Stamps
Five 29-cent stamps honoring the Olympic Games were issued on Friday in Los Angeles and then nationwide yesterday, the first big salvo in the United States Postal Service's sponsorship of the Summer Olympics next year.
The designs are side by side in panes of 40 stamps, with 8 of each design.
The five designs were generated on a computer by Joni Carter of Los Angeles, and they yield a strong sense of motion for each of the events illustrated: the pole vault, the discus, the sprints, the javelin and hurdles.
In one corner of each stamp is a set of the Olympic rings in white.


Doubles Coverage A Sore Point
To the Sports Editor:
Don't they still play doubles at Wimbledon?
For most of the 30 hours of television coverage I was planted on the couch watching attentively.
I watched Martina, Boris, Stefan, Jennifer and Gaby but heard only rare references to doubles play.
Every evening John Tesh informed me of the day's highlights, all of which I was familiar with except, of course, the doubles play.
What happened, NBC?
DANIEL GOLDRING New York


Bradley and Pitcock Duel at Open
Pat Bradley and Amy Alcott continued to make the United States Women's Open a battle of golfing titans today, but not without the dimunitive Joan Pitcock proving herself a presence who cannot be ignored.
Pitcock, a 24-year-old fourth-year professional, matched Bradley stroke for stroke to shoot a one-over-par 72 over the Colonial Country Club course.
That tied her for the 54-hole lead with the leading career money winner in women's golf at one-over-par 214.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Ridgefield
RIDGEFIELD won't let go of its Yankee roots.
"On the surface it hasn't changed at all, " said Sue W. Manning, the First Selectman and a 21-year resident.
"Houses and shops are pretty much the same. Maybe they're painted a different color, rebricked or have an added tree."


STAN GETZ AND LESTER YOUNG
In the article "Stan Getz Through the Years" (June 9), Joseph Hooper seems to lose the eminence of Lester Young in focusing on his eccentricities.
Young made his first records to reach the great public in 1936, with a wonderful small group that included Count Basie.
Young's impact was strong because he opened up new vistas for the saxophone.
His innovations included long-breathed, legato phrases, gliding unpredictably over chord changes, sometimes anticipating a chord before it arrived.
Total technical and rhythmic security gave him the ability to play on, before or after the beat.
He created a sound that was his alone -- haunting, floating, unforgettable.
JOHN GREGORY
Philadelphia


RECORD BRIEFS
Soldier: 'Sojourner Truth,' Quartet No. 1, Other Works
Soldier String Quartet. Newport Classic NPD 85508; CD.


Ellen Schonfeld Weds R. H. Bienstock
Ellen Doud Schonfeld, a doctoral candidate in sociology at New York University, and Robert Harry Bienstock, a lawyer, were married last evening at the South Street Seaport in Manhattan by Judith Wank, an assistant to the Leader of the New York Society for Ethical Culture.
Mrs.
Bienstock, 30 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College.
She is a daughter of Karen Lamberti and Maurice Schonfeld, both of New York.
Ms.
Lamberti is an administrator at the Institute of Fine Arts at New York University.
The bride's father, known professionally as Reese Schonfeld, is the president of Current Trends Productions, a television production and consulting company in New York.
Her stepmother, Patricia O'Gorman Schonfeld, is the program director of Tops for You, a home for young women in Brooklyn.


Germany
To the Editor: Frederick II, King of Prussia, was no more or less ruthless or a conqueror than almost any other European ruler of his epoch (Travel, June 9).
Is it not true that the French coffers were so exhausted by Louis XIV's wars that it eventually led to the French Revolution and subsequently to the reign of the guillotine?
When Louis XIV revoked the Edict of Nantes, did not the persecuted Huguenots find refuge in Prussia?
Colonizing was the name of the game then, and nobody believes that that was anything but ruthless.
Sorry, it was not Prussia that excelled in that field.
ULRICH THIELE New York, N.Y.
Olivier Bernier replies:
Frederick II had the singular distinction of attacking his neighbors without provocation or indeed a declaration of war and was infamous for his habit of breaking his word whenever it suited him.


Headliners; He Counts
A party whip can rarely get every member to stand with the party, but at the very least he should know where each member does stand.
Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan demonstrated some skill in the latter department on his way to being elected last week to succeed William H. Gray 3d as the House Democratic whip.
For days before the vote, Mr.
Bonior predicted that he would get 160 votes, which is exactly what he got.
His opponent, Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, who had insisted that the race was neck and neck, got 109 votes.
The victory will make the 46-year-old Mr.
Bonior the third-ranking Democratic leader in the House after Mr.
Gray leaves, probably in September, to head the United Negro College Fund.
The new whip said that his last couple of campaigns -- a surprisingly slim re-election to the House in 1988 and a defeat for the whip position by Mr.
Gray in 1989 -- had taught him a thing or two about getting votes.
After 20 years in politics, he said, he "went back to knocking on doors."


Mutual Funds; The Stylishness of Latin America
Latin America is in; Europe is out.
That is the message sent by single-country closed-end funds in the first half of 1991.
The biggest winner in this volatile category was the Brazil Fund, whose share price more than doubled even as the premium to its underlying assets shrank.
The Latin America Fund was up 69.8 percent, and the Emerging Mexico Fund rose 62.6 percent.


Frances Arkin, Psychiatrist, 87
Dr.
Frances Arkin, a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst who practiced in New York for many years before moving to Miami in 1978, died on July 3 at the Miami Heart Institute.
She was 87 years old.
She died of a stroke, said her sister, Evelynne Abrams of Middletown, N.Y.


Deborah Todd to Marry Andrew Allen Wheeler
Mr. and Mrs Kenneth R. Todd of Madison, Conn., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Deborah Margaret Todd and Andrew Allen Wheeler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Wheeler of Northford, Conn.
Ms.
Todd, 26 years old, and her fiance, 29, are graduates of the University of Vermont.
She is a sculptor and jewelry designer in Boston.
Her father is a jazz musician and composer.
Her mother, Patricia M. Todd, is a jazz pianist.


The Region; The Budget Balances, But Now Reality
EXCEPT for some figurative fireworks, the eve of a new fiscal year usually is not celebrated with the gusto that marks the beginning of the Julian calendar in January -- particularly when an agreement to raise taxes and reduce municipal services heralds a summer of discontent.
But New York City officials were euphoric two weeks ago for having agreed at all.
So when Philip R. Michael, the budget director, was asked how many dollars officials planned to spend in fiscal 1992, he replied glibly: "Twenty-nine billion, give or take a billion."
Mr.
Michael was just joking.
Mayor David N. Dinkins was not amused.
The Mayor's pained expression suggested the frustration of an official who prides himself on speaking precisely, but whose administration, in conjunction with the City Council, produced a budget that raises questions for this year and may compound the taxpayers' liabilities later on.
It was a spending plan that only a juggler could love because, like the budget director's glib reply, it appeared to defy gravity.


True Confessions of a Nielsen 'Family'
Whenever I hear about television shows cut from the roster for failing to garner the right numbers, I have to wonder about the data that led to the fatal decision.
How proven are the statistics that guide the arm that wields the ax?
Is there a rational basis for keeping "Mr. Belvedere" on the air and sentencing "Buffalo Bill" to extinction?
Can anyone really know who is watching what on television?
I recently completed a week as a Nielsen family, an experience that only multiplied my doubts about ratings science.
My sample is biased -- three friends and myself -- and perhaps my circle is inordinately deceitful, but everyone I know or have met who has ever responded to a Nielsen survey has told flagrant lies about his or her viewing habits.
I don't mean small lies, such as claiming never to have seen an episode of "Three's Company." I mean outrageous, wholesale, novelistic fictions, which, if there were enough people in America as untrustworthy as the people I know, could skew the numbersbeyond reckoning.


IN SHORT: FICTION
GIRLS IN THE GRASS
By Melanie Rae Thon.  Random House, $18.


Home Video Has Its Virtues
To the Editor:
Let's see if I have this right: Theodore Roszak is distressed because home video has made the likes of "The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari" and "The Maltese Falcon" available for people to see whenever they want  [ "When Movies Ruled Our Lives," June 30 ] .
This somehow is a bad thing because (a) familiarity "cheapens" great films and (b) today's young vidiots can't distinguish "diamonds from trash" when they're next to each other on the shelf.
Where does one begin to argue with such twee arrogance? First of all, familiarity often
deepens
appreciaton -- some of us are still mining meaning and pleasure from "Sherlock Jr.," "Beauty and the Beast" and "Red River" the 20th time around.


Questions Arise On Shore Trail Plan
A PLAN by the National Park Service to promote the Jersey Shore nationally as one major tour destination, like a national park, is being questioned by environmentalists and others for its potential to create more traffic congestion and harm the state's beaches and ocean water quality.
The New Jersey Coastal Heritage Trail, as the plan is known, will feature five thematic tour routes from Sandy Hook, its northern anchor, to the Delaware Bay shore in Cumberland and Salem Counties, its southern anchor.
The themes, which are still being discussed, will include the state's maritime history and will encompass more than 372 cultural, historic and environmental attractions and individual buildings, according to spokesmen for the Park Service.


The Vanishing Footnote
To the Editor:
In her well-documented essay, Gertrude Himmelfarb justifiably laments the absence of footnotes in scholarly books nowadays.


Court Committee Backs Videotaping
A STATE Supreme Court committee charged with finding the best way to preserve court proceedings added a new twist to the debate between official court reporters and audio-tape transcribers, the two groups that now dominate the field, by recommending a third technology -- videotaping -- as the most accurate, cost-effective option.
The committee, which was appointed in March by Chief Justice Robert N. Wilentz, issued its report last month after hearing testimony from judges, lawyers, tape transcribers and court reporters on the advantages and disadvantages of stenographers versus electronic recording.


Courtney Brown, A Teacher, Is Wed
Courtney Page Brown, the daughter of Carol K. Brown of Pelham Manor, N.Y., and Neal A. Brown of New York, was married yesterday in Lew Beach, N.Y., to Paul Gregory Lafortezza, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Lafortezza of Grandview, N.Y.
The Rev.
Diane J. Mowrey, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at a nondenominational ceremony at the Beaverkill Valley Inn.
The bride and bridegroom are 26 years old and 1986 graduates of Hamilton College.
Mrs.
Lafortezza, who received a master's degree from Teachers College of Columbia University, is a New York City high school teacher.
Her father is a member of the New York law firm of Greenfield Eisenberg Stein &amp; Senior.
Her mother is a principal in C. S. McClellan Real Estate in Pelham, N.Y.


SCIENCE FICTION
In THE DARK BEYOND THE STARS (Tom Doherty/Tor, $19.95) Frank M. Robinson reinvents the Heinleinesque conceit of the generational starship gone awry.
For 2,000 years the Astron has been searching for other forms of life in the galaxy.
Since the now-legendary Launch, more than 100 generations of crew members have been born, performed their duties of ship maintenance and planetary exploration and gone to the "Reduction" vats for recycling; only the single-minded Captain Kusaka has been kept intact, like an immortal Ahab, to oversee a mission that has yet to find anything even vaguely resembling a living creature.
Bit by bit, the very fabric of the ship is falling apart.
Not surprisingly, there are grumbles of rebellion among the crew, who think that it is time to turn around and return to Earth.
Mr.
Robinson gives Kusaka a worthy antagonist in the person of Sparrow, a young crewman whose loss of memory after a suspicious accident conceals a deeper mystery about his identity.
By watching over Sparrow's shoulder as he learns the truth about himself and the ship, the reader comes to appreciate the sense of urgency that quickens both sides in the debate.


The Shostakovich Quartets: A Diverse Lot
Here's something unexpected: the simultaneous release of two complete cycles of Dmitri Shostakovich's string quartets, only the fourth and fifth ever.
Equally hard to reckon is the growing indication that this music has entered a "mature" phase without ever having had a proper prime.
The young Brodsky Quartet is the second English ensemble to record these 15 quartets (Teldec 71702-2; six CD's, also available singly), following the Fitzwilliam, whose 1970's Oiseau-Lyre series was begun while the composer was still alive.
The Manhattan Quartet, after a preliminary stab in the mid-80's on Centaur, becomes the first American quartet to record the cycle (ESS.A.Y. CD1007/13; six single CD's).


Making Sense of Retirement Advice
To the Editor:
Let me see if I understand this.
Early retirement is being encouraged because we're in a recession (Your Own Account, "The Early Retirement Crunch," June 30).
There is a major gap between retirement income and needs.
If you work past 62, you can't make much money before you start to lose Social Security benefits.
There is a looming labor shortage.
And there are still those who claim that the retirement earnings test should remain as it is.


Melissa Cooper to Wed A. S. Goldstein in 1992
Rosanne Cooper Lubell of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter, Melissa Cooper, to Andrew Scott Goldstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Goldstein of Brooklyn.
The wedding is to be next spring.
Miss Cooper, 24 years old, is a leasing agent in New York for Harry Macklowe Real Estate.
She graduated from the University of the Arts in Philadelphia.
Her mother is a senior vice president of R. H. Macy &amp; Company in New York.


Correction
A chart with the Practical Traveler column on May 26 entitled "A Sampling of Clinics and Costs" misidentified the unit of the Toronto Hospital whose primary task is counseling and immunizing travelers for overseas trips.
It is the Travel and Inoculation Service, as a recent letter from the director of the service pointed out.


Lisa C. Snow Engaged to Wed
September wedding plans for Lisa C. Snow and Richard E. Nelson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Nelson of Jackson, Mo., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Snow of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Miss Snow, 27 years old, is a designer at Perkins &amp; Will, architects in Chicago.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
She and her fiance, 26, received master's degrees in architecture from Washington University.
Her father is a senior partner at the New York law firm of Snow, Becker, Krauss.
Her mother, Deanna Snow, is an investment consultant at Invest Financial Corporation, a subsidiary of Kemper Financial Group in New York.


New Grants Invigorate Historic Sites
HISTORIC HUDSON VALLEY, the cultural organization once known as Sleepy Hollow Restorations, has put Rip Van Winkle on notice and is entering its fifth decade invigorated by new grants totaling $7 million from the Readers Digest Association.
"Things are on the upswing: it's a great moment for us," said John H. Dobkin, who became president 18 months ago.
Historic Hudson Valley is expanding its programs with a new focus on environmental issues and updating its educational role to include more material on the role slaves, Indians and women played at local historical sites.


Kristin M. Clough Weds James Canty
Kristin Marie Clough, a daughter of the Rev.
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles I. Clough of Concord, Mass., was married yesterday at Our Lady Help of Christians Roman Catholic Church in Concord to James Edward Canty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Canty of Schenectady, N.Y.
The bride's father, a Roman Catholic deacon, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 25 years old, is a public school speech and language pathologist in Boxborough, Mass.
A graduate of Boston College, she received a master's degree in speech and language pathology from George Washington University.
Her father is the chief investment strategist for Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in New York.
Her mother, Gloria Clough, is the Roman Catholic chaplain at Emerson Hospital in Concord.


Evenings of Tchaikovsky, Beethoven or Mozart
SUMMER MUSIC, started in 1984 with four chamber programs in Harkness Memorial State Park in Waterford, has grown into one of the jewels in Connecticut's festival season.
The 1991 season lists six orchestral concerts and three special events: a family evening with Shari Lewis and her puppets (July 31), country music with Willie Nelson (Aug. 8) and jazz with Dizzy Gillespie (Aug. 22).
In addition, a series of lunchtime concerts and four Sunday evening recitals have been planned at sites in and around New London.
An all-Tchaikovsky evening opens Summer Music '91 on Saturday evening at 8, with John Browning playing the Piano Concerto No. 1 and Peter Sacco conducting the Fifth Symphony.
Most of the later repertory is similarly standard, including all-Beethoven (Aug. 3) and all-Mozart (Aug. 10) programs, and a Rachmaninoff-plus-fireworks finale (Aug. 24).
When the Empire Brass pays its annual visit a week earlier, on Aug. 17, the program includes Paul Hindemith's Concerto for Piano, Brass and Harps.
For more information, call 442-9199.


A Question Of Fairness
To the Sports Editor:
I am appalled by NBC's tasteless and inappropriate treatment of Martina Navratilova, the nine-time Wimbledon champion.
It was bad enough for NBC to accept intimate videotapes relating to legal agreements between consenting adults, but to air these tapes, and then display a one-sided NBC interview with Judy Nelson, at the same time that Navratilova was working professionally to defend her title, is simply outrageous.
NBC hasn't chosen to air the dirty linen of straight couples.
So why this uncalled-for attack on Navratilova?
After an extraordinary rainy first week at Wimbledon, we tennis fans fully expected NBC to utilize this historic first Sunday of play to show us professional tennis.
JANE LANCASTER Bridgewater Corners, Vt.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
May inventories, percent change
-0.5
-0.3
June auto sales, annualized in millions
7.4
6.4
Tuesday
June factory output, percent change
0.5
0.3
June capacity utilization, in percent
78.7
78.9
Wednesday
June housing starts, in millions
0.98
1.02
June consumer prices, percent change
0.3
0.2
Thursday
June merchandise trade deficit, billions
$4.8
$5
Monday: Group of Seven summit meeting in London Tuesday: Alan Greenspan gives Humphrey-Hawkins testimony in Washington Wednesday: President Gorbachev meets with G-7 leaders in London *
President Gorbachev meets with Prime Minister Kaifu *Presidents Bush and Gorbachev hold working session Thursday: Prime Minister Kaifu meets with European Community leaders in the Netherlands (Source: I.D.E.A.)


The Sound of Musicals
In BROADWAY! 125 Years of Musical Theatre (Arcade, $45), Hollis Alpert provides a lively context for the American musical, with its emphasis on story and libretto, in contrast to other forms of musical theater such as comic opera and operetta.
Not meant to be comprehensive but rather to convey the highlights, the book spans the history of the form from the first Broadway musical, "The Black Crook" in 1866, through vaudeville, burlesque and extravaganza to "Miss Saigon." Mr.
Alpert, whose previous books include "The Life and Times of Porgy and Bess," also provides anecdotes and information about the changing characteristics of the theater district, which was originally located between the Battery and 14th Street.
The numerous photographs of theater memorabilia highlight everything from fluffy entertainments, such as "Florodora" in 1900, to shows with more serious themes, such as "Of Thee I Sing," a political satire that won a Pulitzer Prize in 1932.
Landmark productions -- "Porgy and Bess" in 1935, "Oklahoma!" in 1943, "West Side Story" in 1957 and "Hair" in 1968 -- are shown as reflections of the cultural climate of the time.
Mr.
Alpert also discusses the development of black musical theater from the minstrel show to the first all-black production, "A Trip to Coontown," in 1898.
Although a chronology would have been a welcome addition, "Broadway!" is an informative and entertaining book that allows the reader to savor a uniquely American art form.


From Lexus, a Coupe to Make Your Own
THE after-theater crowd had thinned by the time I picked up my car, but there were still four people in the parking garage, two men and two women.
When the attendant cruised to a stop, the men developed pimples and the women turned girlish.
One of them yelled, "Take me home!"
I preened.
"Everybody wants me to take them home," I said, shaking my head but smiling.
Letting them down gently.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 14


WHAT'S DOING ON: Cape Cod
On Labor Day many Cape Codders celebrate "Over the Bridge Day," gathering on Route 6 overpasses to hang out signs bidding good-natured farewells to summer visitors.
Sometimes these aren't so gentle; one favorite declares "Goodbye and Close the Gate Behind You." But you may not see that one this year.
Instead, travelers to the Cape will find that people serving them or selling them something will be wearing buttons handed out by the Chamber of Commerce proclaiming "We're Glad You're Here!"
After one of the worst economic winters in recent memory, when unemployment reached 17 percent, members of the Cape's commercial community depend more than ever on tourists to keep them afloat until next summer.


In Country


Venice Gallery Limits Crowds
The collection of Venetian paintings assembled in the Galleria Accademia in Venice has become so popular that the museum has been forced to limit the number of visitors at any one time to 180, for better security.
The Galleria Accademia, in the former church of Santa Maria della Carita, just off the Accademia Bridge over the Grand Canal, features about 500 pictures from the 14th to 18th centuries in 24 rooms.
They include landscapes, views of Venice, illustrated legends, portraits and life-scenes by such Italian masters as Giorgione, Carpaccio, Canaletto, Titian, Veronese, Tintoretto, Tiepolo, Bellini and Longhi.
The Accademia is open daily from 9 A.M. to 1:30 P.M. and on holidays from 9 A.M. to 12:30 P.M.
Admission is about $6.


Wall Street; The Tokyo Market Metes Out Some Punishment
Markets do not simply fluctuate.
Sometimes, they punish.
The shares of four giant brokerage houses in Tokyo, for example, have been battered since they were cited by regulators three weeks ago for customer favoritism and loans to underworld criminals.
The retribution has been uneven, however.
With the overall Tokyo market down about 5 percent since the scandal broke, the giant Nomura Securities has fallen almost 8 percent.
Meanwhile, Nikko Securities and Daiwa Securities have declined more than 11 percent -- and Yamaichi Securities, the other player in the continuing drama, is off more than 13 percent.
All four firms were suspended from trading for four days last week.


Corrections
Two captions on page 12 of the Arts and Leisure section today are reversed in some copies.
The actor Justin Chadwick is shown in profile, and the screenwriter and director Hanif Kureishi is facing the camera.


British Classicists


10-Year Project Ends at Brighton
The scaffolding that for 10 years has shrouded King George IV's seaside palace, the Royal Pavilion at Brighton on England's south coast, has finally come down.
What should have been a two-year project that was expected to cost $1.7 million turned into a 10-year project that cost $17 million.
Soon after work began in 1980 it was discovered that the original architect, John Nash, had been concerned more with appearance than with practical methods of construction.
The material used to cover the roof was not waterproof and the drainage system he designed had allowed rainwater gradually to permeate the roof and walls.
First built as a simple classical villa in 1787, the Royal Pavilion was rebuilt by Nash, who was commissioned in 1815 by George IV to extend the building in a design based on Indian architecture.
The interiors were decorated in opulent Chinese style and work was completed in 1822.
By 1980 the ravages of time, sea air and pollution had taken their toll on the exterior of the building and additions and alterations to the interior had obscured important features of the original design.


Fixed-Rate Loans Gain In Popularity
AFTER a decade that unleashed adjustable-rate loans, negative amortization loans, low-documentation loans and dozens of exotic new mortgages on the home-buying public, borrowers have returned en masse to conventional, fixed-rate financing, but with a new twist.
Lenders say the most popular loan now is the traditional standard: the fixed- rate 30-year mortgage.
But they also report heightened demand for fixed rate loans with shorter terms -- most commonly 15 or 20 years -- and say a growing number of people who already have mortgages are paying more each month so the loans will be retired early.


Brenda Kay Born Engaged
September wedding plans for Brenda Kay Born and R. Preston Conklin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Conklin of Dallas have been made known by her mother, Mrs.
Paul F. Born Jr. of Elgin, Ill.
Ms.
Born, 41 years old, is also a daughter of the late Mr.
Born.
She is the research director at Entertainment Weekly magazine.
She received a bachelor's degree and a master's degree in music from Northwestern University and an M.B.A. degree from Dartmouth College.
The future bridegroom, 43, is an investment manager in Darien, Conn.
He graduated from Dartmouth and received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University.


Anne Hepting Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Carleton Hepting of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Anne de Lavolette Hepting, to Mark Steven Flegenheimer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Flegenheimer of Saginaw, Mich.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Hepting, 27 years old and a graduate of the Foxcroft School and George Washington University, is the assistant general manager of an Ann Taylor shop in Manhattan.
She was a member of the 1981 New York Junior Assembly.
Her father is the president of Jeane Eddy Ltd., a women's clothing shop in New York.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'LITTLE TOOT'  Those who may not recognize the name Hardie Gramatky must certainly perk up at the mention of his illustrated children's books about the adventures of a New York City tugboat named "Little Toot," first published in 1939 by Putnam Publishing Group in Manhattan, and still delighting millions of children.
An exhibition of 99 watercolors and charcoal sketches of the beaches, byways, fields and streets of Westport, where he lived for 40 years, and many of the Little Toot illustrations may be seen Friday through Aug. 11 at the Westport Arts Center, 17 Morningside Drive South.


D. E. Stein to Wed Debra Beinstein
The engagement of Debra Lynn Beinstein to David Eric Stein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Stein of Brookline, Mass., has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Henry C. Beinstein of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The wedding is to be in September 1992.
The future bride, 24 years old graduated from the University of Michigan and received a law degree in June from the University of Chicago.
She is to join the Chicago law firm of Kirkland &amp; Ellis as an associate in September.
Her father is the executive director of the New York law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn.
Her mother, Phyllis Beinstein, teaches writing at Public School 81 in Riverdale, the Bronx, and is a clinical social worker with the Epilepsy Institute at the Mount Vernon (N.Y.) Hospital.


Handpiece of Dentist's Drill May Have Spread AIDS Virus
A Florida dentist may have passed the AIDS virus to five patients by using a dirty drill handle, but scientists cannot say for sure, a Federal epidemiologist said Friday.
"We consider the dental handpiece as a piece of equipment that could have been contaminated with blood," said Dr.
Harold Jaffe of the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.
Dr.
Jaffe's comments came in response to a study showing a drill handpiece, a cigar-sized cylinder that holds drill bits, can easily spread germs.


Inquiry Has Japan Edgy: Was It an Arms Conduit?
An investigation into one of Japan's leading military contractors, suspected of illegally exporting millions of dollars worth of missile parts and guidance systems in the 1980's, is forcing the Government to face a deeply uncomfortable question: was Japan a secret conduit for illegal American weapons shipments to Iran?
The Government prides itself on its virtual ban on arms trading, and at the London summit meeting of seven industrial powers, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu is expected to press for an agreement that would force countries to report conventional weapons sales.


Washington Cedes Control of Its Foster Care Programs
In a decision that reflects the inability of cities and states to care for the growing number of foster children, the District of Columbia has agreed to allow a private agency to reorganize its foster care system and bring it into compliance with the law.
The agreement, announced Wednesday, means that the city may have to double the number of its foster care caseworkers, say both sides in the legal case brought about the settlement.
The city's Child and Family Services Division now has about 95 caseworkers overseeing 2,300 children in foster care, along with thousands more who remain at home under city supervision after courts found them to be abused or neglected.


Moving the Pampers Faster Cuts Everyone's Costs
For decades, the Procter &amp; Gamble Company was known as a tough bargainer -- occasionally even a bully -- in dealing with the stores that carry its products.
But these days, the company is cited by marketing experts as a leading example of how packaged-goods and food manufacturers form partnerships with major retailers to slash costs in the pipeline that connects manufacturers to consumers.
The partnerships aim to cut inventories for both parties, smooth out production schedules and quickly identify service and quality problems.
They are looking for the same kinds of benefits that automakers and other industrial companies have been reaping in recent years from "just-in-time" delivery arrangements with suppliers.


Maria Fisher, 87, Dies; Philanthropist to Arts
Maria Fisher, founder of the Beethoven Society of America and the Thelonious Monk Institute of Jazz, died on Thursday at her home in Washington.
She was 87 years old.
She died of brain cancer, said Tom Carter, the director of the institute.


Of Course Race Governed Bush's Nomination; Call Him Judge Thomas
To the Editor:
A July 4 news article quotes Senator Orrin Hatch, whom you identify as Judge Clarence Thomas's chief supporter in the Senate Judiciary Committee, as follows: "Clarence does have a paper trail. It could result in even more questioning of Clarence, and Clarence expects that." You also quote a "White House official" as stating that "It's simply a matter of Clarence getting his bio out."


Ms. Meyer Wed To Neil A. Cohen
Deborah Ann Meyer and Neil Andrew Cohen were married last evening at the Houghton Memorial Chapel at Wellesley College in Wellesley, Mass.
Msgr.
Thomas Hartman, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Benjamin Rudavski officiated.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter J. Meyer of Wellesley.
The bridegroom is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Willard Cohen of DeWitt, N.Y.
Mrs.
Cohen, 26 years old and a Brown University graduate, is a senior consultant at Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton, a management consulting concern in Bethesda, Md.
Her father is the managing director at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets in Boston.
Her mother, Phyllis C. Meyer, owns Communications Associates, a communications consulting company in Wellesley.


Ideas &amp; Trends; The Precarious Growth of the Software Empire
IN the end, it came down to three faulty bits of computer code, three tiny flecks in a program with 2.1 million lines of instructions.
Yet those three bits were enough to cripple phone service in Washington, Los Angeles and Pittsburgh in a spate of nearly identical network failures between June 26 and July 2.
The post-mortems are still in progress.
But it now seems clear that the mishaps were merely the latest examples of an increasingly prevalent phenomenon: the software-induced calamity.


A Women's Resignation Touches a Nerve at Medical Schools
The resignation of a pioneering female neurosurgeon after what she said was a quarter-century of subtle sexism at Stanford Medical School has tapped a vein of resentment among women there and prompted discussion across the nation about how women are demeaned or ignored in the world of academic medicine.
The pattern of behavior described by the surgeon, Dr.
Frances K. Conley, runs from insensitive language to physical harassment and is said by experts of both sexes to be common at medical schools, where women are well-represented in the classrooms but rare in the corridors of power.


Low Units of Aspirin Found to Cut Pregnancy Risks
Low doses of aspirin were found to be effective in preventing pregnant women from developing high blood pressure and in reducing their risk of giving birth to low-weight babies, according to a report based on previous studies.
But the report cautioned that is was still too early to recommend low-dose aspirin therapy routinely for women at high risk for those two problems.
The doses used in the studies were equal to almost one-fifth to nearly one-half of the aspirin found in a single standard pill or tablet sold over the counter.


October Wedding For Ms. Wilson
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Wilson of South Plainfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Margaret Anne Wilson to Ernst Martin Heldring, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Heldring of Wayne, Pa.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wilson, 36 years old, graduated from Georgetown University, as did her fiance, and has a J.D. from Seton Hall University.
She is an associate at the New York law firm of Wagner, Davis &amp; Gold.
Her father is a professor of biochemistry at New Jersey Medical School.
Her mother, Anna Marie Wilson, is a librarian at Maxson Junior High School in Plainfield.


Peter Brandt Engaged To Katherine A. Binns
Mr. and Mrs.
Jack R. Binns of Tucson, Ariz., have made known the engagement of their daughter Katherine Anne Binns to Peter Bartholin Brandt, a son of Xenia Brandt of New York and the late Werner Brandt.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Binns, 30 years old, is a vice president for field operations at Louis Harris &amp; Associates, a research firm in New York.
She graduated from the San Francisco Art Institute.
Her father is a retired Foreign Service officer who was the Ambassador to Honduras in the Carter Administration.


Seoul Accepts North's Call to Resume High-Level Talks
South Korea today accepted a North Korean call to resume stalled high-level political talks next week.
Also today, South Korea's Parliament gave unanimous approval to the country's planned effort to gain membership in the United Nations.


Labor's Last Heavy Hitter
A WHOLE DIFFERENT BALL GAME
The Sport and Business of Baseball.
By Marvin Miller.
Illustrated. 430 pp.
New York: Birch Lane Press/Carol Publishing. $21.95.


Postings: On the Hudson; Year-Round, With Slips
Catskill is one of New York's Hudson River towns long favored by those trying to escape summer's swelter.
Now a developer, Bijan Kalantari, is building a year-round residential complex there with boat-owners in mind.
The project, Harbor Lights Village, is on a 5.5-acre site on Catskill Creek, a quarter of a mile from the river.
All 52 boat slips and the first 10 of 50 town house residences have been completed.


Three Cheers For Accessibility
To the Editor:
Theodore Roszak's essay is insulting to cineastes of my generation.
I am a 21-year-old who is very particular about the movies I see.
They are predominantly films produced before my time, and with the tedium of the work of today, I'm thrilled when I'm able to see a "classic" re-released.
To me, the best movie news of the year was the video debut of two great American films, "Gun Crazy" and "Kiss Me Deadly." If I had been around for their original release, I would have seen them a few times each, after which I would be forced to wait for revival theaters and television to allow me access again.
If one feels passionate enough about a movie, being able to watch it to your heart's content is a blessing.


Handicapped Children's Families Require Help
I, as the parent of a developmentally disabled youngster, was interviewed for "Disabled Rallying for Budget"  [ June 9 ] .
As such, I would like to clarify certain points.
1.
Family support services are not involved in the educational needs of handicapped children.
Therefore, I did not obtain information or services regarding the school-placement or transportation needs of my son through the Peninsula Counseling Center.
For that, I must always deal with the Committee on Special Education of my school district.


. . . 'So Far as It May Be Practical' . . .
Hat in hand, Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev goes to London this week to meet with leaders of the Group of Seven leading industrial nations.
His goal is to win some relief for his nation's rheumatic economy, and last week he said he would ask for investment from the West rather than for direct aid.
As some of the opinions expressed here indicate, experts are divided on what it would take to make such a plan work, what strings should be attached -- or indeed whether aid for development would really help solve the deeply entrenched troubles of the Soviet economy.
One plan to spur Soviet economic recovery -- devised by a group of Soviet and Harvard academics -- proposes direct Western aid along the lines of the Marshall Plan, which helped rebuild Europe after World War II.
A spokesman for Mr.
Gorbachev said last week that the Yavlinsky Plan -- named for one of its Soviet authors -- would be one source for plans that the Soviet leader would bring to London this week.
Here are some excerpts.


Cycling; LeMond Storms Into Lead
Growing stronger as the course grew longer, Greg LeMond stormed back into the lead of the Tour de France today and opened up some breathing room between himself and most of his challengers.
LeMond, the 30-year-old American who is seeking his third consecutive title and fourth over all, also answered most affirmatively a question he had posed before the event started last weekend.
LeMond had said that he would have to wait a week, for this eighth stage, before he could truly evaluate his form.
Now he has the answer, and it is, of course, that he is fine.


Updating Callas's Legacy on Disk
The extraordinary and controversial career of Maria Callas has been matched by remarkable documentation of both her studio and live performances.
The problem is, what to collect -- unless, like John Ardoin, you collect everything.
Mr.
Ardoin, music critic of The Dallas Morning News, has spent a lifetime studying Callas's performances.
He has, as he writes in the new edition of his book "The Callas Legacy," "dealt with every scrap of recorded sound by Callas that I have been able to unearth."


Hey, Dudes, What's the Scoop This Time?
Two years ago, Bill and Ted were just a couple of regular high school dudes living in Southern California.
They dressed in typical teen-age style: jeans, baggy shorts, high-top sneakers, Van Halen T-shirts, inside-out sweatshirts with ink stains on the front.
They liked to do normal teen-age things: play guitar, go to the mall, dream of being famous rock stars.
As with a lot of teen-agers, Bill and Ted really weren't too interested in school, especially history class.
In fact, they were, as Bill said, "in danger of flunking most heinously." Then one day a guy from the future delivered them a time machine in the shape of a phone booth, so they could go back in history and meet the people they were being tested on.
Bill and Ted stood in amazement as the phone booth touched down in the parking lot of a local convenience store.
"Whoa," they said in unison.
"
Whoa
."


Camille Lamont Is Married on L.I.
Camille Haines Lamont, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Miner Lamont of Laurel Hollow, L.I., and Nicholas Weir Burlingham, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Burlingham of Cambridge, Mass., were married yesterday by the Rev.
T.
Carlton Lee at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Burlingham, 28 years old, is an assistant director of the Day Care Center in Hartford.
She graduated from Connecticut College, as did her husband.
She received a master's degree in early childhood education from Columbia University.
Her father, chairman of the Children's Aid Society of New York, is a former vice president of Morgan Guaranty Trust in New York.
Her grandfather Thomas S. Lamont was a vice chairman of Morgan Guaranty.


Inquiry at H.U.D. Results in Indictment of Texas Developer
A Texas real estate developer has been indicted by a grand jury investigating influence peddling at the Department of Housing and Urban Development in the Reagan Administration, according to court papers disclosed on Friday.
The developer, Leonard E. Briscoe, 49 years old, of Fort Worth, was accused in a six-count indictment of filing false statements to obtain $2.4 million under the Urban Development Action Grant program in 1986 for a project in Riviera Beach, Fla.


Families Planning an Appeal to Gorbachev on Korean Jet
Associations of families that lost relatives in the downing of a Korean airliner by the Soviets in 1983 have hopes that their grievances will be taken up with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev when he meets individually next week with President Bush and the leaders of Canada and Japan.
Family groups from the three nations have indications from their governments that Mr.
Gorbachev may be pressed on requests for the return of any remains and for compensation to survivors, according to Hans Ephraimson-Abt, chairman for the Americans.


The Magnanimous 7?
In some ways, the gathering of the leaders of the seven iggest industrial democracies starting here Monday shows how little the nations' leaders accomplished in Houston one year ago, when they last met to deal with some of the world's most acute economic problems.
Now, as then, the seven are divided about whether they should give large amounts of aid to help the Soviet Union replace Communism with a market economy, with Germany, Italy, and France in favor, and Japan, the United States, Britain and Canada saying the Soviets have not yet shown they really mean to make the shift.


Cherie Siegel to Marry Daniel Serota
Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur T. Siegel of Merrick, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cherie Dawn Siegel, to Daniel Harris Serota, the son of Mrs. and Mrs.
Nathan L. Serota of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Siegel, 27 years old, is the special-events coordinator at Henri Bendel in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a retired dentist who practiced in Merrick.
Her mother, Carol Siegel, is a senior branch manager for World Book Educational Products in Plainview, L.I.


A Gag Order During Play
To the Sports Editor:
Tennis commentators are the most annoying and disconcerting of all sports announcers and they should be gagged and maybe quartered and drawn, too.
They do not realize that people at home like to watch the game in silent concentration without all that irrelevant chatter about what the players had for breakfast or what kind of movies they like and other palaver, especially during play.
This was all too obvious during the Graf-Sabatini women's final at Wimbledon.
ERNEST R. BARRA Stuart, Fla.


There's Something New Under the Sun at the Met
One of the stranger troikas to have appeared in an American museum in recent times is the "Summer Selection" that can be seen through Sept. 8 in the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Behind its flat, noncommittal title there lurks a destructive mix that is something quite new for the Met.
Two of its three components make an impeccable mainline pairing.
Gallery I is devoted to German prints that range in date from around 1450 to the 1980's.
Gallery II is devoted to 17th-century French drawings, with a hefty representation by Claude Lorrain and backup groups by Nicolas Poussin and Simon Vouet.
Thus far, this is a troika that drives far and straight.
It is with the third component -- a roomful of large color photographs of contemporary American life -- that the troika makes an unexpected swerve.


Theresa Tierney Weds Jonathan Clark
Theresa Paige Tierney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Tierney of Merion, Pa., was married yesterday in Philadelphia to Jonathan Crawford Clark, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Clark of Aiken, S.C.
Capt.
John F. Baldwin, a Roman Catholic priest who is the fleet chaplain of Naval Forces Europe, performed the ceremony at the Cathedral of Sts.
Peter and Paul.
Mrs.
Clark, 31 years old, is a vice president in the investment banking department of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. degree from Dartmouth College.
Her father, a retired rear admiral, is the president and chief executive of the Catholic League in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.


Bridge
The financial cornerstone of organized bridge in North America has been the master-point system, which was begun in 1936.
The American Bridge League named 10 players that year to the new rank of life master, based on tournament performance.
Social players, if they noticed, were probably surprised that the list did not include Ely Culbertson, whose books they bought by the millions.
This was partly because his tournament appearances were rare and his victories very rare, but also partly because he was the head of a rival organization, the United States Bridge Association.
The two bodies merged a year later, becoming the American Contract Bridge League.


Robert J. Davis, Executive, 94
Robert J. Davis, former executive vice president of the American Optical Company in New York, later owned by Warner Lambert Inc., died on Tuesday at a nursing home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 94 years old and lived in Montclair.
Mr. Davis died of natural causes, a spokesman for the family said.


Expressway Service Road Cut Back
IN response to community complaints the State Transportation Department has dropped its $1 million project to build an intricate system of roads along the Long Island Expressway at the interchange with the Seaford-Oyster Bay Expressway.
The department is now proposing a scaled-down plan for the two-and-a-half-mile area.


Low-Voltage Lighting Easy to Install Outside
LOW-VOLTAGE outdoor lighting is easy to install, and also safe, efficient and inexpensive to operate.
Although it does not provide bright light, it furnishes sufficient illumination to accent architecture, improve security and light walkways, patios and similar areas for safety.
Hardware stores, home and garden centers and discount department stores carry low-voltage lighting kits that include basic components and instructions.
Before buying a kit, evaluate what is needed and plan a lighting layout so that you know what items are required, including accessories.


Review/Dance; New Company Joins a Festival With 'Ballet Builders'
Ruth Chester and Michael Kraus had a good idea when they founded New Choreographers on Point, a company dedicated to developing ballet choreography.
But "Ballet Builders," the program it presented on Wednesday at the start of the Fiorello Summer Dance Festival at the High School of the Performing Arts, was not entirely a success.
There were two strong pieces on the program: Mr.
Kraus's "Pick and Choose," the only dance not selected by audition, and Septime Webre's "D-Construction." "Pick and Choose," set to a score by John Adams that incorporated a Southern revivalist's religious exhortations, portrayed a relationship between two dramatically different people, one representing a serene ideal, the other scrabbling but buoyant imperfection.
The duet was also an interesting study in the quality of movement, with Lisa Ebeyer precise yet lush and Mr.
Kraus, the company's artistic director, a lithe darter.


Dr. Cutolo Is Engaged
November wedding plans for Dr.
Dorothy Marie Cutolo and Michael Thomas Zeterberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Zeterberg of Bay Shore, L.I., have been made known by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Louis Cutolo of Brooklyn.
Dr.
Cutolo, 29 years old, is a dentist in Massapequa, L.I.
She graduated from Lafayette College and received a D.D.S. degree from Georgetown University.
Mr.
Zeterberg, 29, is an investment banker with Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
He graduated from the University of Connecticut and received an M.B.A. degree from Long Island University.


Public Libraries in State Face Abridged Budgets
LIBRARY officials across the state are cutting their book purchases, pruning periodical lists and reducing hours, as they struggle to cope with smaller budgets.
In Bridgeport 30 of 67 library workers have been laid off, and the main public library will be open only 20 hours a week this summer.
Three of the city's branches will operate only one day a week, and the fourth, North Branch, will be open two, said the city librarian, Louise Mackay Minervino.
Similar problems afflict all the larger cities, and suburban libraries are cutting back, too.
In Monroe, for instance, the library director, Lynn M. Rosato, said she was forced to end evening hours.


Mutual Funds; An Appetite for Banking Stocks
Out of crisis comes opportunity, the proverb says.
In the United States, savings and loan associations are enmeshed in a crisis; the banking and insurance industries are struggling.
In Japan, Britain and Switzerland, banks have also been battered.
Hoping to prosper from all this is the Global Value Fund, a new mutual fund sponsored by Venture Advisers in Santa Fe, N.M., which invests mainly in banks, savings and loans, insurers and financial services companies worldwide.


Tech Notes; A Trickle-Down Plant Sitter
Going on vacation for a month need not mean finding plant sitters or coming home to a dead ficus, according to Driwater Inc.
The company, based in Sebastopol, Calif., has developed a time-release water product meant for home use that should keep things going even if the helpful neighbor is not available.
Driwater consists of about 98 percent water, 2 percent vegetable gum and a trace amount of alum, which bonds the mixture into a stable gel.
The product is sold in 7-ounce cups, which cost $1.49 each; 32-ounce cartons, $2.99 each, and bulk containers, $4 a gallon.


A Learning Experience for the Teachers, Too
Sarah Stackhouse and Lucas Hoving went to the People's Republic of China and experienced a high point in their lives as teachers of American modern dance.
David Hochoy, an American of Asian descent, found that going home was possible in an unexpected way.
And the student-dancers of the Guangdong Modern Dance Company -- which makes its American debut Thursday at the American Dance Festival in Durham, N.C. -- discovered a very different world of dance than the one they knew.
All were involved in a program under which American dance teachers worked in China for three-month periods to bring new ideas and insights to students trained in classical ballet and Chinese folk dance.


RECORD BRIEFS
Mahler: 'Das Lied von der Erde'
Birgit Finnila, alto; Peter Schreier, tenor; Berlin Symphony conducted by Kurt Sanderling.
Ars Vivendi 2100207; CD.


Amy R. Segal, Lawyer, Is Engaged To Dr. Andrew S. Blum, a Physician
The engagement of Amy Robin Segal to Dr.
Andrew Steven Blum, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney Blum of Baltimore, has been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon J. Segal of Hartsdale, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Segal, 28 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from the University of Chicago, where she was a member of the editorial board of The Legal Forum.
Her father, a population scientist, recently retired as a director of the Rockefeller Foundation.
He is a Distinguished Scientist on the staff of the Population Council in New York.
Her mother, Harriet Segal, is a novelist.


Brutally Beaten, a Boxer Still Dreams of Title
One morning this week, a world-class Nigerian boxer named Akeem Anifowoshe looked into his bathroom mirror, and then cried.
What he saw were legs that had lost muscle tone and turned stick-like, and a once-sinewy body that had become attenuated, like a figure from an El Greco painting.


Helping the South Fork
The Group for the South Fork, a 19-year-old environmental organization in East Hampton, L.I., raised nearly $100,000 at a dinner dance on July 6 at the estate of the late Evan M. Frankel in East Hampton.
A highlight for the 350 guests was the cocktail reception on the 14 acres of manicured lawns and gardens adorned with sculptures.
During the dinner dance under a white tent, Donald Petrie was honored for his work with the organization.


Corrections
An article on June 23 about a proposal to allow welfare recipients to use plastic cards to get their money, instead of giving them welfare checks and food stamps, misidentified the advocacy group with which Doreen Di Giacomo is affiliated.
She is the volunteer coordinator of the New Jersey Ending Hunger Now Campaign.


Topics of The Times; Unseemly Queenly Perks
The British are harrumphing about the royal fortune again.
The issue has been raised in the House of Commons by a Liberal M.P. from London, Simon Hughes.
"When so many people in my constituency are scraping along and asked to contribute tax on very low incomes," he said recently, "it seems grossly unfair that the person with the highest income escapes."
He meant, of course, the Queen.
Unlike America's Leona Helmsley -- said to have told a housekeeper that "only the little people pay taxes" -- Britain's Elizabeth II owes nothing.
Her grandfather, George V, got Parliament to exempt his government stipend.
Her father, George VI, then got exemption for the royal estates, explaining that a king "naturally" shouldn't be taxed.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My house has wood windows that have what appears to be a varnish finish.
Many of the window frames have water stains caused by condensation that occurred in the winter.
I am afraid that, should I do nothing about this, the wood will rot.
What do you suggest?
A.
The water stains are probably in the finish, not in the wood itself, so chances are that refinishing or painting would take care of that problem.
But you should try to do something about the condensation, because it could lead to more serious problems with rot.
One factor that will help is to install storm sash on the outside of all windows.
Another is to lower the humidity inside the house in the winter.
That might include turning down or shutting off the humidifier, if you have one, and making sure the bathrooms and kitchen have exhaust fans going when those rooms are in use.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Glen Cove 570,000
14 Westland Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 33-year-old, waterfront split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room w/fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $10,000.
Glen Head 215,000
13 Hill Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 63-year-old colonial; dining room, porch, basement, attic, 2-car detached garage; taxes $2,600.
Hauppauge 187,000
10 Sheila Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room w/fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,500.
Uniondale 145,000
1301 Cambria Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; updated kitchen, finished basement, detached 1-car garage; taxes $3,100.
Wantagh 163,000
2956 Wilson Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old split level; dining room, family room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,100.
Williston Park 153,500
175 Capitol Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, attic, gas heat; taxes $2,600.
OTHER AREAS Glastonbury, Conn. 190,000
136 Mountain Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 51-year-old Cape Cod; stone fireplace, family room, formal dining room, 1.8 acres; taxes $2,793.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 291,250
Shad Road West 3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; screened porch, dining room, 2.3 acres; taxes $4,745.
Ramsey, N.J. 398,000
24 Joshua Drive  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; sauna, fireplace, new kitchen; taxes $6,589.


Donna Rosenfeld to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Rosenfeld of Weston, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Donna Lynn Rosenfeld, to Dr.
Steven Mark Lepowsky, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving Lepowsky of Huntington, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rosenfeld, 30 years old, is the manager of market research for Bell Communications Research in Livingston, N.J.
She graduated from Brandeis University.
Dr.
Lepowsky, 30, is an assistant professor of dentistry at Columbia University.
He graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and received a dentistry degree from Columbia.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Fad for the Hamptons  Neither rain, nor sleet nor roller bladers will keep Lorri Ostrowe from delivering the mail in Westhampton Beach.
A new hazard has joined Ms.
Ostrowe's route down Main Street, novice roller bladers.
"I'm afraid I'm going to hit one," Ms.
Ostrowe said.


Mr. Nasty Slogs Through Mud To Win Tom Fool at Belmont
Mr.
Nasty led wire to wire in the mud yesterday afternoon at Belmont to win the $113,000 Tom Fool Stakes, handily beating the rest of the four-horse field.
The 4-year-old chestnut colt, with Angel Cordero Jr. aboard, sped the seven furlongs on a sloppy outer track in 1 minute 21.79 seconds, easily outrunning favored Rubiano, who tried to challenge on the inside rail and finished second.
Mr.
Nasty paid $6.60 to win and $3.00 to place.
There was no show betting.


Summer Calm in Catskills Shattered by Slayings
The sounds of the night -- two people talking on the nearby road, a car riding over some branches, someone's distant laugh -- sat the men and women upright and sent them outside to listen more closely, to stare hard into the night.
The sheriff's deputy, standing with arms folded at the front gate of the Ryke Inn Bungalow Colony, tried to calm them, but they wanted answers.
"What was that? What's happening?" a man asked.
"You should check the woods in back."


The Executive Life; Living Out Cowboy Fantasies on Vacation
Early in the hit film "City Slickers," Billy Crystal's buddies try to revive his flagging spirits -- and his sales career -- by inviting him on a two-week cattle drive out West.
They paint a romantic picture: traveling through sagebrush-filled canyons, herding steer with coiled lassos, sharing stories around a glowing campfire.
"We ride; we rope; we sleep under the stars," his pals tell him.
"This is going to be the greatest vacation ever."
Evidently the movie is spawning a mini-stampede of executives to cattle drives in search of the same rugged experience.
AmyGrubbs, executive director of the Dude Rancher's Association, says she has seen "a significant increase" in inquiries since "City Slickers" was released in June.
The group, based in LaPorte, Colo., oversees 98 dude ranches that offer vacations in 10 Western states, and its occupancy rate is 84 percent this year, up from 64 percent in 1987.
Demand is particularly strong for ranches that offer cattle drives, about 10 percent of the group's members.


U.S. Reports Gains in Drug War, but the Battles Keep On Shifting
Almost three years after President Bush declared a war on drugs, the blossoming of the Cali cartel in Colombia is only one development that challenges Administration claims that major progress is being made.
Government studies indicate that casual use of cocaine and marijuana is declining, particularly among the affluent, the middle class and students.
But critics in Congress say the Administration's statistics are not persuasive, and officials concede that progress is far slower among the homeless, blacks and other minorities.
Skeptics point to a rise in drug-related crime and in the number of deaths linked to use of heroin or cocaine.


Fire at Hispanic Family's Home Is Seen as Bias Crime
Mayor David N. Dinkins visited the home of a Hispanic family in Ozone Park, Queens, late yesterday afternoon, 38 hours after two fire bombs were hurled onto the porch of their frame house in what the police are investigating as a bias-related crime.
The family, including several children, was forced to flee by flames that destroyed parts of the front wall and the roof.
Awakened by a daughter who had been sleeping in the living room downstairs, they escaped out a back door and ran across the street.
No one was injured.


In Tight Economy, a Turn to Remodeling
WHEN Eileen and Edward Herbster sold their 12-room house in Rye, they bought a small Cape Cod remodeled it for their needs.
"We wanted to stay in Rye, but after our five children left home we reasoned it was cheaper for us to find a small house and remodel it to get what we want, rather than try to convert the big one," Mr.
Herbster, a construction management consultant.


The Region; Hartford's Tug-of-War Over an Income Tax Drags On
LIKE a scene from some zany summer movie, angry Connecticut protestors for and against the income tax picketed last week outside the insurance office of the Senate President pro tem, John B. Larson, who is an anti-income tax Democrat from East Hartford.
Mr.
Larson, who along with everyone else in the Capitol seemed to be showing signs of strain, was asked by reporters how things were shaping up.
The normally reserved legislator went into an impromptu soft shoe. 'The Great Summit'
Improbable occurrences are becoming common in Connecticut's increasingly embittered effort to find a budget plan.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., a third-party Governor who proposed a sweeping budget overhaul and income tax plan earlier this year, has now vetoed two complete year-long budgets that lacked the income tax.
The Senate has killed one budget that had passed in the House, and the House has voted down one that the Senators never even got to consider.


Fishermen on the Hudson Develop a Small Caviar Industry
DUBBED "the monster fish" and "the master of the Hudson" by local fishermen, the Atlantic sturgeon is the source of a small caviar business up and down the Hudson Valley.
From May until July about a dozen commercial fishermen set nets on the Hudson from Haverstraw Bay to Catskill, N.Y., hoping to snare the Atlantic sturgeon on its journey from the ocean to spawn in the river where it was born.


Sunday Menu; Potato Salad With Smoky Taste of the Sea
One recent afternoon, bored with chicken salad and not eager to have meat, I remembered all the dishes I had read about that used smoked salmon in place of fresh.
Suddenly the summertime potato salad I had been wanting to make seemed just the vehicle for a bit of fancy fish.
It doesn't take much smoked salmon to permeate a potato salad, providing all the flavor with little of the fat or salt.


BEST SELLERS: July 14, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
2
3
18
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
2
8
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
4
4
10
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
5
9
3
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
6
8
3
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The disappearance of a couple sailing off Bermuda raises a question: is a fabled creature from the deep responsible?
7
5
10
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
8
6
68
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
9
7
4
THE RUSTLERS OF WEST FORK, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $18.) A frontier novel featuring Hopalong Cassidy, first published in 1951. (LP)
10
10
5
VORTEX, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $21.95.) War in southern Africa, sometime in the future.
11
11
11
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of two perpetrators of an insurance scam.
12
12
7
IMMORTALITY, by Milan Kundera. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) Through the lives of characters in 19th-century Weimar and present-day Paris, the author reflects on contemporary life.
13 *
7
HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT, by Whitney Otto. (Villard, $18.) The reminiscences of eight women, members of a quilting circle.
14
15
4
A SOLDIER OF THE GREAT WAR, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $24.95.) An elderly Italian professor recalls a life spent as soldier, hero, deserter, lover and family man.
15
10
DAMAGE, by Josephine Hart. (Knopf, $18.) A British gentleman is mesmerized when he meets the woman his son plans to marry.
16 *
13
2
THE PIRANHAS, by Harold Robbins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) A young man discovers the ways of Hollywood, Wall Street and organized crime.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
34
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
2
4
4
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America, past, present and future.
3
2
9
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How the President and his high military commanders made their decisions during the first two years of the Bush Administration.
4
5
4
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
5
10
2
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
6
8
9
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
7 *
6
2
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
8
3
6
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events and machinations that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
9
16
6
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
10
9
6
COUNSEL TO THE PRESIDENT, by Clark Clifford with Richard Holbrooke. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the lawyer who served as adviser to several generations of Democrats.
11 *
11
3
PAUL HARVEY'S FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH, edited by Paul Harvey Jr. (Bantam, $15.) Anecdotes told by the radio broadcaster.
12
12
5
REAL PONIES DON'T GO OINK! by Patrick F. McManus. (Holt, $16.95.) A humorist's essays about life's foibles at home and in the great outdoors.
13
7
3
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
14
14
12
NANCY REAGAN, by Kitty Kelley. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized biography of the former First Lady.
15
15
8
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are being taught and treated on many campuses.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
5
23
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) An illustrated book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
2
2
79
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
3
3
36
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
4
4
46
HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal with today's problems.
5
116
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE ADVENTURES OF AMOS 'N' ANDY: A Social History of an American Phenomenon, by Melvin Patrick Ely. (Free Press, $22.95.) A Yale historian examines one of America's greatest cultural enigmas -- the amazing popularity, among blacks as well as whites, of "Amos 'n' Andy" on radio for more than 30 years.
AMERICAN NERVOUSNESS, 1903: An Anecdotal History, by Tom Lutz. (Cornell University, $29.95.) A witty, concrete, gossipy study of neurasthenia, the disease that once racked such members of the brainworking classes as Teddy Roosevelt, Henry James, Willa Cather, Jack London and everybody who was anybody at the time.
THE HITLER DIARIES: Fakes That Fooled the World, by Charles Hamilton. (University Press of Kentucky, $24.95.) The tale of the creation, merchandising and exposure of Adolf Hitler's lost works.
THE FORESEEABLE FUTURE, by Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $21.95.) Three longish short stories that invoke the meditative and retrospective powers of the form to show us people whose interior lives enable them to survive in the ordinary world.
BY HER OWN HAND: Memoirs of a Suicide's Daughter, by Signe Hammer. (Soho Press, $18.95.) A fascinating and disturbing family memoir that carefully follows to their beginnings the threads of family history that ultimately converged in disaster.
CABIN FEVER, by Elizabeth Jolley. (Harper Perennial, $19.95.) Ms.
Jolley's 13th volume of fiction concerns a mature woman in solitude, examining, recalling and finally mourning the people and events that once appeared in her life and now constitute her past.
POLITE SEX, by James Wilcox. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) A different species of aspiring-actress-in-New York novel, in which we see how life worked out for an earnest Smith graduate from the South.


Name That Tune
To the Editor:
In "Dancing to the Wrong Tune in Europe" (Forum, June 23), Milton Ezrati takes a shortsighted negative stance on monetary union.
Germany has adopted a tight-monetary/loose-fiscal balance to address domestic needs.
Does Mr.
Ezrati suggest a recipe of spiraling inflation and currency depreciation for Germany, a loose-monetary and loose-fiscal policy?


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on May 19 about the marriage of Elizabeth Cooley Buckingham and Denny Howard Silverman misidentified the college from which the bride graduated.
As she informed The Times last week, it was Smith College.


Kathleen Norton Weds
Kathleen Marie Norton and Joseph John Hamill Jr. were married yesterday by the Rev.
John Murray at St.
Bernard's Roman Catholic Church in Concord, Mass.
The bride is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James H. Norton of Concord.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hamill of Ridgewood, N.J.
Mrs.
Hamill, 26 years old, is a lawyer in New York.
She is a cum laude graduate of Georgetown University.
She and the bridegroom received law degrees from Boston University.
The bridegroom, 27 and a Northwestern University graduate, is an associate at the New York law firm of Condon &amp; Forsyth.


The Nation; Foes of Crime Bill Say It Steals States' Rights
THEY voted to outlaw advertising for marijuana seeds and enhance the penalty for selling drugs at truck stops.
They voted to create boot camps for young offenders and police corps for young law enforcers.
And in their wisdom, the members of the United States Senate last week also moved into territory that had belonged to the states.
They passed, by a vote of 71 to 26 on Thursday, an anti-crime bill that could, among other things, impose the death penalty in 14 states and the District of Columbia, where one does not exist.


Challenged and Chastened, Citibank Pursues the Customer
Citibank once advertised itself to New York consumers as the bank that never sleeps.
But it is discovering that rivals have also been staying up late.
While Citibank remains the largest consumer bank in the New York area, its lead has narrowed.
Chemical Bank, long the area leader in serving small- and medium-sized businesses, says it is now the primary bank for about 10 percent of the households in the New York area, up from 7 percent five years ago.
Manufacturers Hanover has expanded by acquiring 24 branches, with $2.8 billion of deposits, from the failed Goldome Savings Bank.
And Chase Manhattan, whose name is highly regarded by wealthy consumers, has launched a series of new products, most recently a package of special services for checking and savings account customers over the age of 50.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MY LIFE  By Edith Piaf with Jean Noli. Peter Owen/Dufour Editions, $30.


The World; South Africa Faces Lingering Wounds To Its Economy
WHEN the United States Congress enacted a tough package of sanctions against South Africa in 1986, President P. W. Botha responded with defiance.
"South Africans will not allow themselves to be humiliated in order to prevent sanctions," Mr.
Botha said.
"We do not desire and we do not seek it, but if we are forced to go it alone, so be it."


A PERSISTENT AMERICAN YEARNING
James Reston packs more common sense into his article "A Persistent American Yearning" (June 16) than has come out of the whole city of Washington in 10 months.
When will the President, the Congress and other leaders stop feeding us pap and swagger and come to grips with our country's real security problem -- a domestic society that is unraveling in frightening ways?
STEPHEN G. CARY
Haverford, Pa.


Back to Nature


This Week: Watering Grass
Try a new approach to watering the grass.
New research from Cornell University indicates that lawns should be watered less deeply in hot weather, a reversal of the old practice of watering deeply and less frequently during hot spells to help plants grow longer roots.


Cheaper Rooms Listed in Japan
A simpler process of reserving rooms in Japan is available through Japan's new Welcome Inn Reservation Center in Tokyo.
By sending a completed reservation request form to the center at least two weeks in advance, travelers may reserve rooms for $60 or less in 143 inns and lodges throughout Japan.
Those wishing to book a room upon arrival in Japan may do so at the tourist information centers in Tokyo, Kyoto or Narita.
The service is free and travelers may register independently or through a travel agent.
Accommodations range from Japanese-style inns (ryokan), family-run bed and breakfasts (minshuku), government-sponsored lodges (kokumin shukusha), to Western-style hotels and pensions.
Within a year, the center plans to increase the number of its registered inns to 600.
The Welcome Inn Reservation Center is operated by the International Tourism Center of Japan, a nonprofit arm of the Japan National Tourist Organization.
A free 1991 Directory of Welcome Inns, which includes a reservation request form, is available from the Japan National Tourist Organization, 630 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10111; (212) 757-5640.


Making a Difference; From Bad Boy to Big Business
Philippe Kahn has always commanded attention in the software industry -- for his loud Hawaiian shirts, for impromptu saxophone solos at news conferences and for throwing the best parties in the business.
But Mr.
Kahn has also commanded respect for technical innovation and marketing prowess and along the way he built his eight-year-old company, Borland International Inc., into a respected competitor.
Last week, he turned it into the third-largest maker of software for personal computers by announcing he would acquire the Ashton-Tate Corporation in a $439 million stock swap.
Only the Microsoft Corporation and the Lotus Development Corporation are bigger.


Chief's Response Criticized in Texas Beating
The shaky, grainy, home video zooms across the crowded freeway until it settles on a patrol car pulled onto the shoulder and the image of a police officer repeatedly hitting someone with a nightstick.
Like the beating of Rodney G. King by Los Angeles police officers in March, the incident on July 3 in Fort Worth was also captured on videotape.
But everyone connected with the Fort Worth incident agrees that there are significant differences in the two, particularly in the responses of the police chiefs in both cities.


February Bridal For Miss McCoy
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. McCoy of Boston have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tracey Anne McCoy, to Robert Barry Cleary Jr., a son of Mr.
Cleary of Weston, Mass., and Carol H. Reever of Reston, Va.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss McCoy, 26 years old, graduated from Rollins College.
She is an account executive at Arch Advertising, and her father is a partner in Colley &amp; McCoy, an investment concern, both in Windham, N.H.


Germany
To the Editor: The article about the royal palaces of Potsdam, near Berlin (Travel, June 9), was of great interest to us, having visited there about five weeks ago.
The article refers to a 45-minute drive from central Berlin.
We would recommend a train ride, taking about the same time, with the Berlin S-Bahn.
A change is required at Wannsee where the former West Berlin electric trains end.
The part from Wannsee to Potsdam, also originally electric, has not yet been restored, so trains are pulled by diesel engines.


Carolynne Kelly Weds T. K. Grundman
Carolynne Anne Kelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Kelly of Tenafly, N.J., was married in Tenafly yesterday to Thomas Kenneth Grundman, a son of Bernice Passaretti of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Charles K. Grundman The Rev.
Craig W. Rule and the Rev.
Harry E. Chase performed the ceremony at the Tenafly Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Grundman, 28 years old, is the director of advertising sales for Meetings &amp; Conventions magazine published in Secaucus, N.J.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is the vice president for program sales for Editel, a post-production video company in New York.


Two Cast Changes For 'Lips Together'
Roxanne Hart and Deborah Rush will join the cast of Terrence McNally's "Lips Together, Teeth Apart," which opened June 25 at the Manhattan Theater Club Stage 1, at City Center.
They will replace Swoosie Kurtz and Christine Baranski, original members of the cast, who are leaving for other commitments.
On Tuesday, Ms.
Rush will assume the role of Chloe Haddock, originally played by Ms.
Baranski; next Saturday, Ms.
Hart will take over for Ms.
Kurtz in the role of Sally Truman.
The other members of the original cast, Anthony Heald and Nathan Lane, will remain in the production.


Casino Employees Seeking Permission To Gamble
AFTER more than a decade of grudging acceptance of some of the most stringent casino gambling laws in in the world, Atlantic City casino employees say it is time for a change in the law that prohibits thousands of dealers, slot attendants and croupiers from gambling in the state's casinos.
The employees and their supporters say they are being denied a "basic human right" and are being treated as "second-class citizens" by being barred from gambling.


Sports People: TENNIS; Germans to Practice On Red Clay in U.S.
Germany's Davis Cup team, headed by Wimbledon champion MICHAEL STICH and runner-up BORIS BECKER, is so intent on beating the United States, the defending champions, in September that it is taking the unusual step of having its players remain in this country after the United States Open earlier that month, to get in practice time on red clay.
The Germans' captain, NIKKI PILIC, said he is searching for red-clay courts to approximate those the American squad has chosen for the semifinal round of competition, Sept. 20-22 at Kemper Arena in Kansas City, Mo.
Pilic and his players, each of whom is paid via private contract with the German Tennis Federation, will presumably end up in Florida, where there are red-clay courts near Tampa and at the Association of Tennis Professionals tour headquarters in Ponte Vedra.
The court at Kemper Arena won't be available until Sept. 16.


The Striped Bass Weren't Interested in a Repeat Performance
If he is wise, an angler will not try to duplicate an unusually rewarding fishing adventure and will use the memory of it not as a goal but as sustenance through the winter and the winter of his years.
Being unwise, I spent 17 evenings from late May through the third week in June striving vainly to re-create a night of fly-fishing for striped bass during which I caught and released more than 30 of those fish.


INSIDE
Violence at Film Openings
Violence erupted as the film "Boyz N the Hood" opened around the country.
Page 10.
The film is part of the emergence of blacks to film-making prominence.
Magazine, section 6.


From Twigs, Leaves and Mud, a Show of Landscape
THE Katonah Museum of Art has been invaded by "Sticks and Stones" and looks all the better for it.
That is, the premises seem more lived-in, though by those who may well have stalked out of the collective unconscious.
Apparently, the show's title was not lifted from the nursery rhyme, for there are no implications of broken bones or hurtful words.
There are words, however -- from the guest curator, Barry Walker, who heads the department of prints and drawings at the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston.
Mr.
Walker contends in his catalogue essay that the artists make "us" think of "our" relationship to natural surroundings.
"The show," he adds, "is not
about
landscape; it is
of
landscape." And indeed, several of the artists actually use sticks or stones or both.


Anne F. Botta Is Engaged To John Russell Trautlein
The engagement of Anne Ferris Botta to John Russell Trautlein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald H. Trautlein of Bethlehem, Pa., has been made known by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Robert Botta of Allendale, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Botta, 31 years old and a Wheaton College graduate, is an associate at Slatkin &amp; Company, interior designers in New York.
Her father is a physician and surgeon.


Dr. J. Julio Perez Fontan Is Married To Dr. Arnold, a Fellow Pediatrician
Dr.
Susan Teale Arnold, a daughter of Barbara N. Arnold of New York and the late Dr.
William D. Arnold, was married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest to Dr.
J.
Julio Perez Fontan, the son of Maria del Carmen Fontan Maquiera of Santiago, Spain, and the late Simon Perez Nino.
The Rev.
Hugh Hildesley and the Rev.
John J. Tivenan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
The bride, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a pediatric neurology fellow at Yale University.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received her M.D. degree from Cornell University.
Her father, an orthopedic surgeon, was the chief of the combined fracture service of New York Hospital and the Hospital for Special Surgery.


A Nomination Sets Off Battle On C.I.A. Role
Beyond the charges and denials involving the Iran-contra affair, the struggle over Robert M. Gates's nomination as Director of Central Intelligence is a battle over the course of the nation's 50-year-old espionage establishment.
Broadly, the conflict pits two contrasting views of American intelligence.
Supporters of Mr.
Gates would shift the historic focus of American intelligence away from the Soviet Union, secret wars and back-alley covert operations to the sophisticated analysis of regional and global political and economic trends.
On the other side are veteran spies, in the mold of John le Carre's fictional George Smiley, whose views were forged in the cold war and the shadowy world of espionage.


Reporting Czech News
WITH Czechoslovakia in turmoil, a publisher on Long Island is trying to provide news for worried Czechoslovaks in the New York metropolitan region.
The publisher, Peter Bisek, and his wife, Vera, race the clock every other week to put out their bilingual bicultural Czechoslovak newspaper.


Intervention Knocks Dollar
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
136.35
138.30
148.15
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7895
1.8265
1.6515
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1483
1.1439
1.1579
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6505
1.6155
1.8005
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$368.25
$369.55
$364.40
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Low-Voltage Lighting Easy to Install Outside
LOW-VOLTAGE outdoor lighting is easy to install, and also safe, efficient and inexpensive to operate.
Although it does not provide bright light, it furnishes sufficient illumination to accent architecture, improve security and light walkways, patios and similar areas for safety.
Hardware stores, home and garden centers and discount department stores carry low-voltage lighting kits that include basic components and instructions.
Before buying a kit, evaluate what is needed and plan a lighting layout so that you know what items are required, including accessories.


Texas
To the Editor: Suzanne Winckler's account of the beauty and charm of Austin (Travel, May 26) is accurate in every detail, but she omitted a salient fact: Austin has no downtown bus station.
In early December I went by bus from San Antonio, my boyhood home, for a sentimental visit to the University of Texas, from which I received a B.A. in June 1950.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Livingston 230,000
105 Wast McClellan Avenue  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-half bath, 49-year-old colonial; 3-car garage, fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,728.
Ramsey 398,000
24 Joshua Drive  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; sauna, fireplace, new kitchen; taxes $6,589.
Ringwood 140,000
180 Skyline Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old raised ranch; fireplace, rec room, 3-zone heating; taxes $4,172.
Short Hills 317,000
52 Elmwood Place  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 45-year-old Tudor; den, porch, 2-car garage, fireplace; taxes $4,686.
Springfield 225,000
690 South Springfield Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 20-year-old contemporary; c/a, 2-car garage, family room w/fireplace; taxes $4,870.
Woodcliff Lake 180,000
51 Lincoln Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, 2-zone heating, corner lot, full basement; taxes $2,609.
OTHER AREAS Glastonbury, Conn. 190,000
136 Mountain Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 51-year-old Cape Cod; stone fireplace, family room, formal dining room, 1.8 acres; taxes $2,793.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 291,250
Shad Road West 3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; screened porch, dining room, 2,438 square feet, 2.3 acres; taxes $4,745.
Wantagh, L.I. 163,000
2956 Wilson Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old split level; dining room, family room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,100.


Man Denied Tax Deductions Is Charged in I.R.S. Attacks
A man who was denied $9,000 in deductions in a tax audit was charged in two ombings of an Internal Revenue Service office, the authorities said.
The man, Dean Harvey Hicks, 45 years old, is also under investigation in the bombings of several other revenue service offices, including one in Fresno, Calif., the Federal Bureau of Investigation said.


To Give Bastille Day Its Due, Brioche
IT'S Bastille Day. Let them eat cake. Or, one might translate literally and say gateau.
Actually, the term is brioche.
Jean Jacques Rousseau, the 18th-century French author, recalled the Queen's "thoughtless saying" as "Qu'ils mangent de la brioche." So to give the day its due, it should be brioche.


Never Without Her Camera
ELIZABETH ALICE AUSTEN was a member of the Staten Island gentry, counting Van Rensselaers among her relatives, Roosevelts among her friends and photographing them all every chance she got.
Of the 3,000 prints that survive, 100 are on view at the Alice Austen House for the rest of the season.
The daughter of Alice Cornell Austen and Edward Stepford Munn, an Englishman who left shortly before her birth in 1866 (and whose name she rejected), the young Alice grew up in the house, then called Clear Comfort, with her mother, grandparents and other relatives for company.
It remained her home until 1950, when she was admitted to the poorhouse, titled euphemistically the Staten Island Farm Colony.


On Language; Britishisms Lying Doggo
Is doggo to become the new sleeping dog of punditry?" asks Duncan Morrow of Springfield, Virginia. Readers who closely follow the usage of the chin-pulling set know that Britishisms and Southernisms abound; in this case, two columnists with Southern roots were caught using a Britishism.
Edwin Yoder, Jr. speculated that Saddam Hussein's military strategy was to dig in, "protecting his military assets and lying
doggo
while U.S.-allied air power breaks over him."


Carol Bernstein, Psychiatrist, Wed
Dr.
Carol Ann Bernstein and Dr.
Arthur Theodore Meyerson were married last evening at the Burden mansion in New York by Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is 43 years old and is the daughter of Dr.
Stanley H. Bernstein of Hollywood, Fla., a cardiologist, and the late Enid L. Bernstein.
The bridegroom, 54, is the son of Dr.
Morris Meyerson of New York, a retired dentist, and the late Rebecca Meyerson.


The Life And Times Of Ellen Tracy
Ellen Tracy is a familiar name to women shopping for career clothes in up-to-the-minute styles at prices that are easy on the paycheck.
A major resource for just about every department store in the country, Ellen Tracy has been around for 42 years.
But no, Virginia, there is no Ellen Tracy.
And there never has been.
The company's founder and owner is Herbert Gallen.
The designer for the last 29 years has been Linda Allard, an Ohio native who came to New York right after graduating from college with a degree in fine arts and a determination to become a designer.


Ice Cube Melts in Front of the Camera
Ice Cube was born and raised in South Central Los Angeles, the black ghetto that has been transformed into a war zone by drugs, gangs and easily obtainable weapons.
His first-hand knowledge of the city's violence made him an ideal candidate to break into films in the role of Doughboy.
The character is a teen-ager trapped in a violent, dead-end existence in "Boyz 'n the Hood," the first feature film by another young man from the neighborhood, 23-year-old John Singleton.
But Ice Cube, who is 22 years old, already had a career.
Making his debut in 1986 as a member of the provocative rap outfit N.W.A., he wrote that group's first hit single, "Boyz 'n the Hood," before striking out on his own.
His 1989 solo album, "AmeriKKKa's Most Wanted," went platinum in a matter of weeks.


Two Shapes of Comedy -- Tragic and Spoof
The sun is bright, the sky is crystalline, and a breeze is wafting in off the ocean.
It promises to be the perfect Fourth of July.
Standing on the deck of a sleek Fire Island beach house, drinking in the sea air, Chloe is contemplating the day ahead.
"No agenda," she announces idly.
But she can't help herself.
She still has to tick off the possibilities.
"Swim, take a walk, read, volleyball, paint, barbecue, nap, doze, eat, drink, laze, nothing."


Managing; In Motivation, Nonprofits Are Ahead
Nonprofit organizations can still learn a lot from the private sector about managing projects and money.
In fact, last October the well-known management guru Peter Drucker founded the Peter F. Drucker Foundation for Nonprofit Management to provide management advice and money to nonprofit groups willing to try new management techniques.
But Mr.
Drucker and other management experts say that when it comes to managing people, nonprofit executives have passed their corporate colleagues on the learning curve.
Frances Hesselbein, head of the New York-based Drucker Foundation, discussed some of the reasons behind the discrepancy.


Sunday Outing; No Snow, But Hunter Mountain Is Busy Anyway
The chairlift runs up the mountain, ski trails are open and the base lodge is full of people.
But one thing is missing: snow.
Hunter Mountain, a 128-mile drive from New York City, bills itself as "the snowmaking capital of the world." But it does not come alive only in winter.
In summer it offers an array of activities from music festivals to mountain biking.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Prices Dropping on Fairfield's Gold Coast
FAIRFIELD COUNTY'S prestigious towns of Greenwich, Darien, New Canaan and Westport have beckoned home seekers for a half-century as the ultimate in country living.
They still do, but their cachet is available to a larger segment of the market since prices have dropped from their lofty perches of the 1980's.
Christine and Mark Bell, born and raised in Brooklyn, are moving from a Manhattan co-op to a $297,000 triplex at Hawthorne, a condominium complex on Pemberwick Road in Greenwich.


Forget the Fluff; Cut to the Court
To the Sports Editor:
It's unfortunate that coverage of the most prestigious tennis event in the world must be interrupted by a 20-minute interview with a player's ex-girl friend and a documentary on another player's temper tantrums.
Skip the junk shots, NBC, and show tennis!


A Living Will Is Not A Health-Care Proxy
I wish to correct a misstatement in Donna Greene's interview of the elder law attorney on June 23  [ Westchester Q&amp;A: Penelope Morgan ] .
A living will is not the same as a health-care proxy. A living will presumes a
permanent
inability to participate in health care decisions.
It sets forth a person's choice either to have administered or withheld treatment that serves only to prolong the dying process when the person is in an incurable or irreversible mental or physical condition with no reasonable expectation of recovery.
It is a person's statement of preference either to be kept alive indefinitely through artificial life support or to be allowed to die "with dignity."


Listen to the Baroque Mocking Bird
To the Editor:
Your suggestion that mockingbirds like a little amusement is borne out by a recent experience I had with a house finch who frequents my fire escape.
One day, after he poured forth the incredible arpeggio his tiny throat produces, I tried a responding whistle, to which he responded with an even more involved melodic convolution.
Although at times my whistle was little more than a croak, he seemed to enjoy the conversation and came back for more, daily at midday and fiveish.


More Jail Crowding May Force Release of Inmates
First, the prison barge was not ready on time.
Then the State Legislature refused to approve the early release of more inmates from New York City jails.
Suddenly, a record backlog developed in transferring city prisoners to state custody.
And finally the New York City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, vetoed a $270 million emergency construction plan to add space quickly for 3,000 inmates in the city's jail system.
All of these circumstances arose over the last month, confronting New York with what jail officials say is its most serious prison overcrowding in eight years.
The city's top jail official, Correction Commissioner Allyn R. Sielaff, says the problems were "unforeseeable" and may soon force him to release thousands of inmates.


State's Troubadour Sings of Golden Yesterdays and Shining Tomorrows
IN his winsome tenor voice, Tom Callinan sings odes to Connecticut that reach out to the emotions.
They tell of a land of dreams, moonlit scenes, sailing ships and village greens.
The state is a vibrant patchwork of people and places, says Mr.
Callinan, who calls one of his songs "Connecticut: More Than Just a Corridor."
Yet he says he longs for the day when the dolphins he watched as a child from his seaside home return to play in Long Island Sound, when the oyster beds of New Haven harbor once again thrive, and when industrial and medical waste no longer threaten to close beaches.
"Long Island Sound's been good to me," he says, adding that this faithful friend now needs help.


The Vanishing Footnote
To the Editor:
I am just as much disturbed by the disappearance of citations altogether as Gertrude Himmelfarb is, and I do understand her impatience at having to flip to the back of the book -- or, worse yet, wait until the final volume is published.
But, as a practicing scholar, I find there are few things more maddening than trying to check a fact through a footnote at the bottom of a page only to encounter "op. cit.," with no hint as to the previous page on which that particular "op." was duly "cit." At that point, one works one's way backward, footnote by footnote and page by page, hoping not to miss the fine print, and eventually one finds the full citation.
This can be a tedious process in a work with hundreds of pages and a plethora of citations.


Streetscapes: 12 West 129th Street; Changeling Resists Landmark Status
THE Landmarks Preservation Commission will hold a hearing on Upper Manhattan landmarks tomorrow -- delayed from June 11 by Borough President Ruth W. Messinger and some local groups to allow more time for discussion.
But there is one building where the opposition of the owner has been increasing, not decreasing, and if the opposition is availing, then the future of the odd little villa structure at 12 West 129th Street is in doubt.


Bed and Pirogi in Eastern Europe
MY Polish hostess, Helena Ditrych, showed me the tidy guest room of her Warsaw apartment with its blue curtains and oversized fan, and then whisked me into her kitchen for an ample meal of pirogis and cold cuts.
It was only after my second glass of oversweetened fruit juice to stave off the unusual Warsaw heat that I realized she knew just a word or two of English and German.
I speak absolutely no Polish.
I was immediately taken aback, but then I thought of the fan, and decided to brave it.
Helena, who must have been in her early 60's, was clearly not intimidated.
After heaping more delicious pirogis on my plate, she fetched a heavy book that I thought for a moment was a Bible, but which turned out to be a Polish-English dictionary.


NASA's Untouchable Folly
NASA's proposed space station continues to grind forward, propelled more by momentum than common sense.
Last month it survived an effort to kill it in the House, and last week it was approved for another year of funding by the Senate Appropriations Committee.
But as the full Senate prepares to vote on the extravagant project, it needs to ask itself one critical question: Isn't there a better way to perform the primary mission of this costly platform?


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Stock prices were up today in Tokyo.
At the close of trading, the 225-issue Nikkei average was at 23,459.04, a gain of 321.26 points, or 1.39 percent.


Alcoa Net Off; Alcan in Loss
Alcoa says its earnings declined by half in the second quarter, while a competitor, Alcan Aluminium Ltd., said it lost $5 million in the period, primarily because of lower aluminum prices.
Alcoa, the world's largest aluminum maker, said on Friday that its net income totaled $81.2 million, or 95 cents a share, compared with $161.9 million, or $1.86 a share in the second quarter of last year.
Its revenues fell to $2.6 billion, from $2.74 billion.


Rahal Wins a Third (Last?) Meadowlands Grand Prix
Bobby Rahal has probably developed a special fondness for the Meadowlands Grand Prix, which he won today for his first victory since winning this race two years ago.
This time next year, he may have only the memories of this track.
Rahal, who hadn't won an Indy-car race in 31 races after entering the 1990 season having won 1 out of each 11 Indy-car races he had entered in his career, took the lead on the 62d lap of the 150-lap, 182.55-mile race today and was never seriously challenged.
His average speed was 95.551 miles an hour and he won $77,922 in beating his teammate Al Unser Jr. by 6.954 seconds.
Rick Mears was third.


'They Were Throwing Bottles and Cans at the Nasty Guy'
To the Editor:
"After her husband had been knocked out of his wheelchair in Harlem and robbed of his video camera, and after her son had chased after the thief, all Paulette Pastre could scream was, 'Parlez-vous francais?' " (news article, July 8).


Bridge
Any player who ventures into the press room at a world championship or major European international event is likely to find an organized chaos consisting of typewriters, computers, telex machines, fax machines, telephones, result sheets and match records.
For the last 18 years the chaos was efficiently controlled by Rene Ducheyne, who died July 1 in the Netherlands at the age of 52.
He was a large, rumpled man who was capable of sending a telex message in one language, conducting a telephone conversation in a second, and answering a journalist's question in a third, simultaneously.
And his wife, Elly, was always present, unobtrusively dealing with any other problems that arose.


Corrections
An article on June 24 about budget cuts at the New York City Health Department's Bureau of Laboratories incompletely described the processing of AIDS-virus tests in the city.
Although the Health Department handles the bulk of the work, several private laboratories also process the tests.


Goodbye $, Hello "B"
Numbers have gotten too big.
The gross national product, the national debt, the Federal budget, the Social Security Trust Fund.
I first thought that I was the problem; perhaps I had lost the ability to tell whether things were costing too much or too little.
However, I now think the problem is in the numbers -- they are just too far from what normal people encounter in their daily lives.
Ordinary people are paid in the unit of currency that is legal tender -- here, the dollar.
Our mistake lies in assuming that when the House Ways and Means Committee, the Office of Management and Budget and General Motors discuss money, they too are referring to dollars.


One Killed, One Wounded in Subway Shooting


Reporter's Notebook; British Hosts, Being British, Plan an Understated Splendor
Two years ago, the French combined the annual meeting of seven leading economic powers with a celebration of the 200th anniversary of their revolution.
They built a 35-story hollow cube to serve as conference headquarters and imported the soprano Jessye Norman, wrapped in a tricolor gown, to sing "The Marseillaise" in the Place de la Concorde.
Last year, President Bush's adopted hometown, Houston, spent something approaching $20 million on civic beautification, treated all the grandees to a rodeo and outdid even the French in the quantities of food and drink provided.


Poet Told All; Therapist Provides the Record
When the poet Anne Sexton began writing in the late 1950's, those intensely autobiographical poems about her mental breakdowns, erotic fantasies and preoccupation with death brought her overnight acclaim, and some criticism, as a "confessional poet." As Sexton said, rather proudly, at the peak of her popularity in 1969, "I hold back nothing."
Neither did her psychiatrist.
"Anne Sexton," to be published by Houghton Mifflin in September, is the first serious examination of Sexton's life and work since her suicide, at the age of 45, in 1974.
It is also the first known time a biography of a major American figure relies on material taken from the subject's private therapy sessions with a psychiatrist.


Books of The Times; Deranged Mind as a Landscape Drawing Tourists
Force of Gravity By R. S. Jones 320 pages. Viking. $19.95.
Inside a deranged person's head may not seem the most inviting place to spend the length of a novel.
And yet the literature of insanity is enduring: One thinks offhand of "The Metamorphosis," by Kafka, and three other stories: Willa Cather's "Paul's Case," Oliver Onions's "Beckoning Fair One" and Conrad Aiken's "Silent Snow, Secret Snow." One thinks of Malcolm Lowry's novel "Under the Volcano" and Joanne Greenberg's "I Never Promised You a Rose Garden."


Maris May Get New Shot at Hall
Roger Maris's chances to land in the Baseball Hall of Fame could go from nonexistent to remotely possible when the hall's board of directors meets next weekend when this year's inductions will be made in Cooperstown, N.Y.
EDWARD STACK, the Hall of Fame's president, acknowledged that there might be an amendment to a recently passed rule that makes Maris's entry into the hall via the veterans committee impossible.


Near Gang Turf, Theater Features Peace
The homeboys came, but they mostly left their colors at home and "dressed down," as they say in the 'hood, to see "Boyz N the Hood."
While sporadic violence on Friday night caused eight movie theaters elsewhere in Southern California and the nation to cancel showings of the film, there was no trouble where many had expected it to be the worst, at the Baldwin Hills Theater, which lies at the edge of the gang-torn South Central Los Angeles neighborhood where John Singleton's drama of growing up in the ghetto was set.


Health Officials Investigate Practice of Dentist Infected With AIDS
New York State health officials are investigating the practice of a recently deceased Long Island dentist who was infected with the AIDS virus to determine if he passed the virus to any of his patients.
The investigation, which is the first of its kind in New York, began yesterday when more than 110 former patients of Dr.
Philip M. Feldman of Coram, L.I., called a toll-free telephone number to receive counseling about AIDS and information on a free, confidential testing program.


Review/Rock; A Band Seeking to Shock
Sex, blasphemy, big beats and go-go dancing: they're all in a night's work for My Life With the Thrill Kill Kult, who performed on Friday night at the Building.
"Yeah we're wild," the group's two female singers cooed in "The International Sin Set," and the group tried to live up to its promises of titillation with costumes and lyrics that itemized fetishes and taboos in titles like "Leathersex," "Sexplosion" and "Sex on Wheelz."
The men, raspy and trying to be ominous, wore leather, satin and panty hose; the women variously appeared in a leather bikini, a gold-foil wig, a feather boa, a nurse's uniform and, at one point, a pair of waist-length conical breasts, kneeling before a man on a crucifix.
As the band sang about "Christian zombie vampires," an oversize cardinal figure appeared to bless the proceedings.


A Job for 100 Chinese-American Notables
To the Editor:
As translator of "The Chinese of America" by Jack Chen and editor of Our Pen, a Chinese-American writing-class magazine, I am deeply interested in the formation of the Committee of 100 distinguished Chinese-Americans ("Building a Voice for Chinese in the U.S.," June 22).
Members like I. M. Pei, Yo-Yo Ma and T. D. Lee have become household names for all Chinese-Americans to emulate.
I am glad that they came to their senses and are using their socioeconomic status and popularity to deal with issues facing Chinese-Americans.
I would like to point out a few things for the committee as it develops its goals, strategies and activities.


CHRONICLE
BILLY JOEL put Cold Spring Harbor on the map by naming his first album after the Long Island waterfront community.
Now, the Town of Huntington, which includes Cold Spring Harbor, is dedicating a park to the rock singer.
On the way from Hicksville, where he was born, to the Hamptons, where he lives now, Mr.
Joel lived in Cold Spring Harbor, where he got his start composing and performing.
"He's been very active in Long Island, and we want to recognize his advocacy for the environment and his work on behalf of the baymen, who are fighting for their survival," said WILLIAM B. REBOLINI, a Huntington Councilman and Billy Joel fan.
The small park, 52 by 83 feet, is on the waterfront next to the fishing pier.
The dedication is on Wednesday, with Mr.
Joel's wife and daughter, CHRISTIE BRINKLEY and ALEXA JOEL, expected to attend.


One 'Mos Time: Cosmos Are Back
Sixty-two former Cosmos players, including PELE, are expected at a Giants Stadium reunion of the defunct North American Soccer League powerhouse on Sunday.
The only name player who won't be attending the exhibition doubleheader against former stars of Brazil and Italy will be GIORGIO CHINAGLIA , who has other commitments. . . .
Time Flies Department: RAY CHARLES LEONARD JR. , who as a small child appeared with his famous fighting father in commercials, will attend Ohio University in the fall.
He'll major in computer science.


Mcorp Wins Its Case Against Regulators
A Federal judge has ruled for the second time this year that regulators violated banking law in a dispute related to the collapse of Mcorp, once the second-largest banking company in Texas.
District Judge Robert Porter ruled last week that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which insures deposits at the nation's banks, withheld money owed to Mcorp's New Braunfels, Tex., bank after many Mcorp banks were taken over in 1989.
The $17.1 million in dispute was lent to Mbank Dallas by Mbank New Braunfels.


Decision Today on Adjusting the Census
In a decision that could affect the makeup of political districts nationwide and the distribution of about $59 billion in Federal aid, Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher plans to announce Monday whether the flaws in the 1990 census should be remedied by using statistical formulas to correct the count.
The decision will determine whether there will be a statistical adjustment to add about 5.3 million people who the Census Bureau believes were missed in its count of the nation's 248.7 million residents.


Medicaid Fraud: It Can Be Costly
Medicaid fraud by pharmacists, physicians, laboratories and patients costs New York State and its localities $150 million to $2.5 billion a year, according to estimates given at recent hearings by the State Senate's Social Services Committee.
"Without question, I'm sure you can say it's in the hundreds of millions that are stolen every year," said the committee chairman, Joseph R. Holland, a Republican of New City.


Financial Plight of a Top Insurer Could Shake Faith in the Industry
The Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company has been one of the most conservative and respected insurance companies in the country, and as New Jersey officials prepare to seize it this morning, industry experts predict the takeover will weaken public confidence in the life insurance business.
The seizure of Mutual Benefit, based in Newark, would prevent the largest failure of an insurer to date.
The company is in financial distress because of its troubled real estate investments.


Dance in Review
Midori Kashiwagi and Company Gould Hall 55 East 59th Street
Some dances are more interesting in their conception than in their actuality.
That was certainly true of the two works presented by Midori Kashiwagi and Company on Friday night.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10
The arms talks ended in agreement on all issues, except for a technical question.
The agreement came after four days of talks between Secretary Baker and the Soviet Foreign Minister in Washington.
Page A1


Seized Bank Helped Andrew Young Firm And Carter Charities
Charitable organizations created by former President Jimmy Carter received $8 million in contributions from the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce International, and Andrew Young, the Carter Administration's representative at the United Nations, had a consulting arrangement with the bank while he was the Mayor of Atlanta.
The $8 million in donations spanned several years and were given to Mr.
Carter's Global 2000 Inc., which the former President organized to help improve health and agriculture in developing countries.
The bank also donated $500,000 toward the construction of the multimillion-dollar Carter Center of Emory University in Atlanta, which includes the Jimmy Carter Library and operates health, agricultural and political mediation programs around the world. 'No Strings Attached'
As investigators sift through the complex history of the bank, which was seized by regulators in seven countries earlier this month, there has been no suggestion that Mr.
Carter performed any services for the institution.
But the details of the charitable gifts and the arrangement with Mr.
Young demonstrate the way in which the bank created ties with American public officials to help it do business.


Philippine Volcano Buried 40 People Alive
More than 40 tribespeople who hid in mountain caves to escape an erupting Philippine volcano were buried alive by volcanic debris, civil defense officials said today.
Up to 435 people have been killed since Mount Pinatubo began erupting on June 9, according to combined reports from the Office of Civil Defense and the Philippine National Red Cross.


Dividend Meetings


Coast-to-Coast Sunday Punch As Four Score Runs, Runs, Runs
Will Clark drove in seven runs, including four on a grand slam, and had five hits today as the San Francisco Giants routed the Philadelphia Phillies, 17-5.
Clark's seven runs batted in and five hits tied his career highs.
Matt Williams added two homers and four r.b.i. and Kevin Mitchell hit a three-run homer as the Giants banged out 22 hits.


Review/Television; Garbage Rules the Waves
Summertime and the bathing is queasy.
Tonight, in "Danger at the Beach," the first of eight weekly National Audubon Society specials, at 8 on Channel 13, Ted Danson, the actor and founder of American Oceans Campaign, travels from Boston Harbor to Long Island Sound to the New Jersey shore to Chesapeake Bay to Florida to Puget Sound, and finds garbage everywhere.
He also finds people who are trying to clean things up, with not enough help, some say, from the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
Although the producers cannot resist posing Mr.
Danson moodily against the waters he is trying to save, he makes a down-to-earth guide who seems actually interested in the fact that half the shellfish beds around Boston have been closed because of pollution and that ooze from the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island is seeping onto the Jersey Shore.
The segment in Florida tells of romantic cruise ships dumping all manner of garbage into the water, and, in the Bering Sea, seals are seen being strangled by discarded plastic.
The poisons spread by humans are giving liver cancer to sole in Puget Bay.


Dance in Review
The Royal Ballet Metropolitan Opera House
The Royal Ballet, vividly renewed since its last visit in 1983, revealed more about itself and its new productions with another series of debuts at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Lesley Collier, now the British company's senior ballerina, appeared for the first time as Odette-Odile in Anthony Dowell's staging of "Swan Lake" on Saturday afternoon.
The triple bill on Friday night featured Fiona Brockway and Tetsuya Kumakawa as the new leads in Sir Frederick Ashton's "Scenes de Ballet."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week: *
Alkermes Inc., 1.5 million common shares.
Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co. *
Alliance Imaging Inc., 2.75 million common shares.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc.


Lincoln S.&amp; L. Parent Sues
Saying other creditors got a raw deal, the parent of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association says it is suing to regain $27 million paid to more than 2,000 bondholders before it filed for bankruptcy protection.
An attorney for the bondholders, Joseph W. Cotchett, said the move was outrageous because many of those being sued lost large amounts of money when the American Continental Corporation collapsed, leaving its bonds nearly worthless.
"Most of these people are elderly people who lost their life savings," he said.


Mr. Gates: Man in the Middle
The Senate Select Committee on Intelligence was right to postpone today's scheduled hearing on Robert Gates's fitness to be Director of Central Intelligence.
Fresh disclosures about the Iran-contra scandal demand a close and careful examination of the C.I.A.'s involvement in covering up the scandal while Mr.
Gates was deputy director.
President Bush keeps pressing for quick confirmation.
But a stunning guilty plea last week by the official who ran covert operations in Central America is reason to slow the Senate's rush to judgment.


Metro Matters; How Dinkins Plan To Combat Crime Detoured Critics
A foreign tourist dies from gunshots fired in a Chinatown gang war.
A token-booth clerk is killed in a subway robbery.
A woman is murdered while walking her dogs on the West Side.
A 14-year-old is critically wounded by a bullet fired through his bedroom window in Harlem.
A prosecutor is gunned down at a Brooklyn bank.
A Bronx grocery store and a Brooklyn social club are hit by hand grenades.
And Mayor David N. Dinkins's own public appeal for gun controls is interrupted by gunfire in East New York.


Turner Signs With Browns
Eric Turner, the No. 2 draft pick in the National Football League, signed a four-year, $6 million contract with the Cleveland Browns yesterday, which included a $3.15 million signing bonus.
Leigh Steinberg, the attorney for the safety from U.C.L.A., said the signing bonus would come to Turner in lump sum payments, with no deferment, making the first-year compensation a record for a National Football League rookie.
Usually, players receive signing bonuses over several years.


Eleanor Sullivan, 62, Magazine Editor, Dies
Eleanor Regis Sullivan, the editor in chief of Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine since 1982, died on Friday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, her brother George Sullivan of Belmont, Mass., said.
She was the managing editor of the monthly mystery magazine from 1970 to 1982 while also serving as editor in chief of Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery Magazine from 1975 to 1981.


Baghdad Hands U.N. a New List of Clandestine Atom Installations
Iraq gave the United Nations a new list of clandestine nuclear installations today, but the chief United Nations nuclear inspector refused to disclose any details of what it contains or to say whether he thinks it is accurate.
"I can't express an opinion," the inspector, Demitri Perricos, said tonight.
"It is very early. The list is still being studied."


BOXING: Sports of The Times; Considering His Mileage in the Ring, Tyson Is an Old 25
THE number of fights for a boxer is like the number of miles on a tire.
The more fights, the more wear and tear, if not punctures and flats.
Now that Mike Tyson has accepted a guaranteed $15 million for trying to dethrone Evander Holyfield, assured of $30 million, as the world heavyweight champion on Nov. 8 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., it's time to check the challenger's mileage.


IRAQI ATOM EFFORT EXPOSES WEAKNESS IN WORLD CONTROLS
Scientists and weapons experts, surprised that Iraq secretly used a method abandoned by the West half a century ago to enrich uranium, say Iraq's feat is a blow to international efforts to stem the spread of nuclear arms.
In a single stroke, it has overturned decades of assumptions about which procedures and materials need to be safeguarded.
Up to now, the control effort has focused on keeping certain techniques secret and limiting export licenses for high-technology equipment that can be used in making bombs.


Baseball and N.B.A. are Partial to Former Players
Of the big three professional sports in this country, baseball is still the leader in hiring its former players to manage its teams.
But the National Basketball Association, moving away from career coaches or those who learned their trade in the college ranks, has closed to within percentage points of the major leagues, while the National Football League lags far behind.
With the appointments over the last couple of seasons of, among others, CHRIS FORD in Boston, RICK ADELMAN in Portland, WES UNSELD in Washington, PHIL JACKSON in Chicago and MIKE DUNLEAVY in Los Angeles, 18 of the N.B.A.'s 27 head coaches, or 67 percent, played in the league or the defunct American Basketball Association.


Prospect of an Execution Stirs Debate
Faced with putting a person to death for the first time since 1959, Nebraskans are waging an emotional debate over the execution of Harold Lamont Otey, a 39-year-old convicted killer who has been on death row in the State Penitentiary here for 13 years.
After years of appeals, Mr.
Otey was to have been put to death in Nebraska's electric chair on July 1 for the 1977 rape and murder of a 26-year-old photography student, Jane McManus.
Two last-minute appeals have postponed the execution again, at least until Aug. 5.


Next Iraq Solution
To the Editor:
In "Feed Iraqis, Starve Saddam" (editorial, July 1), you state, "A wiser course would be to let Iraq export oil but turn the proceeds over to the United Nations." But would Iraq, which is to say, would Saddam Hussein, accept such an offer?
It seems to me he would not, for two obvious reasons: (1) it would in no way benefit him personally, and (2) it would deprive him of the leverage he is able to use in hopes of getting sanctions lifted.
The lever is world sympathy and concern for the Iraqi people.


Cuomo Faults Bush on Policy
Appearing today on a television news program that focused on his presidential prospects, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo continued to disavow interest in joining the 1992 race.
But he did mount a strong assault on President Bush's domestic policy, his nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, and his failure to depose President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.
"What will the President's slogan be when he runs?" Mr.
Cuomo asked on CBS News's "Face the Nation." "You know what it's going to have to come out to? I won the war; the other guy's a bum."


Detroit Abuzz: Who After Iacocca?
In an industry where strong executive rule is a matter of course, Lee A. Iacocca defined authority with such force that his persona and that of the Chrysler Corporation are virtually indistinguishable.
Now, with Chrysler nearing a financial crisis and Mr.
Iacocca almost two years past normal retirement age, Chrysler directors are pressing Mr.
Iacocca to get on with a plan for succession that will ease the jolt of his eventual departure and prepare new leaders for Chrysler's dicey future.


Rockaway Journal; Dump's Close Ends Malodorous Era
If the cries of Jamaica Bay's sea gulls seem more anguished these summer days, it is because their favorite restaurant is no longer in business: the Edgemere garbage dump on the Rockaway Peninsula has closed.
The birds cannot replace this ultimate alfresco dining experience, where they could choose from a menu of 1,200 tons of garbage trucked fresh to the site each day.
Neither can the New York City Sanitation Department, which has counted on the dump for 53 years as the final resting place for more than 5 percent of the city's waste.


Sasser, in Right, Is Unable to Do Wrong
He saved three runs in the first inning with his glove, then broke up the no-hitter in the eighth with his bat.
Altogether, it wasn't a bad day for Mackey Sasser, Met right fielder.


Group Opposes Nomination WASHINGTON, July 14 --
The National Women's Political Caucus, which concluded a four-day conference here today, unanimously adopted a resolution opposing the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
The resolution, voted on by more than 300 delegates, said the nomination presented "a clear and present danger to women's rights."


Review/Opera; Vows Broken Lyrically In 'Pecheurs de Perles'
Opera, with its sheer variety of elements, many argue, presents more possibilities for disaster than almost any other art form.
But that same variety is a major part of opera's enduring appeal, since it allows disaster in one area to be mitigated if not wholly offset in others.
Like many another opera, Bizet's "Pecheurs de Perles" (1863), which re-entered the repertory of the New York City Opera on Saturday afternoon for the first time since 1986, contains the seeds of disaster in the form of a flimsy plot and a correspondingly inane libretto.
In a Ceylonese community of pearl fishers, two old friends, once rivals for the same woman's love, renew their friendship and swear off the woman.
She, as a virgin priestess, swears off love altogether.
All join together, and vows fall like dominoes, with predictably fatal results.


Knicks' Anthony Talks Up Hunt
GREG ANTHONY , recently selected by the Knicks in the first round of the National Basketball Association draft, believes the league's teams made a mistake in not selecting his backcourt partner at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, ANDERSON HUNT , in either round.
Hunt, a 6-foot guard, was the only starter from last season's U.N.L.V. team not picked.
"I think maybe Anderson got bad advice in coming out a year early," Anthony said.
"But I also think he's going to stick in the league. He's a solid player. He's sound defensively, a good shooter and does exactly what he's supposed to do."


INMATE IS KILLED AT ILLINOIS PRISON
An inmate was shot and killed and three prison guards injured, one of them critically, after the prisoner attacked a corrections officer late Saturday in the high-security section of the Stateville Correctional Center, the authorities said today.
Trouble flared again tonight as inmates in the low-security section of the Statesville Correction Center took three guards hostage for more than two hours before freeing them.
One guard suffered minor injuries, a spokesman for the state Department of Corrections said.


Excerpts From Briefing On Arms Negotiations
Following are excerpts from a news conference held by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh of the Soviet Union about strategic arms negotiations, as recorded by Federal News Service, a transcription company:  OPENING STATEMENTS Mr.
Baker


Rape and Killings Raise India Tension
As a police officer walked into the sweltering town square, Abdul Rahim tugged at his sleeve.
"What happened?" Mr.
Rahim pleaded with the officer, O. P. Singh, in a choked voice.
"What happened to my son?"


Quotation of the Day
"If it's a question of protecting people who are martyred persecuted or massacred by the government of Saddam Hussein, if it's a question of seeing this country, Iraq, arming itself with nuclear weapons, then military intevention will be just." -- President Francois Mitterrand of France.
[ A1:4. ]


Tough Justice Urged in Bogota on Drugs
A month after the surrender of Colombia's most-wanted cocaine trafficker, an initial euphoria is being tempered by demands from the police and church and victims' groups for tough justice.
The image of a helicopter landing Pablo Escobar Gaviria inside a high-security prison near Medellin on June 19 sent approval ratings soaring for the plea-bargain policy of Colombia's President, Cesar Gaviria Trujillo.
The week after the trafficker's surrender, 90 percent of those answering a poll called it "positive," and two-thirds hailed it as a "triumph."


Leyland Hospitalized Following Chest Pains
Pirate Manager Jim Leyland was taken to a hospital tonight after complaining of chest pains while the team was flying from Cincinnati to Pittsburgh.
"I've been told by our people there is no cause for alarm," said Rick Cerrone, a Pirate spokesman.


Brazil Eases Computer Curb
The Brazilian Government has relaxed its longstanding restrictions on imports of computers and computer parts.
The Government said last week it had approved ventures between Brazilian companies and two American companies to produce computers with technology imported from the United States.


Lack of Contract Doesn't Keep Anthony From Drills
When Pat Riley showed up here this morning for his first day on the court as the Knicks' new coach, he was probably expecting some surprises.
One of them turned out to be a pleasant one.
Twenty-one players appeared for the Knicks' training camp for rookies and free agents on the SUNY campus, and one of them was Greg Anthony, the Knicks' top draft pick.


Time Warner to Begin Rights Offering Today
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that it would begin its rights offering today to raise $2.8 billion through the sale of 34.5 million new shares of stock at $80 a share.
Ten investment banks will underwrite the offering, which gives shareholder six-tenths of a right, for each share they own, to buy a share of stock at $80.
It is the largest underwritten rights offering in United States history.


Ms. Tobin Weds Todd N. Tsakiris
Jill Mary Tobin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Tobin of Glen Cove, L.I., was married yesterday in Glen Cove to Todd Nicholas Tsakiris, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Tsakiris of Oakdale, L.I.
Rabbi Irwin Lowenheim performed the ceremony at Harrison House.
The bride, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a marketing specialist at the Genrad Corporation, a maker of testing equipment in Concord, Mass.
She graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
Her father owned Dubrows Cafeterias in Manhattan and Brooklyn.
Her mother, Phyllis Tobin, is a social worker with Selfhelp Community Services in Forest Hills, Queens.


Japan's Scandal: No Laws to Break
The world has grown so accustomed to Japan's peculiar way of dealing with scandals that few people have noticed a remarkable fact running through the resignations, suspensions and pay cuts in the current stock market upheaval: there has yet to be a judicial proceeding, hearing or even modest attempt to relate the flurry of penalties to a legal statute.
Japanese officials do not seem to have sensed the slightest irony in the fact that they are responding to a scandal that is essentially about an unwritten code in the stock market by turning to an informal code that is opaque to all but those in power.


Lucius R. Eastman 4th; Philanthropist, 78
Lucius Root Eastmen 4th, a venture capitalist who was president from 1961 to 1988 of the Lucius and Eva Eastman Fund, a philanthropy founded by his parents, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 78 years old.
He died of emphysema, a family member said.


Navy Jet Crashes Into Bay
A Navy A-4 Skyhawk jet plunged into Cape Cod Bay today, but the pilot parachuted to safety and no one was injured, a Coast Guard spokesman said.
The solo pilot, who was not identified, was picked up by the fishing vessel Tigger Two.
The cause of the crash, four to five miles off the mouth of the Cape Cod Canal, is under investigation.


Merrill Automating Stock Orders
Brokers at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company are beginning to use a new computerized stock-ordering system that industry experts say could fundamentally change important elements of the securities business, ranging from costs to the supervision of brokers.
The new system was developed over a period of years at Merrill and has quietly been introduced at a number of the firm's offices in recent weeks, industry executives said.
Merrill executives said the system would eventually be used throughout the firm's brokerage network, which is the largest in the country.


Enigma Wrapped In a Playbook
PAUL BARCHITTA , who coaches a sandlot outfit of former high school and college players called the Staten Island Bulldogs, doesn't know what to make of his team's next opponent.
He has no scouting report to study, no films to watch, no idea what the Soviet national football team might run on third-and-2.
"I'm a little bit nervous about it," Barchitta said.
"I don't know if they're going to run a pro set or a single wing. I want to see what these guys have."


HBO Finds Hits the Networks Miss
For almost all of its life as television's leading pay channel, Home Box Office has been identified with movies, and sometimes boxing.
HBO subscribers paid a monthly charge averaging about $10 to $12 nationwide because they wanted to see uncut recent movies and one-round fights featuring the likes of Mike Tyson.
The last thing they expected to pay for was a sitcom.


Mallon Wins Open For 2d Big Victory
Playing nearly perfect tee-to-green golf and handling weatherbeaten greens as if they were smooth as felt, Meg Mallon pulled away from two of the game's top players on the back nine today to win the 46th United States Women's Open.
In 98-degree heat and even more stifling tension, the 28-year-old Mallon shot a three-under-par 32 on the Colonial Country Club's back nine for a closing 67 that swept her past veterans Pat Bradley and Amy Alcott on her way to a 72-hole total of one-under-par 283.


Allison Jatlow Wed to Richard Beitler
Allison Deborah Jatlow and Richard Ian Beitler were married yesterday at the Marquand Chapel at Yale University in New Haven by Rabbi Esther Adler.
The bride is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter I. Jatlow of Orange, Conn.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Myron Beitler of Seal Beach, Calif.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Yale.
She is a medical student at the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn.
Her father is the chairman of the laboratory medicine department at Yale and the chief of laboratory medicine at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
Her mother, Stephanie Jatlow, is a sales associate at the William Raveis Real Estate Company in New Haven.


Bavaro Fails Physical And Might Be Finished
Mark Bavaro, once the best tight end in pro football, has failed his preseason physical with the Giants, a person familiar with Bavaro's left-knee problems said yesterday.
The person said the Giants' medical staff did not expect the 28-year-old Bavaro to play again.
In his six seasons with the Giants, Bavaro was a fierce blocker and reliable receiver who played with injuries.
Despite undergoing reconstructive knee surgery in January 1990, he played the entire season.


Jennifer A. Rosen, Lawyer, Marries Nicholas A. Shufro, Venture Capitalist
Jennifer Ann Rosen and Nicholas Arnold Shufro were married yesterday at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Malcolm Stern and Cantor Nathaniel Benjamin officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, is a daughter of Cynthia L. Rosen of Tenafly, N.J., and Dr.
Gerald Rosen of Los Angeles.
The bridegroom is a son of Lydie T. Shufro of New York and Edward G. Shufro of Greenwich, Conn.


After 4 Years, British Envoy Is Leaving a New South Africa
When Sir Robin Renwick arrived here as the new British ambassador in 1987, his debut coincided with a bleak period of resistance to change in South Africa under former President P. W. Botha.
"What we were seeing at that time," Sir Robin said, "was an attempt to respond to the steam building up inside the caldron by trying to nail the lid down harder and tighter."


Rig Count Drops Again
The number of rigs exploring for oil and gas in the United States dropped by 15, to 844, last week, Baker Hughes Inc. said Friday.
The count fell by 22 rigs, to 859, in the previous week.
The Houston-based oilfield tool maker said the count stood at 1,001 rigs a year earlier.
The count reached a peak of 4,500 in December 1981.
It plunged to a low of 663 after oil prices collapsed in the summer of 1986.


Postal Service Steps Up Efforts Against Drugs
When Dirk Rice was arrested on a charge of distributing cocaine, he decided that driving to and from Miami in his late-model Mercedes-Benz was not the most inconspicuous way to do business, postal authorities say.
Postal inspectors who arrested Mr.
Rice last year -- his second arrest -- say he resorted to a simpler way: sending drugs through the United States mails.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Mutual Benefit Life Insurance has been a conservative and respected insurance company, and as New Jersey officials prepare to seize it today, industry experts predict that the takeover will weaken public confidence in the life-insurance business.  [ Page A1. ]


Big Gamble on Schwarzkopf Book
While the spending of more than $90 million on Arnold Schwarzenegger's capers in Carolco's new movie, "Terminator 2," strikes many as bold but quite possibly shrewd, the payment of close to $6 million for a mere book with a few hundred pages and a handful of motionless pictures still seems outlandish.
Yet that is what Bantam Books, a subsidiary of Bertelsmann A.G. of Germany, has recently agreed to spend for the world rights to the memoirs of a real-life warrior, Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf.
In so doing, it is betting that like Lee A. Iacocca, Donald J. Trump and Brig.
Gen.
Chuck Yeager the hero of the Persian Gulf war has a story that will sell books in unusual quantities.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 15


Further Decline Seen in Britain
British financial-services companies expect business to decline further over the next three months, the Confederation of British Industry found in a quarterly survey to be released on Monday.
The confederation said banks and other financial institutions remained worried about the effect of the British recession on their business and about increased competition from abroad.
"Business volumes are expected to decline over the next three months at broadly the same rates reported in the second quarter of this year," it added.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday Business Inventories . . .
May Industrial Production . . .
June Capacity Utilization . . .
June 10-Day Auto Sales . . .
Mid-July


2 Are Killed in a Yugoslav Clash
Croatian militiamen and Serbian militants battled today in clashes that left at least two people dead and many wounded as ethnic strife in the breakaway republic continued to strain Yugoslavia's cease-fire.
The violence came after the federal Government and the secessionist republics of Croatia and Slovenia gave final approval for unarmed European Community observers to monitor the truce between the national army and the republics' militias.


Trading Hide-and-Seek For the Old 1-2 Punch
It started on the streets of East Los Angeles.
The fights were for fun, arranged on the moment as just another recreation.
One of the de la Hoyas, Joel or his little brother Oscar, would square off against one of their cousins and pretty soon two of them would be left throwing punches while the others loudly urged them on.


You Can't Drive Solar Cars to Work Yet
To the Editor:
Readers of "The Car Is Dead. Long Live the . . ." (Business Day, June 22), about the touring Festival of Solar, Electric and Human-Powered Vehicles, should not be lulled about solar-powered cars.
Such cars can never be anything but experimental devices.
Solar power is too weak to power even a minicar for daily use.


In California, Stricter Rules
The California Air Resources Board has introduced rules that reduce the maximum allowable emissions of unburned hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxide, which interact with sunlight to produce ground-level ozone, or smog.
The rules also set a lower level for carbon monoxide.
Experts think the new rules will require that vehicles be equipped with electrically heated catalytic converters to burn off these pollutants as soon as the vehicles are started; the current converters are highly effective, but only after they have warmed up.


Flea Bites
It is flea market season.
On Saturdays and Sundays all over America the bargain hunters are out.
They are walking down Main Streets and through vacant lots lined with tables.
They are lifting things, turning them over, poking around.
Their eyes are as focused as a croupier's, and their hopes as high as a 5-year-old's on Christmas morning.
They are finding funnel cakes.
They are also finding T-shirts that say "Hard Rock Cafe" and cheap sunglasses and fanny packs and fingerless gloves -- everything, in short, that can be found in any variety shop.
The shoppers who fall for this stuff won't go home empty-handed, because buying is the psychic equivalent of eating to many souls.
But they will go home joyless.
They didn't find the diamond in the dust heap.


Optimistic Fed View Is Expected
Now that Alan Greenspan has been named to another term as the Federal Reserve Board's chairman, he is expected to accentuate the positive this week when he delivers his semiannual testimony to Congress on monetary policy and the economy.
Analysts said that when he addresses the Senate Banking Committee tomorrow, Mr.
Greenspan will probably reiterate recent comments that in the Fed's view, the economy has begun to crawl out of the recession.
He is also expected to have good things to say about inflationary pressures, which continue to moderate.


Harry Keates Weds Robin Silverman
Robin Lynn Silverman, a daughter of Susan Silverman and Henry R. Silverman, both of New York, was married yesterday to Harry Andrew Keates, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edwin Keates of Philadelphia.
Rabbi David M. Posner performed the ceremony at Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 23 years old, is a Latin teacher at the Bancroft School in Worcester, Mass.
A graduate of Wesleyan University and a member of Phi Beta Kappa, she received a master's degree in education from Tufts University.
Her father is a partner in the Blackstone Group, investment bankers, in New York.


Review/Television; Growing Up Black and Homosexual in America
Tongues are wagging about "Tongues Untied." New Yorkers can see the hourlong documentary about black homosexuals tomorrow night at 10 on Channel 13, but about a third of the biggest public stations are not running it.
And the Rev.
Donald E. Wildmon, the president of the American Family Association, a conservative watchdog group, has denounced it as another misuse of money from the National Endowment for the Arts.
What seems to be bothering Mr.
Wildmon and others about the work by Marlon Riggs is its street lingo, nudity and scenes of men making love.
If ever there was a program where such elements are justified, this is it.
Mr.
Riggs, who appeared a few weeks ago on the "P.O.V." documentary "Absolutely Positive" as one of the people who have tested positive for the AIDS virus, searches his memory in "Tongues Untied" for what it was like growing up black and homosexual in America, "captured by identities I never wanted to claim." It is a remarkably rewarding effort.


Customers of Telesphere May Press for Bankruptcy
Customers of troubled Telesphere Communications Inc. are considering an attempt to force the nation's sixth-largest long-distance company into bankruptcy, lawyers representating customers involved in disputes with the company said last week.
Telesphere, which acts as a billing and collection agent for services that sell information to callers through "900" numbers, sent its customers a letter in mid-June saying it would pay them just 16 percent of what was owed them from March through June.
The "900" services sell financial advice, entertainment reviews, sports scores and other information for fees that are added to phone bills.


Cold Day in July for Home Teams
It soon became another pitchers' duel yesterday afternoon at Shea Stadium, with the stakes raised well above the usual limit.
His slow curve working the corners, Padres starter Greg Harris labored into the late innings with a no-hitter.
Mets starter Ron Darling hung in there, auditioning again for Manager Bud Harrelson in a heartfelt argument to remain in the rotation.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; Dailies Find Lower Prices At Auction
THE buying and selling of newspapers has all but stopped in the last year, mostly because prospective buyers have refused to pay the premium prices that dailies commanded two years ago -- prices that most sellers still demand.
Newspaper brokers say the few papers being sold are trading at prices that reflect the sharp decline in advertising and questions about whether all of it will return when the economy improves.


QUESTION BOX
Close but No Plaque
Q.
Nellie Fox, the outstanding second baseman for the Chicago White Sox in the 1950's, has never been voted into the Baseball Hall of Fame.
How close has he come?


Review/Pop; Misanthropic Morrissey Evokes Passion
Fans of both sexes pelted the stage of Madison Square Garden with gladiolas, lilies and irises on Saturday evening as Morrissey, the prince of mope rock, held court for an hour and a quarter.
The concert was the final date of the first American tour in four years by the 32-year-old singer and songwriter from Manchester, England.
Throughout the evening, the singer, one of the most fervently revered cult figures in all of rock, continually fended off admirers who stumbled onto the stage and hurled themselves at him in blind adoration.
One of the most literate of rock songwriters, Morrissey has specialized in expressing negative emotions in the most personal terms.
His lyrics have the offhanded directness of excerpts from the journal of a haughty, neurasthenic misanthrope.


U.S. AND SOVIET UNION AGREE ON ALL BUT TECHNICAL ISSUE FOR STRATEGIC ARMS TREATY
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh of the Soviet Union announced today after four days of marathon talks that they had resolved all issues for a treaty reducing long-range nuclear arms, except for one highly technical dispute that they hope to resolve in the coming days.
Given the progress, it now appears that the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, which will reduce Soviet and American long-range nuclear arsenals by about 30 percent and has been in negotiation since 1982, is on the verge of completion.


Many in Harlem Want Longer Landmarks List
At a hearing today, the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission is very likely to get an earful about a long-simmering complaint among Harlem residents: that their area is often overlooked when it comes to landmark designations.
The commission, contends Michael Adams of the Upper Manhattan Society for Progress Through Preservation, is not offering landmark protection to a number of Harlem sites that have "landmark potential."


Isidore M. Cohen, 93, A Clothing Executive
Isidore M. Cohen, the retired president of Joseph H. Cohen &amp; Sons, a leading manufacturer of men's clothing, died on Saturday in New York Hospital.
He was 93 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, a family spokesman said.


CHRONICLE
DICK GREGORY has lost his 40-acre farm in Plymouth, Mass., in a foreclosure, although he said he, his wife and their 10 children hoped to continue living there.
Mr.
Gregory said he hoped to work out a deal with Citizens Trust Bank of Georgia, which claimed Town Hill Farm after he defaulted on a $165,942 mortgage.
Mr.
Gregory told The Patriot Ledger of Quincy, Mass., that he was unable to make payments because of his pending lawsuit against his two partners in their Slim-Safe Bahamian Diet business.


Rising Costs Force Towns to Share Various Services
Crusading to hold down costs, local governments across the New York metropolitan region are beginning to share everything from police forces to Latin teachers.
In Rockland County, N.Y., the village of Nyack dissolved its 23-member police force this year and now pays to be patrolled by officers from nearby Orangetown and Clarkstown.


CHRONICLE
MARISOL MONTALVO, Miss Brooklyn, was crowned Miss New York State Saturday night at the pageant in Alexandria Bay.
Miss Montalvo, 23 years old, is a senior at the Brooklyn Conservatory of Music.
She has performed with several opera companies in New York and plans to pursue a career in opera.
Miss Montalvo, who won a $5,000 scholarship and beat out 18 other contestants, will represent New York in this year's Miss America Pageant.


INSIDE
The Show Went On, Quietly
The theater was in gang country.
The film was "Boyz N the Hood." All the violence was on the screen.
Page A13.
Help on Student Loans
Victims of fraudulent trade schools, with no education and heavy debts, are finding help in court.
Page A11.


Essay; The Great Panhandler
Not since the Treaty of Brest-Li tovsk in 1918 when Lenin granted independence to Georgia, the Ukraine and the Baltic states, and groveled before Germany -- has a Soviet leader inflicted such humiliation on his nation.
Mikhail Gorbachev protests that he is not "going on his knees to beg" for money at the economic confabulation this week in London.
On the contrary; he will rattle his tin cup standing up, even menacingly, warning that chaos and war will break out if the West does not help Beggar, thy neighbor.


Despite Debt, Time Warner Is Unbowed
While executives of Time Warner Inc. huddled with its bankers last week to discuss ways to reduce its $11 billion of debt, the president of one of its subsidiaries flew from Los Angeles to Sun Valley, Idaho, for a business meeting on one of the company's seven aircraft.
Time Warner has been so concerned about its debt level that it attempted a disputed rights offering that ultimately had to be scrapped.
But despite a concession on its top executives' stock-option plan, disclosed in today's new rights offering, the company has not demonstrated any willingness to trim back a corporate style that appears lavish even by the glitzy standards of the entertainment business.


Excerpts From the Briefing Held by Bush and Mitterrand
Following are excerpts from a news conference by President Bush and President Francois Mitterrand today in Rambouillet, France, as provided by the Federal News Service, a transcription company, through the facilities of CNN:


Ard Playing Let's Make a Deal
In these days of a struggling economy and an unpredictable stock market, brokers try to be creative.
None is trying harder than WILLIAM DONOVAN ARD of the Westfield, N.J., brokerage house of Butcher &amp; Singer.
Yes, this is the same Billy Ard who played guard for the Giants from 1981-88 and the Green Bay Packers in 1989 and 1990.
For eight years, he has spent the off season as a broker.
At age 32, he still wants to play football, but he says he will not play unless the Packers guarantee some of his salary.


Robert Maes, Surgeon And Philanthropist, 81
Robert Adamson Maes, a surgeon who was president of the Independence Foundation of Philadelphia, died Tuesday at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
He was 81 years old and lived in Glenmoore, Pa.
Dr. Maes died of cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Florida Rejects Miami Plan to Temporarily Put Homeless in Stadium
The State of Florida has refused to finance Miami's first broad program to help the homeless until the city comes up with a permanent rather than a temporary solution.
The state's decision kills the plan, announced earlier this month, under which the city would have moved several hundred homeless men and women living under a highway overpass in downtown Miami to a nearby baseball stadium owned by the city.
The 30-day emergency plan would have provided the homeless with shelter, food and counseling.


Rose Speaks on His Ban
In his first major interview since leaving a Federal prison camp earlier this year, Pete Rose said last night that being reinstated into major league baseball was not his major priority.
"It's important to me, but it's not time right now," Rose told Jane Pauley on her NBC program, "Real Life."


Boys at Kenya School Rape Girls, Killing 19
Boys at a coeducational boarding school killed 19 girls and raped many in an attack on the girls' dormitory early today, the Kenya News Agency reported.
State television said four other girls were taken to a hospital with severe injuries and 71 were treated for bruises after the incident, which occurred shortly after midnight at St.
Kizito secondary school near Meru, about 100 miles north of Nairobi, the capital.


Sculptor Preserves Amazon Images
On a recent morning, this river port's sagging docks offered a mural of life on the Amazon: white-uniformed sailors from a Brazilian Navy hospital ship mixed with the crew from a scientific research vessel, while migrant families lounged in hammocks on a ferry whose departure time was listed as "Today."
Only slightly out of place was the Inca Pachacutec.
With a statue of a Bora Indian boy playing panpipes on the prow and yard-high stereo speakers blaring rhythm-and-blues below decks, the scuffed and listing boat was the Amazon's equivalent of a hippie school bus from the 1960's.


Treasury Is Selling Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings for this week is confined to the regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today.
By late in the day on Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.57 percent, and the six-month bill at 5.68 percent.


When a News Source Speaks Off the Record
To the Editor:
Your June 25 article commenting on the Supreme Court decision that a reporter's promise of anonymity to a source constitutes a contract further confuses the issue.


Syria Accepts Bush Plan for Mideast Peace Talks
President Hafez al-Assad of Syria responded today to President Bush's proposal for a Middle East peace conference, saying the plan was an "acceptable basis for achieving a comprehensive solution," state-run Syrian Television reported.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, speaking to reporters after arms talks at the State Department, said the letter was Syria's most positive and forthcoming approach to Arab-Israeli peacemaking that he could recall.
The letter, he said, appeared to have no obvious conditions, although he said there were some points -- which he did not specify -- that Washington would like to explore with Damascus.


Texas Policeman Defends Beating of Suspect
A Fort Worth police officer who was videotaped beating a handcuffed prisoner with a nightstick said he repeatedly struck the man because it was the only way to keep him from escaping.
"I did what I was trained to do," the officer, Edward J. Parnell, said in today's Fort Worth Star-Telegram.
"I did what I thought I was supposed to do."


Mark A. Rosenfeld, 54, Exporter And Former Hostage of Iraq, Dies
Mark Allan Rosenfeld, a businessman who exported motor vehicles and who was taken prisoner by Iraqi soldiers while in Kuwait on business last year, died on Thursday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 54 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of lymphoma related to AIDS, his family said.


Smaller Loss for Revco
The owner of Revco D. S. Inc., the financially troubled drugstore chain, has reported a fourth-quarter loss of $2.99 million, a sharp improvement from the $17.2 million it lost a year earlier.
Sales for the quarter totaled $585 million, up 5.7 percent from adjusted figures for the 1990 quarter.
For the year ended June 1, the parent of Revco, the privately held Anac Holding Corporation, lost $65.2 million, down from an adjusted loss of $59.5 million a year earlier.
Without adjusting for the sale of 712 unprofitable Revco stores, Anac lost $232.7 million in fiscal 1990.
Sales for the year totaled $1.9 billion, up 3.9 percent from the adjusted figures in the period a year earlier.


A Search for Answers As Calumet Crumbles
Bertha Wright sat in the living room of her stately home at Calumet Farm on Saturday and looked out over the 800 acres of rolling bluegrass fenced in trim white board, the fields where Whirlaway and Citation grazed and the barns where Bull Lea and Alydar sired a thoroughbred empire.
She was surrounded by the silver trophies of the past, by the memories of horses that won the Triple Crown twice, the Kentucky Derby eight times, the Horse of the Year award six times and stakes races more than 500 times.


Gasoline Prices Drop
Gasoline prices dropped by more than 2 cents a gallon in the last three weeks despite high summer demand, according to an industry survey issued today.
The average retail price for all grades of gasoline, including taxes, was $1.221 a gallon on Friday, down 2.36 cents from June 21, according to the Lundberg Survey of 13,000 stations nationwide.
"Wholesale prices to retailers have been dropping," said Trilby Lundberg, an industry analyst, "and this has allowed retailers to cut prices to consumers in order to chase sales."


Venice Journal; Dying Art: Building a Crooked Boat to Go Straight
The men of the Tramontin family seem ideally qualified to perpetuate the history of Venice as they work in their dark, messy boatyard, making wooden vessels as elegant as a swan, nimble as a reed and finely carved as a violin.
Nevis and Roberto Tramontin are gondola builders, and by verdict of Venetian nautical historians, they are the best and among the last of a vanishing breed.
Jeopardizing their ancient skill are the haste of modern man, the motorboats, the labor laws and a shortage of youngsters willing to spend 10 years learning how to make one of the world's most complex boats -- a craft that is built crooked so it will glide straight.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about a support group formed by families of young people killed in the Bronx misidentified Jose L. Ithier, who spoke to the group.
He is secretary to the Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer.


Clarence Thomas and 'Natural Law'
What is really at stake in the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court?
While any candidate nominated to replace Justice Thurgood Marshall would likely accelerate the Court's rightward trend, Judge Thomas's adherence to "natural law" as a judicial philosophy could take the Court in an even more troubling direction.
Most conservatives criticize the judiciary for expanding its powers, "creating" rights rather than "interpreting" the Constitution.
These critics talk of returning issues like abortion to democratically elected and politically accountable bodies.


What Is Throw-Weight?
The throw-weight, or weight of the payload a missile can carry, has long bedeviled arms control negotiators.
Throw-weight is generally understood to include the weight of the warheads, any decoys that are used and the so-called bus that houses them.
But the two sides have had trouble agreeing on a precise technical definition.


Dance in Review
Milmul Modern Dance Company Education Theater New York University
Sook-Jae Lee's Milmul Modern Dance Company, which performed on Saturday night in an American debut season, has some of the best-looking and most beautifully trained dancers to be seen here in some time.
Their resiliency and expressiveness reflect the breadth of Miss Lee's dance training, which includes work at Ewha Women's University in Seoul and at New York University and the Martha Graham and Merce Cunningham studios in New York.
And she clearly has some compelling theatrical and scenic ideas.
But Miss Lee's full-evening "Moomyong Chogory" ("Korean Cotton Jacket") was in some ways a disappointment.


France Backs U.S. on Using Force If Iraq Pursues Nuclear Weapons
President Bush won strong public support today from President Francois Mitterrand for the use of military action against Iraq if it persists in efforts to develop nuclear weapons.
In a television interview broadcast just before Mr.
Bush's arrival in France for talks in advance of the economic summit meeting in London, Mr.
Mitterrand said that renewed use of military force would be justified if Baghdad continued its nuclear arms program or moved to repress Kurds or other Iraqis.


Citicorp View Of Bad Loans
Citicorp's chairman, John S. Reed, has said that the cost of bad loans in the bank's corporate finance sector so far this year is 25 percent worse than expected, an industry newspaper has reported.
Nevertheless, corporate bankers who attended the two-hour meeting with Mr.
Reed on Wednesday said they left the session with their morale lifted, the newspaper, The American Banker, reported.
Several of the bankers said they had a sense that the embattled Mr.
Reed was firmly in control.


CHRONICLE
ELLEN LIMAN is to be named chairwoman of New York City's Advisory Commission for Cultural Affairs, City Hall officials say.
The commission, which advises the Department of Cultural Affairs and Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS, has 15 to 21 members, of whom Mrs.
Liman is one.
Mrs.
Liman's restless energy as a painter and sometime writer has resulted in two books on interior design, "The Collecting Book" (Penguin, 1980), and "Babyspace" (Perigee Books, 1984).


French-Americans Celebrate Bastille Day With an Old-Country Game


In Ruling, Hope for Students Deceived by Schools
No one has challenged George Leeson's claim that Northeastern Business College here lured him with false promises, failed to give him an education and left him with nearly $3,000 in student loans.
A state court has called the defunct school's behavior "unconscionable."
The question is who should pay.
Mr.
Leeson says not him, and a sympathetic ruling by a Federal judge, permitting the suit to go forward, has opened the door to similar arguments across the country.


World Economies


12 States Consider Smog Curb
Representatives of 12 states and the District of Columbia will meet tomorrow to consider adopting California's stringent rules requiring electric vehicles and additional anti-pollution equipment for gasoline-powered cars and trucks.
Eight of the states are on record in favor of the change, and it is likely that at least some of the others will go along.
Proponents of the standards say they will result in cleaner air from Virginia to Maine.
As each state signs on, they contend, it cleans its own air and helps that of its neighbors.


Dr. Stern Marries Arne J. Pearlstein
Dr.
Elizabeth Jane Stern, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leo Stern Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Arne Jacob Pearlstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Pearlstein of Los Angeles.
Rabbi Mark Hurvitz performed the ceremony at the faculty center of University of California at Los Angeles.
The bride, 40 years old, is a software quality assurance analyst at Transaction Technology, in Santa Monica, Calif.
A magna cum laude graduate of Harvard University, she studied Icelandic folklore as a Fulbright Scholar at the University of Reykjavik in Iceland and received a master's degree and a doctorate in folklore and mythology from U.C.L.A.
Her father is a dentist in New York and an associate clinical professor at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


Nets' George Wants a New Venue
It is a tale of two point guards, both local, both National Basketball Association first-round draft choices.
Kenny Anderson can't wait to appear.
Tate George can't wait to disappear.
When the New Jersey Nets opened their rookie and free-agent camp today, Anderson, their unsigned top pick from the 1991 draft, was absent, while George, one of their two first-round selections a year ago, expressed his desire to be on the next plane out of town.


Ellen Porges Marries Andrew J. Dannenberg


Review/Television; A Portrait of Stanwyck: Tough and Vulnerable
Barbara Stanwyck (1907-1990) has her own special niche in the history of movies.
She is right up there with Bette Davis, Joan Crawford and Katharine Hepburn, but somehow she stands alone, just as she did professionally when she became one of the first Hollywood stars to go independent.
No long-term studio contracts for Stanwyck.
She began as a showgirl from Brooklyn, and as Sally Field observes as the host for tonight's television biography, she "never forgot it and didn't even try."
"Barbara Stanwyck: Fire and Desire," on TNT at 8 and 11, has many of the flaws peculiar to television profiles of movie stars.
The indisputably great work is too often given equal weight with the forgettable.
Generalizations are common.
And the unifying thesis, in this instance provided in a script by Richard Schickel, the producer and director, can get wobbly.
Mr.
Schickel keeps detecting parallels between Stanwyck's off-screen life and the roles she chose to play.
But a good case can be made for the far more uncomplicated fact that this actress just liked to work and took any good role that came along.
In any event, this documentary is generous with clips showing Stanwyck in action.
That's reason enough to watch.


Hadson Corp. Plans to Undo 1990 Spinoff
The Hadson Corporation proposed yesterday that it be reunited with the Hadson Energy Resources Corporation, an oil and gas producer it had spun off as a separate company last year.
The Hadson Corporation kept a 49 percent stake in Hadson Energy after the spinoff, in February 1990.
Since then, Hadson Energy's stock price has languished, while the Hadson Corporation has shed most of its businesses not related to energy.
The proposal, which calls for merging the companies into a new entity, would result in a single, stronger company, Hadson Corporation executives said.


Japan Sets Tough Rules On Business
Under pressure from the United States, the Japanese Government has published new regulations prohibiting companies from fixing prices, driving competitors out of the market and blocking certain types of imports, in what could mark -- on paper at least -- a big change in the way Japan does business.
The critical question is how strictly the rules will be enforced by Japan's Fair Trade Commission, which is not known for its political clout or its eagerness to enforce the country's antitrust laws.
Nonetheless, the new rules are one of the biggest changes brought about yet in Japan by the broad trade talks with Washington that are known as the Structural Impediments Initiative.


Changing World, Changing Voice
Nothing comes harder to any Federal agency than contemplating a reduction in staff.
An advisory panel of the U.S.
Information Agency thus earns full marks for sensibly suggesting phasing out Radio Free Europe broadcasts to Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia.
And it finds that another U.S.I.A. venture, TV Marti, is "not cost-effective." That warrants another bravo.
Overseas broadcasts unquestionably helped hasten the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe.
For four decades, Radio Free Europe provided captive peoples with news their own rulers tried zealously to conceal.
But with the spread of democracy and press freedom, the Munich-based station has lost its main mission.


Wanted: A Writer to Handle the General
Linda Grey, the publisher of Bantam Books, says her "mail is flooded with applicants" for the job of writing Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf's autobiography.
"I have had at least 100 letters," she said.
But Marvin Josephson, the general's agent, said the field had been narrowed to five writers who were discussing the project with General Schwarzkopf.
One of them, C. D. B. Bryan, has known the general for about 20 years and wrote a profile of him for The New Republic.
He is widely considered to be the favorite.


Judge Declares Rates on Medicaid In Washington State Inadequate
A Federal district judge has ruled that Medicaid rates paid by Washington State failed to compensate hospitals adequately and thus were illegal.
The ruling by Judge Thomas S. Zilly follows a decision last year by United States Supreme Court allowing health care institutions to sue states for higher rates.


No Fatal Distractions in London
When Mikhail Gorbachev appears Wednesday at the end of the London summit meeting of Western leaders, will he commit himself to radical economic reform?
Will he seek Western aid, or just advice?
And will he offer a specific economic program, or mere generalities?
These are riveting questions.
And therein lies a danger.
As important as Mr.
Gorbachev's visit is, it should not be allowed to distract the leaders of the seven major industrialized countries from some urgent unfinished business of their own.
The Uruguay Round of international trade talks is stalled, and the G-7 leaders are mostly to blame.


Los Angeles Police Chief Says He May Stay
Under renewed pressure to resign after a report on racism and brutality in his department, the Los Angeles police chief now says he may keep his job until 1993.
In an interview published today in The Los Angeles Times, the Chief, Daryl F. Gates, also suggested that he might speak out against a proposed amendment to the City Charter that would limit the chief's tenure to two five-year terms.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW -- WORKING GROUP ON THE NEW INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORDER -- 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Corrections
A brief report on the Credit Markets page of Business Day Friday misidentified the lead underwriter of a bond offering for the Sabine River Authority in Texas.
It was William Simon &amp; Sons.


Edinboro Journal; Making Purple Martins Feel at Home
A BBC film crew, making a documentary about four of the world's most dedicated birders, was just here filming James R. Hill 3d and his flock of purple martins.
The BBC program will feature a Polish painter who rehabilitates sick birds and turns their likenesses into Polish postage stamps, a British airline steward who is creating a sanctuary for endangered parrots, a South African with a warm spot for vultures, and Mr.
Hill.


Aydin Unit Is Investigated
The Aydin Corporation, a military contractor, says its West Coast division is being investigated by a grand jury for possibly falsifiying test results for an Army radio.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Aydin said last week that it was notified last month by the United States Attorney for the Northern District of California that it was "now one of the targets of a grand jury investigation."


Cold Day in July for Home Teams
Their final day in town was the worst, but the Yankees couldn't complain when it was over.
The last time they toured the West, they won just twice in eight games.
They are ahead of that pace now, and the trip isn't quite half-done.
But they flopped today.
Wade Taylor couldn't pitch his way through the fourth inning, walked seven batters by the time he was pulled and suffered a 10-2 defeat to the California Angels that kept the Yankees from a four-game sweep.


Little Defense for Poor Tenants As Legal Services Strike Persists
Hundreds of tenants have been evicted and thousands of others -- all of them among New York City's most vulnerable people -- have been forced into Housing Court without representation as a strike by workers for Legal Services of New York moves into its 16th week today.
Negotiations in the increasingly bitter dispute broke off on June 20 and no new talks have been scheduled.
Management says it will begin hiring temporary replacement workers today.
Union leaders charge management with "union-busting."


Tractor-Trailer Kills 2 Sisters On 179th St.
Two elderly sisters holding hands as they crossed a street on the way home from their weekly Sunday dinner at a neighborhood restaurant were struck and killed by a tractor-trailer yesterday afternoon in upper Manhattan.
The truck kept on going, running a red light and crossing the George Washington Bridge nearby, the police said.
After ignoring a Port Authority police car that pursued the truck for several miles, the driver was seized in Fort Lee, N.J., seven minutes after the accident, the police said.


Child Becomes Woman In Traditional Akan Rite
All day long, 16-year-old Otelia Oteng, clad in a traditional yellow and white flowing robe, sat serenely on the low carved Ghanaian stool and watched the colorful ceremony welcoming her to womanhood.
Now and then she flashed a broad smile.
The coming-of-age ceremony, performed for Otelia yesterday at the North Academic Center at City College in Harlem, is a tradition among the Akan tribe in Ghana.
Gifts of food, soaps, perfumes and bolts of Ghanaian cloth were spread in silver bowls before the young woman.
A few feet away, the Bragorofuo, a dozen of so of her female elders, chanted and sang songs imparting age-old womanly advice.


Market Place; Boom in Comic Books Lifts New Marvel Stock Offering
While much of publishing is in the doldrums, comic books are booming, in large part because companies have discovered that they can raise prices without driving away many buyers.
Now, the owner of Marvel Comics, the largest comics operation, is trying to sell a minority stake in Spider-Man, the Incredible Hulk, Captain America and all its other superheroes to the public.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
New York State Dormitory Authority is offering $39.3 million in tax-exempt mortgage revenue bonds for Menorah Campus Inc., with a maximum yield of 7.4 percent for an issue due in 2031, through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Yields on serial bonds range from 5.5 percent in 1994 to 7.15 percent in 2006, with the yield on another long maturity, due in 2016, at 7.3 percent.
The issue is rated AA by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Weicker: A Maverick Visionary or a Political Realist?
Former Gov.
William A. O'Neill, Connecticut's chief executive throughout the prosperous, placid 1980's, liked to call his home state "the land of steady habits." Under Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., it might more aptly be called the land of the rising blood pressure.
In his first six months as the state's first independent non-party governor since the Civil War, Mr.
Weicker has ridden roughshod over about as many sensibilities as his brief time in office has allowed.
Two-party government?
An anachronism.
The long-avoided and politically verboten income tax?
Long overdue, and anyone who disagrees is lacking in courage or intelligence.
But as the state enters its third week without a budget on Monday with Mr.
Weicker and lawmakers still apparently deadlocked over the income-tax issue, the questions are growing ever more urgent about just how much a non-traditional governor without a single member of his party in the Legislature can achieve.
Thorn in Nixon's Side
Behind that is the question of who exactly Mr.
Weicker is and what makes him push as hard as he has -- through two budget vetoes over the last six weeks and a partial shutdown of the state government carried out over the objections of the state Attorney General and the Comptroller.
It is a subject that others have tried to plumb before, and failed.Former President Richard M. Nixon, to name just one, began asking about Mr.
Weicker in 1973.
Mr.
Weicker was gaining national attention and the cover of Time magazine as the young Republican Senator on the Watergate committee who dared attack his own party's Administration.


90 Evacuated in Amtrak Fire
Ninety passengers on a New York-to-Montreal Amtrak passenger train had to be evacuated today when the train's rear turbine engine caught fire, the authorities said.
Chief Jim Favreau of the Beekmantown Fire Department said the fire was reported about 6:20 P.M.
No passengers were injured, but some firefighters suffered from heat exhaustion, he said.
The passengers were taken by bus to Montreal.


Critic's Notebook; Leaping From Rock to Classical: A Case for Taking the Pitons
One wishful theory advanced by classical music enthusiasts is that as rock-and-roll fans grow up, their tastes will eventually become more refined and they will find their way to the classics, perhaps with jazz serving as a kind of halfway house.
I have not seen evidence that this is the case, at least not on a scale worth mentioning, although I know some people who moved from rock to jazz and stopped there.
Lately, though, there has been a rash of unexpected rock world conversions to classical music, not on the part of rock fans, but by rock stars, who as a group have traditionally portrayed their work as the revolutionary antithesis of the classics, which they regard as staid and elitist.


7 Arrive With Soviets on Their Minds
Leaders of the seven largest industrialized democracies gathered here today for three days of talks that are expected to focus on ways of encouraging the Soviet Union to move to a market economy without much help from any of them.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union will present his latest plan for economic change to the leaders here on Wednesday afternoon.
That meeting, sought by Mr.
Gorbachev for two years, is a recognition of the interdependence of all the world's economies now that the cold war is over.


Results Plus
GOLF Fleisher Wins Playoff Bruce Fleisher, who quit the PGA Tour in 1983 to work as a golf pro at a country club, sank a 40-foot birdie putt on the seventh playoff hole yesterday to beat Ian Baker-Finch of Australia and capture the New England Classic in Sutton, Mass.
Fleisher, 42, sank his long putt on the 11th green and then watched as Baker-Finch missed from 25 feet to end the PGA's longest playoff since Bob Gilder needed eight extra holes to win at Phoenix in 1983.
Fleisher, the 1968 United States Amateur champion, who got into the tournament as an alternate, shot a 64 in coming back from a faltering third round for his first PGA victory, which was worth $180,000.
He left the tour in 1983 after 11 years without a victory but then returned a year ago.
He finished at 268, 16 strokes under par.
Baker-Finch forced a playoff with a birdie 4 on the 72d hole.(AP) Ziegler Wins, Finally: Larry Ziegler ended a 15-year victory drought with a record-breaking six-stroke victory in the Newport Cup seniors tournament at the Newport Country Club in Rhode Island.
Ziegler, 51, fired a final-round five-under-par 67, and his 17-under 199 broke the 54-hole tournament record by one stroke.
Ziegler had not won a PGA event since the New Orleans Open in 1976.
Tom Shaw and Jim Dent each shot 71 and George Archer had a 68 to tie for second at 11-under 205.
Ziegler, who joined the Senior Tour in 1989, began the final round with a two-stroke lead over Shaw and Dent. (AP) Verwey Wins on Final Putt: Bobby Verwey of South Africa sank a 6-foot par putt on the final hole to win the British Seniors Open in St.
Anne's, England.
Verwey drove into a fairway bunker on the last hole, but recovered for the par that gave him a one-stroke victory over Bob Charles and Tommy Horton.
Verwey, the brother-in-law of Gary Player, shot a 70 in the final round for a 285 total.
Player won the tournament last year. (AP) TENNIS From Ashe to Shelton  Bryan Shelton won a tournament for the first time in his career yesterday, beating Javier Frana, 3-6, 6-4, 6-4, in the final of the Hall of Fame Championships in Newport, R.I.
Shelton, 25, became the first black American to win a singles tournament in North America since Arthur Ashe won in Los Angeles in 1978.
He is ranked 147th in the world.
Shelton took control by breaking the Argentine's serve in the first game of the final set.
At 30-30, Shelton floated a return that caught the baseline to reach break point.
He sent a forehand winner past Frana for the service break.
Frana never threatened to break serve for the remainder of the match. (AP) Gustafsson Prevails: Magnus Gustafsson of Sweden routed Alberto Mancini of Argentina, 6-1, 6-2, yesterday to win the Swedish Open in Bastad.
It was the second Association of Tennis Professionals tour title for the 24-year-old Swede, who won another clay-court tournament two months ago in Munich, Germany.
Gustafsson, the second-seeded player, used his powerful forehand to overwhelm the eighth-seeded Mancini.
After the players split the first two games of the match, Gustafsson won nine straight games to win the first set and take a 4-0 lead in the second set.
Mancini, who beat Aleksandr Volkov in the semifinals after losing the first eight games, couldn't come back this time.
Gustafsson, the first Swede to win the tournament since 1987, earned $32,400.
Mancini, who beat Gustafsson in the third round of the French Open, received $19,000. (AP) Sanchez Wins Swiss Open: Emilio Sanchez of Spain defeated his Davis Cup teammate Sergi Bruguera, 6-1, 6-4, 6-4 in Gstaad to win the Swiss Open.
The top-seeded Bruguera was bothered by a strained stomach muscle that hampered his service throughout the match.
It was the 14th career title for Sanchez, who also won the Swiss Open in 1987.
It was Bruguera's first tournament since he hurt his back at the French Open in May. (AP) Pierce Wins Her First: Mary Pierce, ranked 91st in the world, upset Sandra Cecchini of Italy, 6-0, 6-3, to win a clay-court tournament in Palermo, Sicily.
It was the first career title for Pierce, a 16-year-old who was born in Canada and lives in France.
Cecchini, ranked 16th in the world, couldn't keep up with the aggressive play of her opponent. (AP) AUTO RACING  Mansell Roars Again Nigel Mansell sped away from the field yesterday to win the British Grand Prix by 42 seconds over Gerhard Berger for his second Formula One victory in eight days.
Mansell, who won the French Grand Prix a week earlier, led for all but the opening 45 seconds.
No other car could match the speed of his Williams-Renault, which repeatedly set lap records at Silverstone, England.
The Briton, who has won his nation's grand prix three times in the last six years, began from the pole position but was overtaken at the start by defending world champion Ayrton Senna.
Mansell needed only half a lap to regain the lead, and he never relinquished it after that, increasing his gap over Senna with nearly every lap. (AP)


Ban the Replacement of Workers on Strike; Teaming With Unions
To the Editor:
I read with interest "Work Teams: Not All Teamwork" (Business Day, June 25), on work teams in United States factories.
I was distressed to read that the executives at Monsanto Pensacola, the factory you discuss, attribute their success to the absence of unions.


Mourners Pay Tribute to Bishop Mugavero
It seemed that everyone at the wake yesterday for Francis J. Mugavero had a personal story to tell about the retired Bishop of Brooklyn who died Friday at the age of 77.
But the one vignette that may have captured the man best was limned by Msgr.
John Walker, a friend for 40 years.
Monsignor Walker told of how Bishop Mugavero loved to eat with fellow priests in little-known Italian restaurants in Brooklyn and Queens.
"We could never get him to leave," Monsignor Walker recalled.
"He wouldn't leave. He kind of oozed out of there like toothpaste out of a tube. He had to stop and say hello to everyone in the restaurant.


Ban the Replacement of Workers on Strike
To the Editor:
You report that the Communications Workers of America canceled a speech by Labor Secretary Lynn Martin at its annual convention in San Francisco because of fear of protest against Administration opposition to a bill banning the permanent replacement of striking workers (news article, June 27).
You quote Ms.
Martin's statement in response, voicing regret that "there are those who let single-issue politics stifle discussion and communication."


At Tourist's Burial, Grief, Hope and a Call for Justice
It would have been better, said Dr.
Renaldo Lantin, if his daughter had never gone to America.
"The Philippines is written about as a violent country where killings are common," he said.
"But Rhona would have been safer here."


Health Workers Delay Protest Over Layoffs
Leaders of New York City's health workers union have proposed delaying a mass demonstration planned for tomorrow.
The action came after top mayoral aides agreed yesterday to help form a management-labor committee to search for ways to cushion the effects of hospital layoffs forced by the city's fiscal problems.
Leland T. Jones, a spokesman for Mayor David N. Dinkins, said last night that the committee would search for more money for city hospitals at the state and Federal levels.


Altera Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Chicago Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


P.&amp; G. Ecology Drive: Beyond Packaging
FOR the first time, a "green" advertising campaign for household products made by the Procter &amp; Gamble Company focuses not only on packaging, but also on the products in the packages.
Print advertisements, now appearing in national magazines, tout the purported environmental friendliness of the ingredients of three venerable P.&amp; G. brands of household cleaner: Spic and Span, Comet and Mr.
Clean.
As a companion to the campaign, advertising in free-standing inserts in Sunday newspapers echoes similar themes and offers cents-off coupons for the products.


For Haitians, Voyage to a Land of Inequality
Riding calm seas, with thunder crackling across a hazy night sky, 163 men, women and children jammed aboard a leaky Haitian fishing boat called Conail were 30 miles from Miami when they were stopped July 7 by the Coast Guard cutter Baranof on border patrol.
Following procedures, Coast Guard officers ordered the people off the Conail and on board the Baranof.
Of the 163 people on board, 161 were Haitians trying to escape the grim poverty of their homeland.
The other two were Cubans whose flimsy raft had been plucked from the water by the Haitians in a gesture of brotherhood.


Guards Are Held for 2 Hours In 2d Night of Prison Unrest
Inmates in a cellblock for well-behaved prisoners held three guards hostage for two and a half hours on Sunday night in a second night of trouble at the Stateville Correctional Center.
Eight inmates were removed from the dormitory after prison officials concluded that they were responsible for Sunday's hostage-taking, a spokesman for the Corrections Department, Nic Howell, said today.
One of the three guards was slightly injured.


Lightning Touches Off Fires In Idaho Forests and Range
Hundreds of lightning strikes on Sunday touched off fires in dry forests and range land across the southern half of the state, although none of the fires threatened homes or businesses, the authorities said.
The biggest fire affected a 6,000-acre range near the Nevada border, the Bureau of Land Management said.
Elsewhere, 11 fires continued to burn in Salmon National Forest, where 21 fires were started by 800 bolts of lightning that struck the 2-million-acre forest from 6 A.M. to noon Sunday, a spokesman there said.


New Deficit Estimate Hurts Prices
Estimates from the White House that next year's Federal budget deficit will be nearly $350 billion, a figure that was on the high end of what Wall Street had expected, helped to depress prices of Treasury securities yesterday.
Over the last few weeks credit market participants have worried about how they would cope with the huge volume of government debt to be issued this quarter, a number many analysts put at $100 billion.
The news about the heftier borrowing in the 12 months beginning Oct. 1 intensified those concerns.


Polaroid Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Guilty Plea by Leader In Fatal Attack on Wards I.
The man who prosecutors say was the ringleader of attacks on homeless men that resulted in one man being killed on Wards Island in October pleaded guilty to second-degree murder yesterday.
In a plea agreement with Justice Allen G. Alpert in State Supreme Court, the 19-year-old defendant, Reynolds Walker of 316 East 103d Street, pleaded guilty in exchange for a prison sentence of 18 years, instead of the sentence of 25 years to life he faced if convicted by a jury.
A spokesman for District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan, said Mr.
Walker had admitted being the "instigator and ringleader" of attacks on at least seven homeless men on Wards Island.


Leaders Open Economic Conference in London


Henry Lee Munson, 87, A Retired Fund Raiser
Henry Lee Munson, retired president of H. L. Munson &amp; Company, a Manhattan fund-raising and public relations concern, died on Sunday at his son's home in Orono, Me.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Munson died of emphysema, a family spokesman said.


Music in Review
Handel and Haydn Society of Boston Avery Fisher Hall
The venerable Handel and Haydn Society of Boston re-created itself five years ago when it hired Christopher Hogwood to transform it into a period instrument band.
On Sunday evening, Mr.
Hogwood brought the group to Avery Fisher Hall for a Mostly Mozart concert and showed that venerability and scholarliness need not be staid.
With Robert Levin, the fortepianist, he presided over a performance that at times seemed a cross between a musicological conference and a Las Vegas lounge act.


Lexicon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Facelifters Home Systems Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Wearing Scout Uniform With a Difference
To the Editor:
In the name of equality, an 8-year-old girl in Florida goes to court to gain the right to become a Boy Scout, you report in your front-page examination of the state of the Scouts (June 23).
Does equality for girls mean being and doing the same as boys?
If so, then doesn't that force girls to abandon their essence?
And can that possibly be perceived as equality?


No Hit-Run Charges in Crash Fatal to 2
The driver of the tractor-trailer that struck and killed two elderly sisters in upper Manhattan on Sunday was not charged in the accident yesterday because New York City law-enforcement officials did not believe he was aware he had hit the two women.
But in New Jersey, where he was apprehended seven minutes after the accident, the driver was arraigned on charges of driving while impaired by drugs and eluding the police.
Court records examined yesterday indicated that the driver, Harold J. Heitzman of Hurst, Tex., had a lengthy history of arrests related to drugs and alcohol.


Review/Theater; Three Misfits, Several Songs and a Scud
A confused mixture of Eastern European cabaret and environmental theater, Byron Ayanoglu and Jiri Schubert's musical play "The Eagle in the Bubble" focuses on three social misfits, two of whom live in an abandoned Broadway theater.
Nostro (Ron Jones), an androgynous seer, and Rosie (Ruby Lynn Reyner), a self-proclaimed Communist who fled to New York City from upstate, are lovers of sorts.
Periodically, they are visited by Pavlov (Marek Vusut), a loud-mouthed Eastern European punk who brings them sausages and drugs.
When it is announced that a Scud missile has deposited chemical weapons on the neighborhood, their stronghold is invaded by frightened zombie-faced workers who claw at plastic shower curtains separating them from the trio.
Rosie, Nostro and Pavlov reflect at excruciating length about their wasted lives and imminent deaths.
Their shrill, whining monologues are interspersed with renditions of songs that range from Alice Cooper's hit, "Only Women Bleed" (sung by Ms. Reyner as a parody of Marlene Dietrich), to a Czechoslovak folk song called "Amerika."


Charles M. Bliss, 87,Retired Bank Official
Charles M. Bliss, a retired chairman of the Bank of New York, died on Friday at his home in Southport, Me.
He was 87 years old.
He died of bone cancer, said a funeral home spokesman.


Chess
It is quite impressive what counts as a failure for a top female player these days.
Judit Polgar, the youngest of the three amazing sisters from Budapest, made an even score -- five victories, five losses and three draws -- in the elite Schweizerische Kreditanstalt Tournament in Munich, Germany, from May 2 to 20, but it was less than she was aiming for.
Before the advent of Judit Polgar, who will be 15 years old next Tuesday, such a strong showing would have been considered virtually impossible, but she wanted one more draw in the last round to achieve the credentials for grandmaster rank and instead lost to the Soviet grandmaster Aleksandr Belyavsky.


New Aid to Israel Can Only Hinder Peace
To the Editor:
"New U.S. Dispute With Israel Seen" (news article, June 26) quotes Thomas A. Dine, executive director of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, the pro-Israel lobby in this country, arguing that absorption of immigrants to Israel must not be linked to the peace process.
But the first to make this linkage was not the Bush Administration; it was the Israeli Government.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir has twice declared in the last year and a half that Israel needs the occupied territories to absorb immigrants.
Every time Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d visited Israel in the last few months, he was greeted by a new settlement, erected, with barely concealed government sanction, to make the same political statement.


NCNB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


IRAQ CALLS ATTACK BY U.S. PROBABLE
Iraq's Prime Minister declared today that a new American attack on his country was "a probability" despite what he called Baghdad's full compliance with United Nations terms for ending the Persian Gulf war.
Speaking a day after President Bush and President Francois Mitterrand of France threatened military action should Iraq persist in developing nuclear arms, the Prime Minister, Saadun Hamadi, said Iraq was ready to provide the United Nations with whatever additional information it wants about the country's clandestine nuclear weapons program.


Peoples Bancorp-Worcester reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Two Airlines Agree To Halt Shipments Of Exotic Wild Birds
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, the largest transporter of wild tropical birds to the United States, and an Indonesian airline, today agreed under pressure from environmental groups to halt shipments of birds caught in the wild.
The birds are captured in South America, Africa and Asia and flown to the United States and Europe for sale as pets.
Conservation groups have been pressing KLM and other major airlines to halt the shipments to help protect dwindling populations of birds not yet classified as endangered.
Environmentalists say that deaths during transit contribute to the extinction of many bird species.


Lie Forces Japan TV Chief to Quit
The chairman of Japan's public TV broadcasting network resigned today for deceiving Parliament about his whereabouts during a failed attempt to put a network satellite in orbit.
The resignation of the chairman, Keiji Shima of the Japan Broadcasting Corporation, known as NHK, adds to a growing list of executives who have stepped down in separate scandals.


The Merger Partners
For John F. McGillicuddy of Manufacturers Hanover and Walter V. Shippley of Chemical, common struggles paved the way to a merger.
Page D1.


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


LSI and Sanyo In Chips Deal
The LSI Logic Corporation, a Silicon Valley semiconductor company, said today that it would co-develop chips for use in high-definition television sets with the Sanyo Electric Company, a Japanese consumer electronics company.
The announcement marked the first agreement between American and Japanese companies to develop chips for Japan's advanced television system and might help increase sales of American chips in Japan.
High-definition television will provide pictures that are far sharper than those of existing television sets, but the advanced sets are not expected to be sold in great numbers until the second half of the 1990's.


Bank Earnings Reports Reflect Industry Turmoil
On the day that the Chemical Banking Corporation and the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation announced their merger, some of the nation's largest money center banks issued earnings reports reflecting the kinds of problems that are propelling banks to unite.
Those reporting yesterday included Chemical, which had lower second-quarter earnings and Manufacturers and Chase Manhattan, which had gains.
Earnings at other banks were generally weak, although slightly above analysts' estimates.


Great Western Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Palermo's Rehabilitation
American League umpire STEVE PALERMO was transfered yesterday from a hospital to a therapy center where doctors said he would continue rehabilitation to recover from a gunshot wound in the back.
Palermo, who was shot earlier this month while aiding two robbery victims, continues to have "some leg immobility," said MICHELLE RAGLON , a spokeswoman at Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas where the umpire was first taken.
He was transferred to Dallas Rehabilitation Institute. (AP)


Stocks Fall in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices fell by mid-day trading today.
The Nikkei index of 225 stocks declined to 23,522.60, down 63.56 points, or 0.27 percent.


Yankees Can't Shake Old Nemesis: Losing
The Yankees were looking for a few good innings from Greg Cadaret.
They got them.
But what they didn't expect was a strange chain of events in the second inning tonight and some dreadful fielding.
Cadaret pitched in poor luck, the Yankees were beaten by the Seattle Mariners, 5-1, at the Kingdome, and now their losing streak is two.
They hadn't lost more than one game in succession since June 20-22, when they dropped three in a row.


Dozier on the Move
D.
J.
DOZIER moved up in class yesterday -- and moved his football career into limbo.
Dozier, an outfielder in the Mets' organization, was promoted from the Double-A Williamsport Bills to their Triple-A Tidewater club.
Last night he went 2 for 4 with a run-scoring single.
Dozier is leaving his situation as a Minnesota Vikings running back in doubt.
He is under commitment to Minnesota, but remained unsigned with the Vikings' training camp a week away.


Temple-Inland reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tine Warner Stock Off As Rights Offer Begins
In the largest underwritten rights offering in American history, Time Warner Inc. yesterday began the sale of 34.5 million new shares at $80 each.
Under the offering, shareholders received six-tenths of a right for each Time Warner share they own.
Each right entitles holders to buy one share of Time Warner stock at $80.
The offering is expected to raise $2.8 billion.


Museum Restores A Nude To Show
Faced with an increasing barrage of criticism, the director of the National Museum of American Art has reversed her decision to remove from an exhibition a work of art that she said last week was "degrading to women." It was announced today that the piece, by Sol LeWitt, would be reinstalled.
"As this artwork has become the centerpiece of a public debate, we believe that the public is best served by including LeWitt's work in the exhibition so everybody can discuss the issues after having seen it," the museum director, Elizabeth Broun, said in a statement issued by the press office of the Smithsonian Institution, which runs the museum.


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American List Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Iraq Still Conceals Nuclear Effort, Inspection Team Reports to U.N.
Baghdad continues to defy demands that it disclose the nature and extent of its nuclear program to United Nations inspectors, the leaders of a mission to Iraq told the Security Council tonight.
Hans Blix, Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and Rolf Ekeus, executive chairman of the special commission overseeing the elimination of Baghdad's weapons of mass destruction, told the Security Council that a new list of nuclear sites, provided by the Iraqis on Sunday, added nothing new to a list of sites released on July 7, which was quickly characterized by American intelligence officials as incomplete and misleading.


Archer Daniels Midland reports earnings for Year to June 30


Smith (A.O.) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Citizen Lawmaking Measure Dies in Trenton
New Jersey legislators refused today to bring to a vote a proposal to allow a form of citizen lawmaking, effectively killing the measure for this year.
In votes that split largely along partisan lines in the Assembly and somewhat less so in the Senate, both houses rejected efforts to bring out of committee a measure that would have put on the November ballot a constitutional amendment to allow citizens to make or repeal laws through initiative and referendum.
The process, allowed in some form in 23 states, is most widely used in California.


This British Open Site Friendly to Americans
The once-lofty self-image of American golf has been absorbing a lot of knockdown shots from European players in recent years, but the 120th British Open, which begins Thursday at the Royal Birkdale Golf Club in Southport, England, holds the promise of revival.
Royal Birkdale, a links course on the Lancashire coast, has never had a European champion on the six occasions it has been the site of an Open, with four American winners and one two-time winner from Australia.
And America's top player, United States Open champion Payne Stewart, has finished no worse than eighth in his last four British Opens.


Philanthropy to Children 'The Marine Corps Way'
On a relaxed Sunday afternoon, Brig.
Gen.
Martin F. Rockmore, a retired reservist in the Marine Corps, spotted two small articles in the newspaper: One described the financial predicament of a Marine Medal of Honor winner who could not afford to send his son to college.
The other reported that a charity ball sponsored by animal lovers had raised close to $1 million.
That was 2 years ago, but even now General Rockmore bristles with indignation.
'Fine, if Americans want to contribute to animal well being, but it seemed to me then, and it seems to me now, Americans can afford to help the children of our war heroes get a good education.
I had to do something." A Foundation is Born
What he did was summon a group of fellow officers and friends to meet at the 21 Club in Manhattan, where he plunked the newspaper clippings on the table and practically ordered everyone to establish the Marine Corps Scholarship Fund.
On the spot, several thousand dollars were collected.
Since then, the foundation has raised $7 million and enabled more than 4,400 children of marines - families with incomes below $35,000 - to get a college education.
Now the foundation is creating another scholarship fund, this one for the children of members of the American forces lost in the Persian Gulf War.
"We're making an addition to our usual program of helping marine families, to give scholarships to the children of the 180 Army, 48 Air Force, 47 Navy and 62 Marine Corps members who died in the Gulf War," said Peter Haas, a retired stockbroker who is the foundation's president.
The foundation is a low-cost operation that raises millions mainly because of the loyalty of its unpaid staff of volunteers, many former marines like Mr.
Haas, who was a sergeant major, and Joseph File, a retired colonel and now a nuclear engineer at Princeton University.
"The general instilled a lot of ramrod in us," said Dr.
File, who is chairman of the 32-member board of the foundation.
Several times each week Dr.
File works at the foundation's office, three rented rooms on the Princeton campus.
The foundation gets most of its money from fund-raising charity balls held each April in New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia and Washington.
It also sponsors a dozen golf tournaments.
In recent years, private foundations, 30 corporations and philanthropists also have sent contributions to the foundation at Box 3008, Princeton NJ 08543-3408.
The foundation has pledged that all contributions to its new Desert Storm fund will go to buy Treasury bonds for the children who lost a parent in the Gulf War.
"When the 202 children covered by the fund turn 18, these bonds we now issue to their family or trustees will bring them each at least $10,000," said Mr.
Haas.
"Sometimes locating the families is difficult, but we track them down. That's the Marine Corps way."


The Pennsylvania Ballet Raises $2.5 Million
The Pennsylvania Ballet, whose severe financial difficulties caused a suspension of operations in March, has completed its $2.5 million Save the Ballet campaign.
Major contributions were a $500,000 donation from the Pew Charitable Trusts, $100,000 from the Annenberg Foundation and $750,000 from the William Penn Foundation, to be given to the ballet company over two years.
Christopher d'Amboise is the president and artistic director of the Philadelphia-based company.


Russell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Born to Be Wild, but Feminine
The motorcycle jacket conveys a tough, don't-mess-with-me attitude.
Men have always worn it to indicate that they were outsiders, beyond the law or born to be wild, even if only on weekends.
Women's fashion has absorbed the style, minus the exhaust, perhaps to send slightly different messages.
Women like the attitude, the jagged counterpoint of tooled leather over more feminine shapes.
The short biker jacket, with its asymmetric front zippers, floppy lapels and angled pockets, adds a series of sharp V-shapes, almost Cubist-like, to the top half of softer silhouettes.


Yugoslav Army Revamping Itself After Setbacks
Staggered by its inept performance against Slovenian separatists, the Yugoslav military is trying to revamp itself, and many officials in the country's two breakaway republics fear that the result may be a stronger, more determined opponent of their independence drives.
In recent days, the army has reassigned dozens of mid-level officers, threatened deserters with execution and moved one of its most hard-line generals to command troops in Slovenia and Croatia, the two republics that declared their independence last month.


Avesis Inc. reports earnings for Year to May 31


Puritan Oil Account Moves Back to Grey
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, Cincinnati, has returned the $10 million Puritan oil account to Grey Advertising, New York, almost a year after moving it to Ayer Inc., New York.
P.&amp; G. wanted to consolidate all advertising for its oils and shortenings at Grey, a company spokeswoman said yesterday.
Grey already handles the Crisco shortening and oils account, which has billings of $11 million.
As part of the consolidation, labels for Puritan Oil will bear the Crisco logo beginning later this year.


Zaghir Journal; Peace Is Bursting Out; Will the Crops Do as Well?
Worn out by war and drought, Neguesse Heruye coaxed his last crop five years ago from the gravelly soil that forms the once verdant hills here into stark peaks.
As a supplement to grain, he owned cattle and goats that fed on low-lying pasture, a day's walk from his house.
But those lands were mined by the Ethiopian Army, and herders who ventured there were shot by soldiers.


Co-Founder of Spy Named Editor of New York Observer
Spy magazine is losing its co-editor and co-founder to a publication it once ridiculed.
E.
Graydon Carter, who helped found Spy in 1986, is departing to become editor of The New York Observer, a weekly newspaper aimed at affluent residents of Manhattan.


IKOS Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Revenue represented net revenue.


Stryker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pentair Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Music in Review
Berkshire Choral Institute The Berkshire School
Since 1981, the Berkshire School has been the home of the Berkshire Choral Institute, a series of five weeklong seminars at which choristers from all over the United States work with some of the country's most respected choral conductors.
About 200 singers attend each course, and every week ends with a Saturday evening concert here with the Springfield Symphony Orchestra.
Tonight's concert, the first of the season, was conducted by Margaret Hillis, the director of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra Chorus.
The program was an unusual match: Ned Rorem's "American" Oratorio and Puccini's Messa di Gloria.


Business Scene; Pressure on Fed Without Letup
AS chairman of the Federal Reserve, Paul Volcker displeased the Reagan Administration in the mid-1980's, and the President's top aides often said so, in blunt public statements.
The Bush Administration deals more softly with Alan Greenspan, the current chairman, but the pressure on the Federal Reserve to shape policy the White House way has been roughly the same -- and without letup.
The President waited until last Wednesday, a month before Mr.
Greenspan's term expired, to name him to a second four years as Fed chairman.
Bush officials pooh-poohed speculation that the reappointment was ever in doubt.
Quite the contrary.
One senior adviser, who declined to be named, even suggested that since January, Mr.
Greenspan had steered Fed policy roughly as the White House would have steered it, if the President's advisers had been running the central bank.


Dichters Replace Labeques
Because of Katia Labeque's illness, the appearances of the piano duo Katia and Marielle Labeque at the Mostly Mozart Festival today and tomorrow at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall have been canceled.
Instead, the pianists Misha and Cipa Dichter are to perform.
The program, which remains unchanged, is to be conducted by Gerard Schwarz and also feature the hornist Barry Tuckwell.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Skidmore Architect Firm Names Its First Chairman
Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill, one of the world's biggest architectural and engineering firms, has announced the election of the first chairman in its 55-year history.
He is David M. Childs and will serve for a two-year period.
The 50-year-old architectural design specialist will continue to be one of the firm's design partners.


Loss Posted At Cascade
The Boise Cascade Corporation said today that it lost $32.5 million in the second quarter, mostly because of deteriorating conditions in the market for its paper products.
The paper and wood products company said the loss for the period that ended June 30 compared with a profit of $23 million, or 52 cents a share, in the corresponding quarter last year.
Revenues slipped 7.4 percent, to $978 million, from $1.05 billion a year earlier.


Franklin Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


The Babies Who Won't Blossom: New Anguish in a Kuwaiti Refugee Camp
The baby, Shrjon, did not squirm or squall when she was taken from her mother's arms and strapped into a sling so that she could be weighed, evidently for the first time in her life, on a scale hanging from the peak of the medical tent.
It is easy to measure such a small, still object accurately.
The needle on the scale sat inertly at the 4-kilogram mark.
Shrjon, who is 5 months old, weighed 8.4 pounds.


A Mayor Volunteers: The Immortal Dinkins
Sometimes it seems like everybody wants a piece of Mayor David N. Dinkins, and yesterday the Mayor said that when he is gone, the world will be welcome to his heart -- and a few other parts, too.
After thinking about it over the weekend, the Mayor and his wife, Joyce, signed donor cards stipulating that when they die, their organs will be available for potential transplant recipients.


P.&amp; G. Ecology Drive: Beyond Packaging
FOR the first time, a "green" advertising campaign for household products made by the Procter &amp; Gamble Company focuses not only on packaging, but also on the products in the packages.
Print advertisements, now appearing in national magazines, tout the purported environmental friendliness of the ingredients of three venerable P.&amp; G. brands of household cleaner: Spic and Span, Comet and Mr.
Clean.
As a companion to the campaign, advertising in free-standing inserts in Sunday newspapers echoes similar themes and offers cents-off coupons for the products.


F.T.C. Official Leaves
Andrew J. Strenio Jr., a member of the Federal Trade Commission for the last seven years, has resigned to join a Washington law firm, the agency said today.
Mr.
Strenio, a Democrat, was appointed to the commission in 1986 by President Ronald Reagan.
He had been a member of the Interstate Commerce Commission.
The 39-year-old Mr.
Strenio will become a partner in the law firm of Fox, Bennett &amp; Turner.


U.S. WON'T REVISE 1990 CENSUS, SAYS CHIEF OF COMMERCE
Overruling the Census Bureau's director and a majority of its in-house experts, Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher announced today that he would not adjust the 1990 census counts to add about five million people the bureau says were missed.
Although he said that adjusting the counts would improve them for the country as a whole, for 29 of the 50 states and for localities where almost two-tirds of the country's residents live, the Secretary said the adjusted figures were increasingly unreliable for smaller and smaller communities.


Wellcome Stock Up On Venture Rumor
The shares of Wellcome P.L.C., the British pharmaceuticals company, rose on renewed speculation that it might set up a venture with the pharmaceuticals division of Imperial Chemical Industries of Britain.
The shares rose 26 pence today, or 45 cents a share, to close at 722 pence, or $12.55, on the London Stock Exchange.
The company declined to comment on the rumor.
I.C.I. is preparing defenses against a possible takeover bid by Hanson P.L.C., the British conglomerate.
County NatWest, the brokerage house, recently upgraded its forecast for Wellcome's 1990-91 pretax profits to $:390 million, or $644.5 million, from $:370 million, or $611.5 million.


Review/Rock; A Band Working The Sounds Of Rebellion
There are times when rock's rhetorical insularity becomes almost astounding.
Mind Funk's show at the Marquee on Friday night, as part of the New Music Seminar, made a case for rock as a totally self-reflexive style of music, a type of limited folk music of the white middle class, aware only of its near past.
The band, which is from New Jersey and records on Epic, worked the language of rebellion.
Even that tired stance can be freshened by new components, but the band wasn't really up to providing them.
The lightly crowded house produced only a handful of slam dancers to go along with the fast and coarse guitar music, and when the two or three people who dared to go onstage jumped back into the audience, after being kicked by the band, they landed on the floor instead of on the crowd.


Issue of Homosexuality Reveals Deep Divisions at Episcopal Meeting
Like the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) before it, the Episcopal Church has opened a meeting of its governing body deeply divided over the ordination of homosexuals and recognition of homosexual couples.
Today the House of Bishops, which operates alongside a house of elected lay and clerical deputies to establish church policy, set aside proposals that have created heated debate in the church over the last few months.


Defense Criticizes Accuser in St. John's Trial
For more than two and a half hours yesterday, one of the defense lawyers in the St.
John's University sexual assault case argued that testimony from the woman who says she was attacked could not be trusted.
In closing arguments, Larry Silverman, who represents 21-year-old Andrew Draghi, one of six St.
John's students charged in the case, said the woman had taken a month to identify his client, initially telling university officials that "Michael, Walter and someone else" had driven her home after the incident.
Later, Mr.
Silverman said, she changed her statement to say it was "Andrew -- I think."


Boatmen's Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Iomega Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Thieves of Baghdad
Just as Saddam Hussein keeps promising to open Iraq's nuclear weapons facilities to inspection, his officials keep promising to return treasures stripped from Kuwait's National Museum.
Last September, Iraqi soldiers made off with 17 truckloads of mostly Islamic art, the cream of a collection valued at $1 billion.
What was left was mostly plundered or destroyed by Iraqi troops who torched the museum's four large galleries, thus gutting Kuwait's past with the same spiteful pyromania they directed against Kuwait's oilfields.
Paintings, sculpture, carpets, manuscripts, tapestries: all this was in Kuwait's museum, along with 8,000 coins and 13,000 books.
Nobody knows how much of this has been kept safely in Baghdad, or what was looted by Iraqi troops, who carried off telephones and chairs as well as huge pottery jars from Greco-Roman times.
The pillage was deliberate, a crime meant to erase Kuwait's distinctive history as a flourishing Persian Gulf city-state.


Society Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ECI Environmental Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


First Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Adams Express Co.  reports earnings for As of June 30


Reynolds Metals Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sears to Give Warranties On Clothing for Children
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, seeking to bolster its share of an increasingly competitive market, said yesterday that it would offer warranties against wear and tear on children's clothing and give discounts to frequent shoppers.
Discount stores like K Mart and Wal-Mart have aggressively entered the children's clothing market with inexpensive, private-label clothing and some brand names.
And specialty stores like the Gap (Gap for Kids) and Toys "R" Us (Kids "R" Us) have been rapidly expanding the number of their children's wear stores.
As they have done so they have challenged department stores like Sears and J. C. Penney, which traditionally dominated the market.


No Spot Is Too Remote for Seagoing Trash
PULLING up in a motorboat to a remote island in the Pacific, a British zoologist was astonished to find that its beaches were strewn with garbage washed up from the ocean.
The island, Ducie Atoll, is arguably one of the most remote islands in the world.
It is 293 miles away from the nearest inhabited island, Pitcairn, and more than 3,000 miles northeast of New Zealand.


Paine Webber Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Parks, Top Duke Recruit, Is Working His Way Up
Cherokee Parks, who stands out among the basketball players at the Olympic Festival because of a catchy name and a 6-foot-11-inch frame, has proved to be a lunch-pail kind of player who jokingly says of himself: "I'd be flashy if I only knew how."
Parks, who was graduated this year from Marina High School in Huntington Beach, Calif., is headed for Duke University this fall.
He figures to give the defending National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, a squad top-heavy with returning lettermen, immediate help.


Weis Markets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Power Conversion reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cypress Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Cycare Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dravecky Making Plans
Looking fit and rested, former San Francisco Giants pitcher DAVE DRAVECKY said yesterday that the amputation of his left arm was only a temporary setback.
"There's adjustments that I have to make, but there's nothing out there that I don't want to do," Dravecky said in his first news conference since cancer surgery June 18.


Morgan (J.P.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NCR Profits Are Off 13.9%
Lower international orders and the recession resulted in reduced second-quarter revenue and a 13.9 percent profit decline at the NCR Corporation, the computer company said today.
The company attributed the decline in orders to the stronger dollar.
NCR, which agreed in May to merge with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, said profit for the three months ended June 30 totaled $99 million, or $1.51 a share, compared with a record $115 million, or $1.66 a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.


Cognitive Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Miller (Herman) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


New Charges for Driver In Dragging of Toddler
The driver accused of dragging an 18-month-old boy to his death in East Harlem last month was indicted yesterday on charges of criminally negligent homicide and leaving the scene of an accident.
The defendant, Pablo Linares, 46 years old, was initially charged only with leaving the scene in the June 3 accident, in which the boy was killed and his mother was critically injured as she pushed him in his carriage across the intersection of East 106th Street and Third Avenue.
At the time, the police said there was not enough evidence to charge Mr.
Linares with criminally negligent homicide or vehicular manslaughter.


Bert Convy, 57, an Actor and Host Of Television Game Shows, Dies
Bert Convy, an actor and host of television game shows, died today at his home in Brentwood here.
He was 57 years old.
A brain tumor was diagnosed in April 1990, said his manager, Howard Hinderstein.
He had been admitted to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center here after collapsing during a visit to his mother, who had been hospitalized for a stroke.


Books of The Times; Hurtling Across Borders, In Pursuit of Iraqi Secrets
Condition Black By Gerald Seymour 336 pages. William Morrow. $20.
The themes and locales of Gerald Seymour's political thrillers call to mind Ezra Pound's comment that literature is news that
stays
news.
Mr.
Seymour, a former British television journalist turned novelist, places his characters in dangerous corners of the world that remain in the news, year after year.
The world is such that he always seems to be on target: terrorism in Northern Ireland; guerrilla warfare in the mountains of Afghanistan; attempted assassinations of Israeli and Arab agents in Western Europe; escapes to freedom from onetime oppressive regimes in Eastern Europe; tribal conflicts and maximum security jails in South Africa, the covert world of intelligence in the Middle East.


Heath Lost for Season
The Atlanta Braves said last night that catcher MIKE HEATHwill be out for the remainder of the season after undergoing three hours of elbow surgery earlier in the day.
The Braves said Dr.
JOE CHANDLER removed 15 loose bone chips from Heath's right elbow.


Bank Stocks Show a Rise; Dow Up 9.84
Banking stocks moved sharply higher yesterday but the rest of the market edged ahead marginally.
Trading continued to be fairly sluggish.
While the Dow Jones industrial average rose 9.84 points, or three-tenths of 1 percent, to 2,990.61, the proposed merger of Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover, pushed the New York Stock Exchange's financial index up 1.6 percent.


Health Management Associates reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Aid to Israel Can Only Hinder Peace; Economy Gains
To the Editor:
I disagree with Robert Loewenberg, who states in "Why Prop Up Israeli Socialism?" (Op-Ed, June 24), "Israel's economy is stagnant because of the perpetuation of an antiquated socialist system, propped up by United States aid and Jewish philanthropy."
Mr.
Loewenberg's description of Israel hardly reflects that Intel (United States) is adding a $95 million expansion to its $100 million investment in Israel.
National Semiconductor (United States) is adding $50 million to its investment.
Twenty-eight United States companies have recently selected Israel for research and development with Israeli companies.


Westinghouse Credit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Way to battle Bias: Fight Acts, Not Feelings
ON a spring night in 1989, someone at Smith College sent anonymous notes, messages of racial hate, to four black students.
The incident ignited a spate of protests on campus.
It also made possible a telling piece of research designed to find ways to fight such acts of bigotry.
For the study, several months after the messages appeared, a student who said she was conducting an opinion poll for a psychology class approached a total of 144 Smith students as they walked across campus.
At the same time, another student -- actually a confederate of the researcher -- was stopped for the survey as she walked by.


Failures Rise In Japan
Corporate bankruptcies in Japan soared 60 percent in the first half of the year, as real estate companies succumbed to a credit squeeze aimed at reducing inflationary speculation, it was reported today.
The Teikoku Data Bank, a private credit research agency, said business failures from January through June rose 60.2 percent, to 4,723, the first year-to-year rise in seven years.


Inventories Down in May For 4th Month
Business inventories shrank by five-tenths of a percent in May, the Government said today.
It was the fourth straight decline and provided a signal, analysts said, that production could pick up as soon as demand increased.
The Commerce Department report also suggested demand might be on the rise.
Business sales, it said, were up 1 percent, to a seasonally adjusted $536.37 billion.
That followed a revised 1.5 percent gain in April that first was reported to have been a 1.2 percent increase.


Biologists Stumble Across New Pattern of Inheritance
GENETICISTS, indoctrinated in the laws of Mendelian inheritance, are embracing a finding that would have surprised the Abbe Mendel considerably.
It is that genes may behave differently depending on whether they are inherited from the father or the mother.
According to the laws of genetics established by Mendel a century ago, inheritable characteristics are passed down from parent to offspring and the results are the same no matter which parent contributes a gene.


Chemicals in Food Raise Children's Cancer Toll
To the Editor:
"Study Finds Mysterious Rise in Childhood Cancer Rate" (news article, June 26) understates the problem and overstates the mystery.
Scientists, it says, are "just now learning of the latest statistics" that show a 4 percent increase in childhood cancer from 1973 to 1988.
Last year, the National Cancer Institute reported a 28 percent increase in the incidence of childhood cancer from 1950 to 1987.


Headfirst! Dykstra Is Back In Action
It took only one game, but all the telltale signs that Lenny Dykstra had come back to play could be found at Veterans Stadium tonight.
His Phillies uniform had its customary patch of dirt smeared across the pinstriped shirt.
After stealing second with a patented headfirst slide he had previously promised to shelve for a while, after scoring the winning run in a 9-8 victory over the Dodgers, after collecting two hits in five times at bat, Dykstra had clearly signaled that two and a half months of injury and idleness had at last come to an end.


A Founder of Mostly Mozart To Resign at Lincoln Center
William W. Lockwood Jr., who helped found the Mostly Mozart Festival and has been executive producer for programming at Lincoln Center since 1982, said yesterday that he would resign on Oct. 1.
Mr.
Lockwood, who joined Lincoln Center in 1965, said he would stay on as a consultant on Lincoln Center's classical music programming.
Nathan Leventhal, Lincoln Center's president, said Mr.
Lockwood told him of his decision about two weeks ago.
"For us it's an incalculable loss," Mr.
Leventhal said.
"Lincoln Center has become an important presenter of concerts in New York, and the majority of the credit for that belongs to Bill."


Dr. Edgar A. Riley, 72, Professor of Medicine
Dr.
Edgar Alsop Riley, professor emeritus of clinical medicine at the Cornell University Medical College, died on Sunday at his home in Tesuque, N.M., near Santa Fe.
He was 72 years old.
He died of kidney failure, a family spokesman said.


Equivest Finance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


In Liquid Crystals, a Glimpse of the Cosmos
AN intriguing possibility that the workings of the universe may be reflected in the behavior of liquid crystals, the chemicals used in digital watch displays, has been suggested by scientists at A.T.&amp;T.
Bell Laboratories and Princeton University.
Scientists describe liquid crystals, which are very common in living organisms, as materials intermediate between cystalline solids, in which atoms are fixed in rigidly ordered lattice structures, and real liquids, in which atoms and molcules wander around chaotically.
The rod-shaped molecules in certain liquid crystals can be forced by electric fields to assume ordered patterns.


John P. Tembeck, Salesman, 75
John P. Tembeck, who was active in New York's Armenian community, died last Tuesday at his home in Yonkers.
He was 75 years old.
Mr. Tembeck died of cancer, a family spokeswoman said.


Review/Dance; Company From Zaire Has Debut In America
The American Dance Festival has always devoted itself to new dance.
Because one of the newest trends in dance is a concern for internationalism and cross-cultural influences, it was only fitting that this summer's festival should present the American debut of the Ballet du Lac Tumba of Bikoro, Zaire.
The performance -- always dignified and often lyrical -- attested to the richness of African dance forms, many of which are scarcely known in this country.
That word "ballet" in the company's name should not be misinterpreted.
In addition to referring to a specific type of Western dance, "ballet" can simply mean any large-scale theatrical dance presentation.
What Ballet du Lac Tumba offered on Saturday night at Page Auditorium of Duke University here was "Iyaya," a suite based upon the traditional dances of Equatorial Africa.


Met Armor Hall to Reopen Soon


At Last, A Comment From Seles
Two days before she could be asked the questions in person, the answers began to emerge in print today about why Monica Seles, the world's top-ranked women's tennis player, suddenly withdrew from the Wimbledon tournament last month.
In a statement issued by her Cleveland-based agent, International Management Group, Seles said that the injury that led to her pulling out of Wimbledon was "shin splints and a slight stress fracture in my left leg."


Southtrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
Baker to Try Again For Arab-Israeli Talks Buoyed by Syria's response to a U.S. plan for a regional peace conference, Secretary of State Baker will return to the Middle East this week and try again to persuade Israel and its Arab adversaries to agree to talk.
Page A9.


First Commerce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alcan Aluminium reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pioneer Hi-Bred reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


AC&amp;R Confirms Move To Sever Saatchi Ties
A spokesman for AC&amp;R Advertising, New York, confirmed yesterday that the agency was seeking to end its relationship with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., its British parent.
The spokesman confirmed that Alvin Chereskin, the agency's chief executive, was negotiating with Saatchi to buy the agency, as reported in this week's issue of Adweek, the trade weekly.
The publication also reported that other AC&amp;R executives, including two senior vice presidents, Doug Fidoten and Stephen Bennett, were joining the bid to buy the agency, which has $264 million in billings.


Citing Conflict, Gay Talese Quits Doubleday
Gay Talese, saying he was unhappy about being published by his wife's company, Doubleday, has ended his eight-year-old contract with that house and taken his new book, "Unto the Sons," to Alfred A. Knopf.
Mr.
Talese, the best-selling author of "Thy Neighbor's Wife" and "Honor Thy Father," said: "I saw the situation as a conflict of interest. My wife, Nan, would have been sitting in on meetings where they would have been discussing how many books to print, the jacket and so on. It would have been awkward for her and for me." 'Not a Dollar Thing'
Terms of Mr.
Talese's three-book contract with Knopf, which was negotiated by his agent, Lynn Nesbitt, were not disclosed.
Mr.
Talese said it was "a very good contract, but this was not a dollar thing.


First Illinois Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Philanthropy to Children 'The Marine Corps Way'
On a relaxed Sunday afternoon, Brig.
Gen.
Martin F. Rockmore, a retired reservist in the Marine Corps, spotted two small articles in the newspaper: One described the financial predicament of a Marine Medal of Honor winner who could not afford to send his son to college.
The other reported that a charity ball sponsored by animal lovers had raised close to $1 million.
That was 29 years ago, but even now General Rockmore bristles with indignation.


4 Ships to Battle Floes On Polar Explorations
ICEBREAKERS from four countries are to fight their way through ice floes of the Arctic Ocean this summer in hope of reaching the North Pole.
Three, sailing from Tromso in northern Norway, are participating in a six-nation effort whose prime goals are scientific.
The fourth icebreaker, the Soviet Union's nuclear-powered Sovietsky Soyuz, is to carry tourists as well as scientists to the Pole, then complete history's first surface ship crossing of the entire Arctic Ocean.


Washington Talk; Celebration for Warren Measures Shift in Court
Although its court room will be empty until October, the Supreme Court offers visitors something to see and think about this summer.
An absorbing exhibition marks the centennial of Chief Justice Earl Warren's birth, documenting a notable life as well as a momentous period in the Court's history.
But it is also something more: a paradoxical, if completely unintended, footnote to the Court's present.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.70
5.80
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.57
7.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.70
5.68
7.51
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.13
8.12
8.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.44
8.43
8.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.48
9.46
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.15
7.15
7.42
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bankruptcy Tarnishes Ford's Shining Image
The horse farm cited as an example of excellence in a widely seen television image-advertising campaign for the Ford Motor Company has become a business failure.
Calumet Farm, which produced champion horses like Whirlaway and Citation, last week filed for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy laws.
Calumet, based in Lexington, Ky., was the subject of one of two spots in the campaign, which was broadcast from February until recently.


Rowan Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sumitomo Plans Investment in LTV
The LTV Corporation said that a Japanese steel producer, Sumitomo Metal Industries, would invest $200 million in LTV after the Dallas company completes its bankruptcy reorganization.
LTV also said it must settle a dispute with the Federal Government over $3 billion in underfinanced pension plans and reach a contract with steel workers before Sumitomo will invest.
The $6 billion reorganization enters its sixth year on Wednesday.
LTV must pay $880 million to the pension funds upon confirmation of the reorganization plan.


Isidore M. Cohen, 93,A Clothing Executive
Isidore M. Cohen, the retired president of Joseph H. Cohen &amp; Sons, a leading manufacturer of men's clothing, died on Saturday in New York Hospital.
He was 93 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, a family spokesman said.


Ceramics Process Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Puritan Oil Account Moves Back to Grey
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, Cincinnati, has returned the $10 million Puritan oil account to Grey Advertising, New York, almost a year after moving it to Ayer Inc., New York.
P.&amp; G. wanted to consolidate all advertising for its oils and shortenings at Grey, a company spokeswoman said yesterday.
Grey already handles the Crisco shortening and oils account, which has billings of $11 million.
As part of the consolidation, labels for Puritan Oil will bear the Crisco logo beginning later this year.


General Public Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Zero Tolerance for Police Addicts
Police work is stressful; police officers are human.
Some understandably succumb to drug abuse.
But do they then have a right to retain their jobs?
The answer ought to be no, yet the State Legislature recently passed a bill forbidding police departments to fire officers who fail drug tests.
The case for a veto is strong.
The New York City Police Department requires tests when there is reason to suspect an officer of using drugs and when officers are being considered for assignment to narcotics units or other drug-sensitive posts.
Police are also subject to random testing.
Last year, two dozen failed.
The department seeks dismissal in every case.


International Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Judge Says Yonkers Can Devise New Approach to Housing Plan
The judge in the 11-year-old Yonkers housing-discrimination case agreed yesterday to consider a major modification of a plan for construction of 1,000 units of housing for minorities in the city's mostly white neighborhoods.
The judge, Leonard B. Sand, said at a hearing in Federal District Court in Manhattan that he would consider any "reasonable" alternative to move the proposed construction forward, and he gave the city a month to come up with a plan.
In the past, the city's failure to act has resulted in court-ordered solutions.


Chase Manhattan reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Johnson Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Forgive Debt, Finance Nature
Latin America owes the world billions of dollars -- much of which it can't repay.
The world wants Latin America to stop destroying its priceless rain forests, ancient nurseries of life that also serve as a natural sink for greenhouse gases.
These two conditions invite a deal -- debt-for-nature swaps that would channel some of Latin America's debt into conservation.
Swaps involving more than $100 million owed to private banks have already been arranged.
And just a few weeks ago, Brazil gave the debt-for-nature idea a huge boost when it agreed to devote $100 million each year to saving the Amazon rain forest if banks would discount its debt.


New N.T.T. Pager
The NTT International Corporation, an affiliate of the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation of Japan, will sell an electronic pager system whose signal can be transmitted worldwide by satellite.
The service will be tested in North America and Singapore in September.


A World of Your Own: Play on a Global Scale
ONE wouldn't want to curse SimEarth by calling it an educational program.
It's a game, like its predecessor, SimCity.
You might learn something from it, though.
With SimEarth, you build a world of your own, altering its chemical, geological, biological and human factors on the computer's screen by selecting options with mouse or keyboard.
A species, whether humans or dinosaurs, may evolve into beings sufficiently intelligent to make war and pollute the planet.
There is really no limit to the number of worlds that can be created and the number of things that can go wrong, or right.


MBNA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ICN Biomedicals reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


ITT Unit Prices 10-Year Notes
The ITT Financial Corporation, a unit of the ITT Corporation, priced $150 million in 10-year notes yesterday through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The notes -- due to mature on July 15, 2001 -- have a 9 1/4 percent coupon and are priced at 99.771, to yield 9.285 percent, or about 102 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Bid for Businessland Is Cut to $48 Million
JWP Inc. has revised and lowered the terms of its offer to buy Businessland Inc., the once powerful computer retailer based in San Jose, Calif.
JWP, a diverisfied services company based in Purchase, N.Y., said today that it would offer only $1 a share for Businessland's common stock, instead of the $1.30 previously offered.
But it will raise its offer to holders of Businessland's convertible subordinated debentures to 35 cents, from 25 cents, for every $1 face value.


'Manny Hanny': A Name for History Books
The Manufacturers Hanover name, like those of so many other financial giants over the years, is receding into history.
One of the most recognizable of bank names in the country, "Manny Hanny," as it has long been familiarly known, is the product of a twisted series of mergers and acquisitions reaching back over a century.


Repercussions Of Bank Deal
The merger of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation and the Chemical Banking Corporation is likely to have repercussions on Madison Avenue.
In many instances, when mergers bring together business rivals, the merged company consolidates advertising at one agency.
McCann-Erickson New York, a subsidiary of the Interpublic Group of Companies, creates advertising for Manufacturers Hanover.
Annual billings are estimated at about $10 million.
Susan Irwin, a McCann spokeswoman, said the agency had been asked not to comment.


Careers; 'Forensic Accountants' In Demand
THE accountant at a cocktail party in New Jersey looked weary.
"I thought I had retired," he said, "but I keep getting called by towns and counties around here to work on fraud cases."
Two weeks earlier he had testified in court, he added, which takes a lot of preparation.


Israel Refuses to Match Syrian Position on Talks
The Israeli Government announced today that it would not offer any concessions to match those made by Syria on the issue of a regional peace conference when Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d visits here next week.
The Government greeted Syria's positive reply to the American compromise plan for the talks with heavy skepticism and deep concern.


Badger Paper Mills reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bankruptcy Tarnishes Ford's Shining Image
The horse farm cited as an example of excellence in a widely seen television image-advertising campaign for the Ford Motor Company has become a business failure.
Calumet Farm, which produced champion horses like Whirlaway and Citation, last week filed for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy laws.
Calumet, based in Lexington, Ky., was the subject of one of two spots in the campaign, which was broadcast from February until recently.


Xilinx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Avemco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Patterns
Michael Leva Closes
Michael Leva, a young designer known for intelligent, modern and well-cut clothes, has decided to close his business after four years.
In a statement yesterday, Mr.
Leva and his partner, Aileen Newquist, said the company would not be shipping its fall line after failing to find financial backing.
"The environment has a been a difficult one for a growing designer clothing company," Ms.
Newquist said.
But she added that the line had increased its sales each year since its founding in 1987.
Mr.
Leva, 30 years old, was caught in a classic Catch-22 of successful young designers: as retail orders for the collection grew, more capital was needed to finance production and the purchase of fabrics.
"The orders were excellent, and sales in the stores were excellent this spring," Mr.
Leva said in an interview.
Saks Fifth Avenue and Bergdorf Goodman carried the collection in New York.
But the money to manufacture the clothes could not be found.
"This is a question of capital and capital alone," he said.
"We can't afford to ship the fall collection. These days it's very hard to get credit. So much up-front cash is involved."
Mr.
Leva said he had been trying to sell all or part of the company to outside investors for two years.
"We are still going to try and do that," he said.
"I hope to be back very soon. I don't feel beaten. I'm ready to get right back in there." In Bloomingdale's Windows
Byron Lars, a young New York designer with a whimsical sense of fashion, is getting the hero treatment at Bloomingdale's next week.
Next week the store will put Mr.
Lars's fall clothes in its windows and plans a series of advertising photographs shot by Steven Meisel.
They feature one of the top models of the moment, Yasmeen Ghauri.
"I'm dying, man, to see this thing," Mr.
Lars said last week, referring to the ad.
Mr.
Lars's winning styles include a men's oxford cloth shirt reworked into a simple side-draped dress, which will cost about $300. (For his resort collection, he did evening dresses derived from ruffled and pique men's formal shirts.)
At the last minute, the designer, who works out of his apartment, realized he had neglected to have proper price tags printed up.
So he sent all the clothes to the stores with handwritten tags.


Patients of AIDS Dentist Seek Tests
Deborah A. Brower, a 33-year-old nurse's aide from Long Island, saw her dentist three times in the last four months.
Today she has a fourth medical appointment, this time to find out if the dentist infected her with the AIDS virus.
Ms.
Brower is one of at least 200 patients who fear they were exposed to the AIDS virus by Dr.
Philip M. Feldman of Coram, L.I., who died of pneumonia last month.
The New York State Health Department has set up hot lines and clinics to offer counseling and testing to his patients and is investigating reports that Dr.
Feldman did not follow proper infection-control practices, like sterilizing or disinfecting dental instruments between patients.


Budget Deficit Estimate Is Lowered
The Bush Administration said today that the Federal budget deficit in the current fiscal year would be somewhat lower than was forecast in January, but it predicted a $348.3 billion deficit next year, far and away the largest ever.
Much of the change has little economic consequence because it represents the method of accounting for the costs of the war against Iraq and a shift of spending for the savings and loan bailout to next year from this year.


Super Bowl Whets Bills' Appetite
For the Buffalo Bills, there remains the task of sifting through the rubble of Super Bowl XXV and clutching what is tried and true and discarding what was charred for good.
There is the task of handling their newfound notoriety and now matching the expectations of others, which also happen to be expectations of their own.
There is another Super Bowl to be played -- in Minneapolis on Jan. 26 -- and though the Bills know it is a long road back, they believe they know the way.


Home Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


By Design; Pearls for Any Occasion
If you were in the Rhine Valley this week, it would be hard to miss Carolee Friedlander on her cycling vacation.
She is wearing a colorful helmet, sizzling yellow gloves, neon pink cycling shirt -- and two sizable pink pearl bracelets, one on each wrist.
"A necklace is too hot on the bike," she said, "but bracelets are perfect." She also carries a spare pair of earrings for "when I take the helmet off; they're better than a spare tire." Ms.
Friedlander also packs a "suitcaseful" of extra pearls to wear on evening stopovers (they are stashed in a van that follows the cyclists).
Pearls are not part of most cyclists' gear, but they make sense for Ms.
Friedlander, the owner of Carolee Designs Inc., a manufacturer of fashionable fake pearls.
Her business is booming, even in these recessionary times.
Creamy white earrings, necklaces and bracelets continue to be the No. 1 choice of women shopping in the Carolee boutique at Bloomingdale's, but they are buying cosmetically colored ones almost as avidly.
Dipped in shades of pink, peach, beige, bronze, platinum, gold or gray, these have the same flattering effect on complexions as do eye shadows, blushers or face powders.
Considering the reasonable prices -- $48 to $80 is average for a strand of good-sized fake pearls -- it is not surprising that shoppers are following the costume-jewelry craze of piling these accessories on two, three and four at a time.


Mutual Benefit Backs State Control
Directors of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company voted yesterday to place the giant insurer under the custodianship of the State of New Jersey.
The move, which had been expected after details of the insurer's troubles emerged last week, is aimed at stanching an outflow of cash that has bled the nation's 18th-largest life insurer of more than $1 billion in the last six weeks.


Marine Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


23 Golf Clubs Bring $1 Million at Sotheby's
A collection of golf clubs -- 23 woods and irons said to have been owned by winners of the British Open golf tournament -- brought $1,031,101 yesterday in a sale by Sotheby's in Chester, England.
The price was the highest paid at auction for sporting memorabilia, more than doubling the $451,000 paid on March 23 at Sotheby's in New York for a Honus Wagner baseball card from about 1910.
The golfing memorabilia sale was held as aficionados of the sport gathered for the British Open, which begins this weekend in Southport, 50 miles north of Chester.


Diebold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Letting Up for the Pirates As They Rout the Astros, 8-0
Randy Tomlin had his first career shutout, and Andy Van Slyke and Bobby Bonilla combined to drive in seven runs as the Pittsburgh Pirates won their sixth game in a row, beating the Houston Astros, 8-0, tonight.
Given a 6-0 lead after two innings, Tomlin (4-3) pitched a five-hitter for his first victory since May 7 and the Pirates' 13th in their last 17 games.
Tomlin struck out six and walked four in handing Houston its fourth consecutive loss.


Heritage Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Outlook Grim and Dirty For New York Ecology
From how much garbage gathers at the curbs to how much pollution ends up in the air, the look and feel of New York City is likely to deteriorate as the city scales back an array of services that affect the environment.
In some cases, cutbacks in the budgets of the Sanitation, Environmental Protection, Transportation and Parks and Recreation departments could increase health risks.
In most situations, though, the budget-paring will simply make life here more unpleasant.
Some of the problems will become evident in a few days or months; others may take years to manifest themselves.


Merging Police to Cut Costs: The Rub Is, Who's Boss?
This little seaside community and its neighbor across Wreck Pond, Spring Lake Heights, have started talks about merging their tiny police departments.
And Tom Phillips, an 83-year-old resident of Baltimore Boulevard here, has a very basic question:
"Who will be in charge of setting the budget and deploying the cops?"


Heekin Can Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 16


Parks, Top Duke Recruit, Is Working His Way Up
Cherokee Parks, who stands out among the basketball players at the Olympic Festival because of a catchy name and a 6-foot-11-inch frame, has proved to be a lunch-pail kind of player who jokingly says of himself: "I'd be flashy if I only knew how."
Parks, who was graduated this year from Marina High School in Huntington Beach, Calif., is headed for Duke University this fall.
He figures to give the defending National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, a squad top-heavy with returning lettermen, immediate help.
At least that is what Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski expects.
"I never told any kid he'll start, but I'll say this: Cherokee will play an integral part with this team," said Krzyzewski, after watching Parks's West team lose to the east, 95-81, at Pauley Pavilion on Sunday.
Each of the four regional teams is made up of recently graduated blue-chip high-school players.
"What I like about him most is he loves to play the game as a team member," added Krzyzewski.
"Ultimately he's involved with what the team is doing, no matter if he's scoring or not." No Me-First Player
So what kind of player is Parks?
The subtext of what Krzyzewski says has more to do with what he isn't.
He is not a me-first player who must have the ball to be happy.
Even though, as a high school senior, Parks averged 28.3 points while shooting 67 percent from the floor, for now at least he is not a "go-to guy," a player who can create a good shot at will.
Reflecting on the scoring figures he managed in high school.
Parks said "There are not a lot of big guys in Orange County, so I was able to do what I wanted to."
He runs with his body tilting forward as if he is perpetually going down hill.
And when he moves for the basket, it is not with the balletic grace that will get him cameos in highlights footage.
Toughness Counts
That's not Parks at all.
That's Dr.
J., or Michael Jordan.
Parks is more like, say, Charles Oakley or Kurt Rambis, a physical player who doesn't mind the rumble under the backboards.
He is a strong rebounder, solid on defense, a worker who plays with his shirt tail hanging out and his emotions close to the surface.
He runs and bumps bodies and keeps coming back.
And if the words "cat-quick" don't necessarily apply to him, Parks compensates with his enthusiasm.
And that, said Krzyzewski, is just what his Blue Devils may need this season.
"You look at the team," he said, "defending champs, and ask, will it be as excited as last year, or will it be: 'We already did this.' Already won a national title? A youngster like Cherokee can create the excitement."
And maybe he will.
But that still leaves one question: what about that attention-getting name?
"Cherokee?" said Parks.
"I'm a little bit of Cherokee Indian. On my father's side. I used to get kidded about it in grade school. But after a while it kind of became distinctive. I've yet to find someone else named Cherokee. And, hey, 6-11 on top of that."
--------------------
Hurley Leads East to Victory
LOS ANGELES, July 15 (AP) -- Danny Hurley of Jersey City, who will be a freshman at Seton Hall in the fall, scored 17 points as the East men's basketball team won its second straight game today to give itself a chance to reach the gold-medal game.
Dickey Simkins had 16 as the East beat the South, 109-97, the South's third loss in as many games.
Simkins plays for Providence.
Benjamin Davis, headed for Kansas, led the South with 20 points.
Basketball and swimming were the headline events as the nine-day festival entered its third day.
In a women's game, Katrina Colleton of Maryland made two free throws with 21 seconds left to give the East a 71-70 victory over the South.
Both teams are 2-1.
The North (2-1) reached the title game by beating the West (0-3), 67-59, in a night game.
Yconda Hill of Northern Illinois scored 18 points for the North.
In swimming, Sheilah McCarthey of Winchester, Mass., set a Festival record in the 200-meter backstroke, finishing in 2 minutes 16.61 seconds.
That broke the record of 2:17..68 set in 1982 by Theresa Andrews.
Brian Jacobson of Downey, Calif., set a record in the 100 freestyle (50.89 seconds), erasing the mark of 51.30 set by Bill Barrett in 1983.


U.S. Will Abandon Volcano-Ravaged Air Base, Manila Is Told
The United States informed the Philippine Government today that it expected to abandon Clark Air Base in the central Philippines, once a major military air hub, because of the damage caused by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo and the huge costs needed to rebuild the base, American and Philippine officials say.
At the same time, the officials said, American negotiators have told their Philippine counterparts that the United States wishes to retain the use of the giant Subic Bay Naval Station, which was also seriously damaged by the eruption of the volcano but which is considered too valuable to abandon.


Cullen/Frost Bankers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Keystone Consolidated reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; First Dawn Of a New Day
THERE has been a controversy in New York recently over the negotiating tactics of Patrick Ewing, the New York Knicks center who turned down a $33 million contract extention from his team in an effort to test the market.
Ewing argues that he is simply trying to insure his freedom of choice; his critics accuse him of being greedy and disloyal.
The critics should have been here yesterday afternoon to hear the Giants announce that Mark Bavaro, their All-Pro tight end, had been cut after seven seasons.
A fourth-round draft pick in 1985, Bavaro is one of the players associated with the Giants' renaissance that year after nearly two decades of mediocrity.


Big U.S. Contract To A.T.&amp;T.
In one of the largest computer contracts ever awarded by the Government, the Treasury Department yesterday assigned business to A.T.&amp; T. worth at least $1.4 billion over seven years.
As part of a modernization program at the Internal Revenue Service, the Treasury has agreed to buy 3,200 high-performance computers and 50,000 work stations from the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
A.T.&amp; T. is also supplying products to link the computers together.


Chemical Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a son of immigrants who has long viewed American society more as a mosaic than a melting pot, today endorsed what he called the "worthy aims" of multicultural education.
But he distanced himself from a state report that set off a furor when it called for a social-studies curriculum giving greater recognition to nonwhite cultures.
The goal of multicultural education, the Governor warned in a five-page statement release today, should not be "pushed to such extremes that the casualty is common sense,"


Kentucky Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Healthcare Services Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


St. Paul Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chaparral Steel reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Francis Moench, 94, Ex-College President
Dr.
Francis J. Moench, president of the State University of New York College at Geneseo from 1954 to 1963, died on July 7 at the Elizabeth Church Manor nursing home in Binghamton, N.Y.
He was 94 years old and had lived in Sag Harbor, L.I., for several years before moving to Binghamton two years ago.
Dr.
Moench, a Sag Harbor native, was a graduate of Springfield College and held master's and doctoral degrees from New York University.
He began his college teaching career at Cortland Normal School in 1923, and became chairman of the Department of Health and Physical Education in 1939, when the institution was called Cortland State Teachers College.
In 1952 he was named dean of what by then had become State University Teachers College in Cortland.


The Last Arms Accord?; Both Sides Are Weary, and There Seems A Scant Constituency for Further Treaties
Even as the United States and Soviet Union near completion of a landmark arms treaty, the momentum for future and more radical arms control agreements seems to have dissipated.
It is not that the strategic arms treaty is unimportant.
On the contrary, it is a milestone in arms control.
It will be the first accord to reduce, rather than limit, the Soviet and American long-range nuclear arsenals.
It will establish verification arrangements that could serve as a framework for future accords, big or small.
Agreement After So Long
But the strategic arms accord will also leave each side with a formidable nuclear arsenal.
Because Moscow and Washington have found it so difficult to wrap up this accord, it is unclear whether they can muster the necessary enthusiasm for pressing ahead with more far-reaching agreements.


Parks, Top Duke Recruit, Is Working His Way Up
Cherokee Parks, who stands out among the basketball players at the Olympic Festival because of a catchy name and a 6-foot-11-inch frame, has proved to be a lunch-pail kind of player who jokingly says of himself: "I'd be flashy if I only knew how."
Parks, who was graduated this year from Marina High School in Huntington Beach, Calif., is headed for Duke University this fall.
He figures to give the defending National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, a squad top-heavy with returning lettermen, immediate help.


Chess
It is quite impressive what counts as a failure for a top female player these days.
Judit Polgar, the youngest of the three amazing sisters from Budapest, made an even score -- five victories, five losses and three draws -- in the elite Schweizerische Kreditanstalt Tournament in Munich, Germany, from May 2 to 20, but it was less than she was aiming for.
Before the advent of Judit Polgar, who will be 15 years old next Tuesday, such a strong showing would have been considered virtually impossible, but she wanted one more draw in the last round to achieve the credentials for grandmaster rank and instead lost to the Soviet grandmaster Aleksandr Belyavsky.


F.T.C. Aiming to Break College Football Huddle
The Federal Trade Commission wants the College Football Association.
Badly.
And if it can't nail the C.F.A., it wouldn't mind collaring Capital Cities/ABC Inc. or any of the 65 card-carrying C.F.A. universities.
The agency's zeal was amply displayed last week during a hearing before an administrative law judge in Washington.


Topics of The Times; Racial Gerrymandering?
Susan Alter, a white New York City Council member from Brooklyn, claims to be the victim of a racial gerrymander at the hands of the City Districting Commission, which drew the lines last month for 51 new Council districts.
She has powerful evidence in the words of Esmeralda Simmons, the commission's vice chairman.
The city may owe this incumbent a fairer shot at re-election in a redrawn district.
Ms.
Alter, a council member since 1977, has won re-election in a district increasingly populated by minorities, but the commission has thrown her into a white-majority district where another incumbent, Noach Dear, has far stronger white support.
On the local WNET-TV program "Thirteen Live," Ms.
Alter charged Ms.
Simmons and other commissioners with denying her the chance to continue serving minority neighborhoods -- simply because she's white.
Officials rarely admit to such activity, but Ms.
Simmons did -- and blamed the Justice Department.
She said the department, which is reviewing the new Council lines under the Voting Rights Act, "frowns" on plans that produce white winners in black districts.
That's dangerously close to saying that black voters aren't adequately represented unless they elect council members of their own race, a stereotype that finds no support in the Constitution or the Federal voting law.
The commission could end this embarrassment by straightening out some of the curliest lines in the annals of gerrymandering around Ms.
Alter's Brooklyn base.
If it won't, the Justice Department or the courts should make clear, as the law plainly states, that citizens are enfranchised when they elect representatives of their choice, not when they elect members of their own race.


Industrial Funding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Bank Merger; For New York, A Loss of Jobs And Revenues
The merger of Chemical Bank with Manufacturers Hanover may make a lot of banking sense, because the two weak banks, by combining, have a chance to emerge as a stronger, more vibrant lending institution.
But for New York City and other communities, this merger and the larger consolidation in the banking industry will bring a lot of pain as institutions slim down, trying to determine the number of branches and employees that will make them more profitable and bring them into the new banking era.


French Doctor Is Optimistic on Disaster Relief
For the last two decades, first as a doctor and more recently as a senior French Government official, Bernard Kouchner has traveled with emergency teams to the scene of scores of natural and man-made disasters.
Now, for the first time, he says he is feeling optimistic.
It is not that disasters are being prevented.
"There are more and more because we hear more about them," he said.
"The volcano in the Philippines, an earthquake in Georgia, the aftermath of Kurdistan and Bangladesh, famine in the Horn of Africa. Just that!"


PNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


P.&amp; G. Ecology Drive: Beyond Packaging
FOR the first time, a "green" advertising campaign for household products made by the Procter &amp; Gamble Company focuses not only on packaging, but also on the products in the packages.
Print advertisements, now appearing in national magazines, tout the purported environmental friendliness of the ingredients of three venerable P.&amp; G. brands of household cleaner: Spic and Span, Comet and Mr.
Clean.
As a companion to the campaign, advertising in free-standing inserts in Sunday newspapers echoes similar themes and offers cents-off coupons for the products.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT EVANS's life sounds like a movie.
A former clothing manufacturer discovered beside the pool at the Beverly Hills Hotel by Norma Shearer in 1956, he was chosen to play her husband, Irving Thalberg, in "Man of a Thousand Faces."
He rose to vice president in charge of production at Paramount Pictures from 1967 to 1975, married ALI MacGRAW along the way and became an independent producer.
His credits include "The Godfather," "Love Story" and "Chinatown."


On My Mind: The Fatal Mindset
So, to sum up, we have learned so far that American policy appeased and bolstered the Iraqi dictatorship before the war and that nowhere in the intelligence, diplomatic, political and scientific establishments of the United States Government has there been a blessed soul who had the faintest idea of Saddam Hussein's ability to manufacture and squirrel away the material and machinery of nuclear weapons.
That spectacular combination of failures was connected.
It was not the result of technical breakdown or because our spies were particularly stupid, but of something more dangerous -- mindset.
The Administration was convinced it could do business with Saddam Hussein.


CHRONICLE
About 800 people from the entertainment industry were invited to crowd the lawn at Gracie Mansion last night for the Crystal Apple Awards.
Given by the Mayor's Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting, the reception honored SPIKE LEE, who received the film award, and LORNE MICHAELS, who accepted the television award for "Saturday Night Live," which he created and still produces.
"The show is primarily a showcase for performers and writers, and they're treated with respect in New York," Mr.
Michaels said before the party.
"We're going into our 17th season, so it, perhaps, reflects the city's sense of crisis that they've finally found us."


Goodmark Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


F.D.A. Panel Approves Test Distribution Of Alzheimer's Drug
An advisory committee to the Food and Drug Adminstration gave hesitant approval today to the sale of an experimental drug for Alzheimer's disease, under an unusual testing program, before the drug is approved for marketing.
The drug, tacrine, could be sold as long as the drug's manufacturer simultaneously conducted new research to see if the drug is effective.


Clark Base Once Vital to Military
What would eventually become known as Clark Air Base had its beginnings in 1903, when the United States Army established a cavalry post on the Philippine island of Luzon.
The post was named Fort Stotsenburg, for Col.
John Stotsenburg, a slain hero of the Spanish-American war.


Ford-Volkswagen Portugal Venture
The Ford Motor Company and Volkswagen A.G. of Germany signed contracts with the Portuguese Government for a $2.8 billion project to make a new multipurpose van in Portugal starting in 1994.
The deal, which represents the largest single foreign investment in Portugal, calls for the auto makers to each own half of the project.
They said the factory would be the most modern in Europe and would produce 180,000 vehicles a year, more than 90 percent for export.
The project should create 5,000 jobs directly and 7,000 indirectly.
Work on a 240,000-square-yard factory will start immediately.


Times Co. Taking Write-Off To Cover Severance Costs
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it would take a pretax charge of $20 million against second-quarter earnings to cover severance costs for 160 employees who are voluntarily retiring early.
The company projected that the write-off would come to about $11.4 million, or 15 cents a share, after taxes, when earnings are reported later this week.


Director Resigns At Artists Space
Artists Space, a nonprofit gallery in TriBeCa, has announced the resignation of its executive director, Susan Wyatt, effective July 31.
The announcement was made by Dan Walworth, the gallery's president, who credited Ms.
Wyatt with having helped the gallery achieve "a great deal of its consistent growth and health" during her six years as executive director and over the course of a 17-year association with the gallery.
Ms. Wyatt said in a statement that "it is time to turn my energies to new projects."


The U.N. Today
General Assembly COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW, WORKING GROUP ON NEW INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORDER -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON EXERCISE OF INALIENABLE RIGHTS OF PALESTINIAN PEOPLE -- 3 P.M.


Stress Follows Troops Home From Gulf
Nearly five months after the end of the Persian Gulf war, evidence of psychiatric problems and family discord among returning troops and their families is raising concern among mental health workers, marital counselors and Federal officials.
In the three-month period when most of the troops returned home, divorce rates have surged from 37 percent to as high as 56 percent over a year ago in communities near three large Army bases that sent troops to the gulf.


The Bank Merger; From Wonder Boys to Survivors
As they emerged, smiles brimming, from the unveiling of the new Chemical Banking Corporation, the tall, youthful-looking chairman of the old Chemical, Walter V. Shipley, turned to the portly, silver-haired chairman of the new Chemical, John F. McGillicuddy, to offer a bankerly version of the athlete's high-five.
"Nice job, John," Mr. Shipley said.


Microcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Keeneland Sales Proceed Cautiously
M.
C.
Hammer and his two brothers weren't there, but Sheikh Maktoum bin Rashid al Maktoum and his three brothers were there monitoring developments on closed-circuit television as the first gavel fell today on the world's most important sale of thoroughbred horses.
It was the opening day of the July sale of yearlings at Keeneland race course, a kind of economic summit of the breeding and racing business and the surest barometer of the state of the horse business, which has been depressed for a half-dozen years.


Boy, 9, Charges After Shooting At Bronx Office
A 9-year-old boy shoved a fully loaded ammunition clip into a heavy 9-millimeter gun he found in his Bronx apartment yesterday, pointed it out the window and fired at a nearby office building, narrowly missing a clerical worker, the police said.
The boy, who later told the police he had learned how to load the gun by watching television, fired only one shot at the building at 190 Willow Avenue, in the Mott Haven section.
When the police recovered the gun, they found 20 more bullets in the clip and one in the gun's firing chamber.


Parks, Top Duke Recruit, Is Working His Way Up
Cherokee Parks, who stands out among the basketball players at the Olympic Festival because of a catchy name and a 6-foot-11-inch frame, has proved to be a lunch-pail kind of player who jokingly says of himself: "I'd be flashy if I only knew how."
Parks, who was graduated this year from Marina High School in Huntington Beach, Calif., is headed for Duke University this fall.
He figures to give the defending National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, a squad top-heavy with returning lettermen, immediate help.
At least that is what Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski expects.
"I never told any kid he'll start, but I'll say this: Cherokee will play an integral part with this team," said Krzyzewski, after watching Parks's West team lose to the east, 95-81, at Pauley Pavilion on Sunday.
Each of the four regional teams is made up of recently graduated blue-chip high-school players.
"What I like about him most is he loves to play the game as a team member," added Krzyzewski.
"Ultimately he's involved with what the team is doing, no matter if he's scoring or not." No Me-First Player
So what kind of player is Parks?
The subtext of what Krzyzewski says has more to do with what he isn't.
He is not a me-first player who must have the ball to be happy.
Even though, as a high school senior, Parks averged 28.3 points while shooting 67 percent from the floor, for now at least he is not a "go-to guy," a player who can create a good shot at will.
Reflecting on the scoring figures he managed in high school.
Parks said "There are not a lot of big guys in Orange County, so I was able to do what I wanted to."
He runs with his body tilting forward as if he is perpetually going down hill.
And when he moves for the basket, it is not with the balletic grace that will get him cameos in highlights footage.
Toughness Counts
That's not Parks at all.
That's Dr.
J., or Michael Jordan.
Parks is more like, say, Charles Oakley or Kurt Rambis, a physical player who doesn't mind the rumble under the backboards.
He is a strong rebounder, solid on defense, a worker who plays with his shirt tail hanging out and his emotions close to the surface.
He runs and bumps bodies and keeps coming back.
And if the words "cat-quick" don't necessarily apply to him, Parks compensates with his enthusiasm.
And that, said Krzyzewski, is just what his Blue Devils may need this season.
"You look at the team," he said, "defending champs, and ask, will it be as excited as last year, or will it be: 'We already did this.' Already won a national title? A youngster like Cherokee can create the excitement."
And maybe he will.
But that still leaves one question: what about that attention-getting name?
"Cherokee?" said Parks.
"I'm a little bit of Cherokee Indian. On my father's side. I used to get kidded about it in grade school. But after a while it kind of became distinctive. I've yet to find someone else named Cherokee. And, hey, 6-11 on top of that."
--------------------
Hurley Leads East to Victory
LOS ANGELES, July 15 (AP) -- Danny Hurley of Jersey City, who will be a freshman at Seton Hall in the fall, scored 17 points as the East men's basketball team won its second straight game today to give itself a chance to reach the gold-medal game.
Dickey Simkins had 16 as the East beat the South, 109-97, the South's third loss in as many games.
Simkins plays for Providence.
Benjamin Davis, headed for Kansas, led the South with 20 points.
Basketball and swimming were the headline events as the nine-day festival entered its third day.
In a women's game, Katrina Colleton of Maryland made two free throws with 21 seconds left to give the East a 71-70 victory over the South.
Both teams are 2-1.
The North (2-1) reached the title game by beating the West (0-3), 67-59, in a night game.
Yconda Hill of Northern Illinois scored 18 points for the North.
In swimming, Sheilah McCarthey of Winchester, Mass., set a Festival record in the 200-meter backstroke, finishing in 2 minutes 16.61 seconds.
That broke the record of 2:17..68 set in 1982 by Theresa Andrews.
Brian Jacobson of Downey, Calif., set a record in the 100 freestyle (50.89 seconds), erasing the mark of 51.30 set by Bill Barrett in 1983.


Rubbermaid Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Hospital Staffing Services reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Torchmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Unpriced Christmas Stamps Herald a Rise
In the clearest hint yet that the cost of a first-class letter will rise again this year, the United States Postal Service has told its printer to produce this year's Christmas stamps with no price on them.
Thus, if the rates go up, the stamps can be sold at the new rates when they are issued in October.


Summit in London: Reporter's Notebook; Now, a Man Who Came To Borrow
Perhaps only Kaufman and Hart could do it justice.
Like Sheridan Whiteside in "The Man Who Came to Dinner," Mikhail S. Gorbachev is plopping himself into the middle of a group that does not quite know what to do with its demanding, larger-than-life guest.


NCR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Johnson Blast Falls Short And Mets Slip in Standing
Howard Johnson began his vigil with his first step out of the batter's box in the eighth inning.
He stared at the shot he just crushed to straightaway center field and marched up the line at a deliberate trot.
In the dugout, the other Mets had clamored for the steps and the best sightlines to watch the loaded moment and giant flyball unfold.


Ametech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Summit in London; Leaders of Wealthy Nations Open Conference in London
The leaders of the some of the world's wealthiest democracies began their 17th annual summit conference today with discussions of problems in Yugoslavia, the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, South Africa and most conspicuously the Soviet Union.
Prime Minister John Major of Britain, the host country for the three-day meeting, opened it with a ringing appeal for common efforts to "build a world partnership and strengthen international order." His key proposal called for "a stronger United Nations that is more of a peacemaker than a peacekeeper," which could respond more effectively to crises like that in Kurdistan this spring.


Brokerage's Earnings Up Sharply
The Paine Webber Group Inc. reported sharply higher net earnings yesterday for the second quarter of $33.8 million, more than double the $14.6 million it earned in the second quarter of 1990.
Revenues were $520.4 million for the quarter, up 11.1 percent over the $468.2 million in revenues in the corresponding period last year.


Raytheon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Apache Corp., Denver, an energy company, said William J. Johnson had been appointed president and chief operating officer; Wayne W. Murdy senior vice president-finance and chief financial officer, and G. Steven Farris, senior vice president-exploration and production. *
Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Co., New York, the financial services firm, appointed John J. Borland senior manager in charge of the Chicago office.


The Bank Merger: Market Place; For 2 Banks' Ailments, a Single Cure
TWO of New York's largest banks, each damaged by lending excesses of the last two decades, hope that together they can forge a strong financial institution again.
John F. McGillicuddy, chairman of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, spoke yesterday of "restoring the credibility" of the two banks.
He said that would be accomplished by slashing costs and raising capital when the new Chemical Banking Corporation is created next year.


Lower-Fat Burger From Hardee's
Hardee's introduced a lower-fat hamburger along with an advertising campaign critical of McDonald's lower-fat burger.
The ads introducing Hardee's "Real Lean Deluxe" contend that McDonald's hamburger uses a seaweed filler called carageenan to help hold the burger together.
A McDonald's Corporation spokeswoman said the McLean Deluxe contained 1 percent carageenan to maintain moisture but added that the seaweed derivative, a gum that acts as a binder, was used in many products, including toothpaste.
The McDonald's burger has 320 calories and 10.2 grams of fat; the Hardee's product has 345 calories and 13.6 grams of fat.


Fishing and Pollution Imperil Coastal Fish, Several Studies Find
FISH are disappearing at an alarming rate in United States coastal waters, and nearly one-third of all species have declined in population in the last 15 years, researchers say.
In separate reports, a Massachusetts agency and two national environmental groups have reached the same conclusion about the fish population off the coast: unless the National Marine Fisheries Service imposes stricter conservation measures and fishing regulations, many fish species may decline or be wiped out in the next decade.


Already Struggling, Big Cities Are Hit Hard
The Commerce Department's decision not to adjust the 1990 census upward is a special blow to New York City, Newark and other fiscally struggling cities in the region where local officials said their large populations of minorities, immigrants and homeless people were severely undercounted.
New York City, for example, would have gained nearly 230,000 people, increased its representation in the State Legislature and gained millions more dollars in Federal aid if the Census Bureau had adjusted its figure of about 7.3 million people.
The city had estimated its population at 7.8 million to 8 million.


Media General Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. WOULD CURTAIL DOCTORS WITH AIDS
Health-care workers who perform certain surgical procedures should voluntarily have tests for the viruses that cause AIDS and hepatitis B, and those infected should stop the procedures unless they get permission from a panel of experts and inform their patients, Federal guidelines recommended yesterday.
The new guidelines emphasize strict adherence to standard infection-control measures and they specifically exclude the mandatory testing of health-care workers that many health and civil rights groups feared might be recommended.


Summit in London; Gorbachev Note to Group of 7 Said to Fall Short on Reform
In a letter he sent to the Group of Seven leaders before he meets them on Wednesday, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union makes vague reform proposals that fall short of the detailed, far-reaching plan that Western leaders are seeking as a condition for granting large-scale financial aid.
Despite recommendations from Mr.
Gorbachev's reform advisers that he outspokenly embrace a market economy, his letter talks in ambiguous and ambivalent terms about moving toward a Western-style economy.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 16


Checkpoint Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Business Digest
The Bank Merger
The largest bank merger in American history was announced by two of New York's biggest banks.
The combination of Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover would create the nation's second-largest banking company, after Citicorp.
But 6,200 people would lose their jobs, up to 70 branches in the New York area would be closed and Chemical's Park Avenue headquarters with its lobby gardens would be abandoned.  [ Page A1. ]


Kodak Settles With Polaroid
The Eastman Kodak Company paid the Polaroid Corporation $925 million yesterday to end a 15-year battle over the patent rights to instant cameras and films, the companies said.
A Federal district court had found in 1985 that Kodak, which entered the instant photography market in 1976, had infringed patents held by Polaroid, a pioneer in the field.


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Deprenyl Research Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


National Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Big 3 Seek Cap On Health Care
The Big Three auto makers and the United Automobile Workers union say they are moving toward an agreement to cap health-care benefits for retirees as a way to hold down costs.
The negotiators for the union and companies are hoping to reach an agreement by the end of the year with a plan in place within a year after that, The Detroit Free Press reported on Saturday.


Westinghouse Electric Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Federal Express Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Engraph Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nuclear Arms Plants Rip Off the Taxpayer
To the Editor:
Cheers for Leslie H. Gelb's "Nuclear Ripoff?" (column, June 26), but nuclear-weapons laboratories are not wasting the most money in the Department of Energy complex.
The production facilities are.
Take the Rocky Flats plant in Colorado.
The department wants to restart the facility though it concedes operations will not fully comply with at least 69 environmental, health and safety laws.
Nor have department officials demonstrated an urgent need for renewed production at the plant, with most of the warheads to be built there having been canceled by the President or Congress.


Vermont Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BRIEFS
Debt  *
American Stores Co., Salt Lake City, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an offering of $175 million in convertible subordinated notes due 2001 and for a shelf offering of up to $500 million in debt securities, including $200 million in debentures due 2003. *
Banponce Corp., a Puerto Rican bank holding company, has filed for a shelf offering of up to $150 million in debt securities. *
Boston Edison Co. has filed for a shelf offering of up to $250 million in debt securities.Ratings  *
Sea Container Ltd.'s preferred stock rating has been increased to BB, from B+, by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
The company is based in Hamilton, Bermuda.


Trustmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AC&amp;R Confirms Move To Sever Saatchi Ties
A spokesman for AC&amp;R Advertising, New York, confirmed yesterday that the agency was seeking to end its relationship with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., its British parent.
The spokesman confirmed that Alvin Chereskin, the agency's chief executive, was negotiating with Saatchi to buy the agency, as reported in this week's issue of Adweek, the trade weekly.
The publication also reported that other AC&amp;R executives, including two senior vice presidents, Doug Fidoten and Stephen Bennett, were joining the bid to buy the agency, which has $264 million in billings.


For New York Token Clerks, Nights of Fear and Tedium
At 3 A.M., at the Woodlawn subway station on the No. 4 line in the Bronx, tedium has set in.
Yet for Barbara E. Rawls, a token clerk for 21 years, fear is always there too.
Customers are few and far between, but she scrutinizes each one.
"You can't afford to take down your guard, not even for a minute, because you never know who is waiting behind a corner or what they might do," the 58-year-old clerk said.


Nets Cut Malaria Deaths, Study Says
A NEW study in west Africa suggests that malaria deaths could be sharply reduced through the use of bed nets treated with insecticide.
The study, conducted in 73 villages in Gambia, showed that malaria deaths in young children were 70 percent lower in villages using mosquito netting dipped in the insecticide permethrin than in villages without the treated nets.
In Gambia and other parts of tropical Africa, malaria is a leading cause of death in children under age 5.


Amsouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Invading Mosquito
Scientists seeking to check the advance of the Asian tiger mosquito from the Southern United States to the Northeast say that a native mosquito species, known as the Eastern treehole mosquito, is unlikely to be a help and might even lose ground to the foreign pest.
Dr.
Todd P. Livdahl and Michelle S. Willey, biologists at Clark University in Worcester, Mass., recently studied whether the common American species, Aedes triseriatus, could help contain invading Asian tiger mosquitoes by keeping them out of two popular breeding sites: water-filled tires and treeholes.


ALC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Crestar Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fingerhut Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Topics of The Times; No Excuse for Times Square Trash
Yesterday morning Times Square was a mess.
Revolting masses of garbage and trash littered its streets, and overflowing refuse cans spilled their contents into the gutters.
Here and there a hotel or office building had battled the filth, but their efforts were offset by fast-food restaurants where the weekend's junk actually restricted pedestrian traffic.
All that was the predictable result of the city's new budget.
The fiscal crisis has cut street-sweeping in the area by 55 percent.
But cutbacks are only part of the problem.
Scofflaw merchants are also responsible.
The city's merchants are required by law to clean not only their sidewalks but an 18-inch-wide strip of street along the gutter.
But the fine for a violation is a paltry $50, and enforcement only occasional.
Many owners consider the fines an acceptable cost of doing business.


Glatfelter (P.H.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Green Tree Acceptance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


UAL Plans Talks On London Flights
The chairman of the UAL Corporation will discuss United Airlines' application for daily nonstop service between Chicago and Stansted Airport in London with the British Government, The chairman, Stephen M. Wolf, said United wants to begin service on Oct. 1.
If approved, it would be the first scheduled trans-Atlantic service to Stansted, London's third-largest airport, after Heathrow and Gatwick.
United would soon decide whether to buy routes and aircraft owned by the Pan Am Corporation, Mr.
Wolf said.
UAL said last week that it had offered to buy certain routes from Pan American World Airways and was interested in 21 of Pan Am's Airbus jets.


Ford Executive Named A Dean at Boston U.
Louis E. Lataif, once a fast-rising young star at the Ford Motor Company, will be leaving Ford in September to become the dean of Boston University's School of Management, where he received his undergraduate degree in 1961.
Mr.
Lataif, who is 52 years old, succeeds George McGurn, who stepped down earlier this year after five years in the post.


Brand Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Texas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


O'Sullivan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Drivers Are Fined
Championship Auto Racing Teams, the Indy-car sanctioning body, has fined drivers DANNY SULLIVAN and WILLY T. RIBBS and placed both on probation for the rest of the year after an on-track incident and an off-track shouting match Sunday at the Marlboro Grand Prix.
CART doesn't announce the size of its fines, but they are reportedly $5,000 for Sullivan and $1,500 for Ribbs.
The difficulties began when Sullivan, apparently frustrated at not being able to get past Ribbs's lapped car late in the race at the New Jersey Meadowlands, clipped the front of the slower Lola as he drove past on the cool-down lap.
The front wing was damaged on Ribbs's car.
Sullivan finished sixth in the race, two laps behind winner BOBBY RAHAL .
Ribbs wound up 10th. (AP)


Ameritrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Bank Merger; BIG BANK MERGER TO JOIN CHEMICAL, MANUFACTURERS
Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover, two of New York's biggest banks, announced plans yesterday for the largest bank merger in American history.
Both banks have been severely weakened in recent years by bad loans, mostly in real estate at Chemical and to developing nations at Manufacturers.
They hope that through a friendly merger they can cut out duplicate costs and speed their recovery from loan losses.


BRIEFS
*
American Express Co., New York, opened an office in Albania. *
Beazer P.L.C., London, a construction congolmerate, said it would make a public offering in its CHB Group by September.
The proceeds will be used to reduce debt and enhance shareholder value.


Popular Spreadsheet Improved
THE Lotus Development Corporation, meeting a challenge from rival products, has added a colorful new face to the basic version of its popular 1-2-3 spreadsheet program.
Unlike the many other versions of Lotus 1-2-3 produced in recent months, Release 2.3 for DOS will work on any I.B.M.
XT-compatible computer with at least 512 kilobytes of working memory and 5 megabytes of free space on a hard disk.
Lotus has long been the leading maker of computer spreadsheets, electronic versions of the ledger sheets used by accountants back when "user interface" meant paper and pencil.
More than five million copies of 1-2-3 have been sold, and Lotus officials estimate that millions more have been illegally copied.
The net effect is that millions of people know the Lotus system of commands and do not particularly care to switch to something different.


KLLM Transport Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about a children's swimming instruction program at New York City pools misstated the starting date for the sessions.
It was last Wednesday; it is not Aug. 2.


Improvement Seen in July Vehicle Sales
Confirming that the American automotive market is growing ever more robust, sales of domestically built vehicles fell a modest 7.7 percent in early July from a strong sales period a year earlier.
Sales of cars built in North America -- which the industry considers domestic production -- dropped 4.4 percent, and light-truck sales were off 12.9 percent.
The seasonally adjusted annual sales rate was 7.3 million, the second-highest 10-day rate this year, after the 7.4 million of the last reporting period.


Dinkins Considers Shorter Workweek To Save Some Jobs
New York City's municipal hospital workers' union has proposed saving the jobs of hundreds of its laid-off members by temporarily shortening their workweek to three or four days at reduced pay, and the Dinkins administration has agreed to discuss the idea.
The decision to discuss the proposal was aimed mostly at averting a one-day work stoppage today by hospital orderlies and janitors to protest the layoffs.
Last night the hospital workers' union voted to postpone the walkout.


Southern National reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Television; He's Not Getting Better, He's Only Getting Younger
The summer schedule gets a badly needed lift -- the "nothing to watch" complaints are louder than usual these days -- with "Stephen King's 'Golden Years,' " the first original series for television the best-selling novelist has written.
Actually, he has written five of the seven installments, including tonight's opening two-hour special on CBS at 9 o'clock.
The final two hourlong segments have been written by Josef Anderson.
But this is definitely King territory.
The prototypically pedestrian is constantly bumping into the decidedly eccentric, if not supernatural.
Cleverly giving the exercise a pop-culture veneer, Mr.
King opens with a line from a David Bowie song: "Run for the shadows in these golden years." That out of the way, he settles quickly into exposing snippets of the bizarre in what passes for ordinary everyday life.


Accounting Rule for Art
Three days of public hearings by the Financial Accounting Standards Board begin today on proposed changes in the way museums and nonprofit organizations account for donated works of art and other contributions.
The board, which makes most of the nation's accounting rules, has received more than 1,000 letters on the proposed changes and 40 groups are scheduled to appear at the hearings, a near record.
Many contend that the proposed new rules would make many nonprofit organizations appear richer than they are and would cost museums billions to adopt.


Hasidic Couple Is Told to Testify
A Federal appeals court yesterday upheld a contempt citation against a Hasidic rabbi from Brooklyn and his wife in what had become a clash between ancient Judaic law and the comtemporary criminal-justice system.
The rabbi, Nocham Sternberg, and his wife, Esther, were cited after they refused to testify before a grand jury in a tax-fraud case involving two other Jews.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Robin Yount, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 6.


Wachovia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Less-Than-Expected Rain Sends Corn Prices Higher
Hot, dry weather over much of the Midwest sent corn futures prices higher yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade.
Traders fear that without more rain, high temperatures could damage unpollinated corn or stunt the growth of kernels.


Dreyfus, Bucking Trend, Hires Chief Economist
Although many companies are showing economists the door, the Dreyfus Corporation, one of the largest mutual fund management companies, has just signed on its first chief economist, Richard B. Hoey, a 48-year-old Wall Street veteran.
"Knowing what everyone else was doing," said Howard Stein, Dreyfus's chairman and chief executive, "Dreyfus had to do the opposite."
Bucking the trend in another way, Dreyfus has doubled its size in the last two years in a drive to expand its market share.
It now manages $70 billion in assets, as large as some nations' entire economy.
"Mr. Hoey's skills and extraordinary track record in spotting emerging economic trends will help guide investment judgments by our portfolio managers," Mr.
Stein said.


Sherwin-Williams Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dollar Mixed in Slow Day; Prices of Gold Rise Slightly
The dollar was mixed in quiet trading yesterday as the market took a breather after last week's volatile sessions.
Gold prices edged higher in New York, picking up 50 cents to close at $369.10 a troy ounce on the Commodity Exchange.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $368.75, also up 50 cents.


A Painful Parting: Giants Waive an Injured Bavaro
In a move untypical for the Giants, who have traditionally been generous with injured players, the Super Bowl champions today waived Mark Bavaro, their onetime All-Pro tight end.
Bavaro and his agent, David Fishof, characterized the Giants' move as an economic decision.
George Young, the Giants' general manager, said it was a medical decision.


What's Wrong With Teaching About Slavery With Sensitivity?
To the Editor:
In "More Pluribus, More Unum" (editorial, June 23), you comment on a proposed use of the term "enslaved person" in teaching American history.
A committee of scholars considering revisions to the New York State school system curriculum in history believes that "enslaved person" is better than "slave" because enslaved person underscores slavery's involuntary character.
But you criticize this proposal, calling it "hypersensitive."


First Bancorp. of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Potlatch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Syria's Reply Buoys Bush, Who Now Looks to Israelis
President Bush said here tonight that Syria's response to his proposal for convening a Middle East peace conference represented a "very positive breakthrough" and could pose "a good test" of Israel's desire to negotiate peace with its Arab adversaries.
Mr.
Bush made his remarks late tonight as he left dinner at the Tower of London with the leaders of six other major industrial democracies, who are gathered here for their annual economic summit conference.


Air Fare Rise Has Setback
An attempt by Continental Airlines to raise fares by 5 percent ran into trouble when Pan American World Airways, the only airline to initially go along, backed out.
Fare increases generally do not work unless the entire industry adopts them, because any carrier that goes out on a limb with higher prices would run the risk of sharp drops in traffic.


G.M. Debt Offering For $700 Million
The General Motors Corporation is offering a total of $700 million in debt securities, divided into two tranches, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The first part of the financing includes $400 million in 9 1/8 percent securiities, due 2001, that are priced at 99.925, to yield 9.136 percent, or about 87.5 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


A Reunion on Knicks for Riley and Branch
Adrian Branch is a guard who is 6 feet 7 inches tall.
The Knicks need a big guard.
He has played for Pat Riley, the Knicks' new coach, and is familiar with his system.
He even owns a championship ring, courtesy of the 1987 Los Angeles Lakers.
Advantage, Branch.


Harrison S. Kravis, Student, 19
Harrison S. Kravis, a son of Henry R. Kravis, the investor and corporate buyout specialist, died in an automobile accident on Saturday in Buford, Colo.
He was 19 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The younger Mr.
Kravis, who was born in Manhattan, completed his freshman year at Brown this spring.


Parks, Top Duke Recruit, Is Working His Way Up
Cherokee Parks, who stands out among the basketball players at the Olympic Festival because of a catchy name and a 6-foot-11-inch frame, has proved to be a lunch-pail kind of player who jokingly says of himself: "I'd be flashy if I only knew how."
Parks, who was graduated this year from Marina High School in Huntington Beach, Calif., is headed for Duke University this fall.
He figures to give the defending National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, a squad top-heavy with returning lettermen, immediate help.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11
News analysis: The momentum for future and more radical arms control agreements seems to have dissipated, even as the United States and the Soviet Union near completion of a landmark arms treaty.
Page A1


Jets Take First Step Toward Improving
If readiness makes a difference, the Jets are in much better shape than last year as they prepare for training camp and the first steps toward improvement on last season's 6-10 record.
Veterans and rookies have been trickling into the Hofstra University training facility here and are scheduled to arrive by Tuesday's 7 P.M. deadline.
Testing and physical exams will be conducted Wednesday and two-a-day drills begin Thursday.


Our Towns
It has been a busy six months in Our Towns with disputes that are boiling and waning, memories that are warming and tearful.
The Persian Gulf war left mental marks on some, physical marks on others.
Permeating virtually every community were the varied impacts of municipal stringencies slicing into lives.
But through it all emerged an inspiring amount of learning, not just in the younger generation, and what grandmothers like Bobbie Bramnick call "get-up-and-go."
Ridgefield Park, N.J., which faced a fireworks-free Fourth of July, got its bombs bursting in air, thanks to the fireworks subcommittee assembled by Chuck and Barbara DeLuca.
When the city deleted money for fireworks, citizens sold tickets.
Not only did they cover the $15,000 costs, they took in $4,500 toward 1992.
Not that they're bragging, but the DeLucas won first place in parade competition, Large Float (Family) Division; it was a six-foot swan carrying the children.


Petroleum &amp; Resources reports earnings for As of June 30


Ruling Backs Enforcing 'Dial a Porn' Law
Reversing a lower court's ruling, a Federal appeals court in Manhattan has cleared the way for nationwide enforcement of a controversial law intended to control access to pornographic telephone services.
The law, intended to protect children from possible harm caused by exposure to such telephone services, is known as the Helms Amendment.
Its main author was Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, and it was enacted by Congress in 1989.
A group of companies that specialize in such services, most of them based in New York, had filed a motion to block enforcement of the law shortly after it was passed.


Northern Trust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Boise Cascade reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Milken Retains Dershowitz
Michael R. Milken, the jailed high-yield "junk bond" financier, has retained the lawyer Alan M. Dershowitz, who has represented clients like Claus von Bulow and Leona Helmsley, to try to get his 10-year prison sentence reduced.
The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday that Mr.
Dershowitz, a professor at the Harvard Law School and an appeals specialist, will try to reduce Mr.
Milken's sentence and help defend him against civil suits.


BMC Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Police Booths in Gem District
Two portable booths that can each house a single police officer were set up yesterday in a midtown area filled with jewelry stores to increase the police presence there.
The booths are on a stretch of 47th Street known as the diamond district, located between Fifth Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas.
The booths, paid for by the Diamond and Jewelry Association, will be occupied during the day and removed at night.


Chess
It is quite impressive what counts as a failure for a top female player these days.
Judit Polgar, the youngest of the three amazing sisters from Budapest, made an even score -- five victories, five losses and three draws -- in the elite Schweizerische Kreditanstalt Tournament in Munich, Germany, from May 2 to 20, but it was less than she was aiming for.
Before the advent of Judit Polgar, who will be 15 years old next Tuesday, such a strong showing would have been considered virtually impossible, but she wanted one more draw in the last round to achieve the credentials for grandmaster rank and instead lost to the Soviet grandmaster Aleksandr Belyavsky.


Review/Concert; Soon-to-Be Director Exercises His Baton At a New Festival
Now things begin to get interesting at the New York Philharmonic.
Though Zubin Mehta is still listed as the orchestra's music director, he conducted his final concerts in May.
Kurt Masur does not take over until September, but there he was on Saturday evening and tonight, conducting a Mendelssohn program to conclude the orchestra's three-week residency at the new Tillesfest on the campus of C. W. Post College here.
And to judge from the results tonight, Mr.
Masur has quickly captured the players' attention and perhaps their imagination as well.
In Mendelssohn's incidental music for "A Midsummer Night's Dream" and even in the thrice familiar "Italian" Symphony, the Philharmonic for the most part sounded like a fresh orchestra.


Music in Review
'Idomeneo' Tanglewood Festival
Mozart, the darling of festivals everywhere this summer, had to take second place at Tanglewood to Leonard Bernstein, who, as a lost member of the family, was celebrated during the opening weekend of the season.
But on Saturday evening, as the highlight of the second weekend, Tanglewood caught up with Mozart in a big way, presenting a "concert staging" of his great serious opera "Idomeneo," featuring the Boston Symphony Orchestra conducted by Seiji Ozawa.
David Kneuss's dramatic conception went beyond the few perfunctory steps and gestures usually encompassed by the term semi-staged.
He nestled a high platform behind the orchestra and added suggestions of scenery: three stylized columns, a staircase, a circular patch of changeable sky.
The singers entered and exited appropriately, wearing an odd mix of street, formal and theatrical dress.
The Tanglewood Festival Chorus was generally hidden behind a retractable curtain when not singing.


Homeowners Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Industrial Output Up in June for a 3d Month
Production at the nation's factories, mines and utilities climbed seven-tenths of a percent in June, the third straight sizable advance, the Federal Reserve reported today.
Although analysts had expected such an increase, the gain was greeted by economists with some relief, after a Government report on Friday of a surprising decline in retail sales in June.


Capital Southwest reports earnings for As of June 30


High Levels of Toxic Substances Found in Kuwait Oil Fire Smoke
A Boston-based environmental group has found five toxic hydrocarbon compounds in the smoke from burning oil wells in Kuwait, in what appears to be the first laboratory analysis to find concentrations that exceed American standards.
"These numbers are indicative of serious problems," said Marco Kaltofen, the laboratory director at the National Toxic Campaign.
Short-term exposure to the chemicals does not have an effect on health, he said, but "chronic exposures could result in human health impact."


Putnam Trust Co. of Greenwich reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
The efforts of the Baltic States to achieve political independence are mirrored in the bridge community: the norm is rejection by official bodies, but some unofficial recognition.
When a group of Estonians competed in the official European championships in Helsinki, Finland, two years ago they reluctantly played as the representatives of the Soviet Union.
But when a similar group went to Czechoslovakia in April to play in the unofficial Prague Cup they competed as Estonia and reached the semifinal.


Quotation of the Day
"If this is a country of immigrants, then why are some immigrants treated like princes and others treated like dogs?" -- Rolande L. Dorancy of the Haitian Refuge Center in Miami.  [ A14:1. ]


BCE Is Weighing Australian Deal
BCE Inc., the Canadian telecommunications conglomerate, is considering a deal to buy Aussat, the satellite company owned by the Australian Government, a Canadian newspaper, The Financial Post, reported.
But BCE said the asking price of $918 million (Canadian), or about $800 million (United States), was too high.
BCE, based in Montreal, has said it can spend up to $1 billion in overseas investments because Canadian laws prevent it from expanding domestically, the newspaper said.
J.
V.
Raymond Cyr, BCE's chairman, has said the company will spend the $1 billion on controlling stakes in two foreign telephone monopolies.


Court Nominee Defied Labels As Head of Job-Rights Panel
As head of the Federal agency responsible for enforcing the laws against job discrimination, Clarence Thomas was often at war with other Reagan Administration officials, with members of Congress, with civil rights groups and with himself.
Judge Thomas, President Bush's nominee for the Supreme Court, was chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission from May 1982 to March 1990, longer than any of his predecessors.
A review of agency files for that period shows that he expressed complex, continually changing, often contradictory views, particularly on questions of affirmative action.


Mr. Coffee Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brewers Place Yount On the Disabled List
Outfielder ROBIN YOUNT has been placed on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to July 6, keeping him out of the lineup until next Sunday, the Milwaukee Brewers announced yesterday.
It is the first time he has been on the list since 1978, when he was sidelined with an ankle injury.


Robert B. Egbert, 74,A Chemical Engineer
Robert Baldwin Egbert, whose pioneering doctoral study on global warming won the 1942 William H. Walker Award of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers, died on Wednesday at Northside Presbyterian Hospital in Albuquerque, N.M.
He was 74 years old and lived in Albuquerque.
He died of a heart attack, his wife of 50 years, the former Emmabelle Cook, said.


Computer Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


National City Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Anac Holding reports earnings for 16wks to June 1


E-Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fleet/Norstar Deal Complete
The Bank of New England officially joined the Fleet/Norstar Financial Group today, six months after its collapse shook the banking industry.
With the takeover, Fleet, based in Providence, R.I., solidified its position as the region's largest bank.
It said Bank of New England branches had been renamed Fleet Banks.


James H. Hawkins Sr., Grocer, 80
James Henry Hawkins Sr., a grocer in the Watts section of Los Angeles who was widely praised for standing up to local gangs and drug dealers, died Thursday of prostate cancer.
He was 80 years old.
For years, gang members threatened to chase Mr.
Hawkins, who owned the Slater Market, and his family out of the neighborhood, said his son, Elton Hawkins.


The Bank Merger; Merger Dashes the Hopes Of One Ambitious Banker
Of all the banking executives now musing on the proposed merger of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation with the Chemical Banking Corporation, probably few are as struck by the irony of it all as Thomas S. Johnson.
An aggressive banker with a reputation for no-nonsense leadership, Mr.
Johnson, 50 years old, left Chemical Bank in 1989, where he was president, to join Manufacturers Hanover as president and heir apparent to John F. McGillicuddy, the bank's chairman.
The move surprised some bankers and bank analysts because Mr.
Johnson was clearly in line for the head job at Chemical, although the wait would probably have been longer.
Chemical's chairman, Walter V. Shipley, is 55.
Mr.
McGillicuddy is 60.


Q&amp;A
Light Bulb Lifespan
Q.
Why do do all my light bulbs seem to burn out at the same time?
What determines how fast they burn out?
Does turning them on and off affect longevity?


Explaining Universe's Structure Gets Harder
BRITISH astronomers recently discovered 20 of the rare celestial objects known as quasars in a region near the edge of the universe that was widely supposed to be nearly empty.
This startling finding has kindled one of the hottest debates in years among scientists who study the origin and structure of the universe.
The discovery of these quasars -- mysterious and very distant objects that are some of the intrinsically brightest in the universe -- casts doubt on several popular explanations of how the universe evolved during the period just after the Big Bang explosion from which most scientists believe the universe arose.


Mets Make the Move: Darling to Expos for Burke
The Mets, faced with a surplus of starting pitching and determined to avoid the kind of continuing clubhouse controversy that plagued them last season, traded Ron Darling to the Montreal Expos yesterday for Tim Burke, a 32-year-old relief pitcher.
The trade ended weeks of speculation over organizational strategy and closed yet another personal chapter in an era for the Mets.


Budget Cutbacks Could Affect the Air New Yorkers Breathe


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Consolidated Papers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Manufacturers Hanover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Infestation by Worm Is Contained in Africa
A RAPIDLY growing, potentially catastrophic infestation by the New World screwworm in Libya has been contained by an emergency eradication effort, officials of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations say.
The infestation, the first ever outside North and South America, had raised alarms that the pest, if unchecked, would extend deep into the heart of Africa, devastating livestock and wildlife.


CHRONICLE
WARREN BEATTY and ANNETTE BENING are expecting a baby, the first child for each of them, early next year.
Hollywood stars don't send announcements; they issue news releases, and this one was three lines long.
"They've been very private about their personal lives," said Andrea Jaffe, Mr.
Beatty's publicity agent, when asked for further details.
"They're really happy about it." Mr.
Beatty, 54 years old, has a very long string of loves, including MADONNA and DIANE KEATON.


Credit Agencies Plan '800' Lines
Two of the nation's largest credit reporting agencies announced plans to set up toll-free telephone lines to handle inquiries from consumers whose credit applications have been rejected.
The move by TRW Inc. of Cleveland and Equifax Inc. of Atlanta comes about a week after six states filed lawsuits in Dallas and New York accusing TRW of violating consumers' privacy and making reporting errors.
TRW's "800" number will be phased in starting in October; Equifax said its number would be installed by December.


Kevlin Microwave Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Fifth Third Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Repercussions Of Bank Deal
The merger of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation and the Chemical Banking Corporation is likely to have repercussions on Madison Avenue.
In many instances, when mergers bring together business rivals, the merged company consolidates advertising at one agency.
McCann-Erickson New York, a subsidiary of the Interpublic Group of Companies, creates advertising for Manufacturers Hanover.
Annual billings are estimated at about $10 million.
Susan Irwin, a McCann spokeswoman, said the agency had been asked not to comment.


Observer; Columbus Did It
There's a lot of anger against Columbus these days.
People are saying it's bad to honor him by celebrating the 500th anniversary of his discovery of America.
Everybody knows he didn't discover America anyhow.
They say all he did was pave the way for Europeans to come over, push the residents around and exploit the land for profit.
Listening to these charges, you get the impression if it hadn't been for Columbus there'd be no air pollution, no grim Interstate highways or ugly housing developments marring the continent's beauty, no mountains of burning tires or reeking gasoline refineries blighting the landscape.
When you think about this possibility, you can't help feeling angry at Columbus.


Aluminum Co. of America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pinkerton's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 14


First Fidelity Bancorp (N.J.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


What's Wrong With Teaching About Slavery With Sensitivity?; 'Imprisoned Person'?
To the Editor:
The recommendation by New York State's panel on multicultural education to replace the term "slave" with "enslaved person" in the social studies curriculum is disconcerting.
The justification offered for this switch is that the new term would help students understand slavery to be a forced condition, rather than a chosen role or profession.
Following this specious rationale, lessons about criminal justice should refer to "imprisoned person," not "prisoner," and "victimized person," not "victim." Changing terms will not clarify these concepts for students, and an educator who cannot teach the meaning of the word "slave" will have no better luck with "enslaved person." KENNETH ALCORN  Greenwich, Conn., June 24, 1991
The writer teaches American history at Western Middle School.


Scripps Award for Anna Sokolow
Anna Sokolow, a socially conscious choreographer known for her dances about urban anxiety, received the 1991 Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival Award on Sunday night in Page Auditorium of Duke University.
The $25,000 award, which was first given in 1981, honors choreographers who have made a significant lifetime contribution to American modern dance.
It is the largest sum given annually to a dance artist.
Among the previous recipients have been Martha Graham, Merce Cunningham, Paul Taylor and Alvin Ailey.


CPC International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Baseball; Mulholland and Phillies Send Dodgers to Their 6th Loss in Row
Terry Mulholland won his third consecutive start and Wes Chamberlain drove in three runs with a two-run home run and a single as the Philadelphia Phillies beat Los Angeles, 3-1, tonight.
The loss was the the Dodgers' sixth in a row.
Mulholland (9-8) pitched his second complete game of the season and 12th of his career, allowing seven hits, striking out three and walking two.
The victory was his sixth in six starts this season against West Coast teams -- two each against Los Angeles, San Francisco and San Diego.


First National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Weather and Soviet Rumors Lift Prices of Farm Products
Prices of corn futures soared the daily limit on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday amid growing alarm over hot, dry weather in the Midwest.
The market was also jolted by rumors, confirmed after the close of trading, that the Soviet Union was actively bidding for grain and other farm products, adding soybeans and wheat to those futures posting solid gains.


VLSI Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Aaron Burns, 69, Dies; Leader in Typography
Aaron Burns, a graphic designer and typographer who headed the International Typeface Corporation, died on Tuesday at his home in Boynton Beach, Fla.
He was 69 years old.
He died of an illness related to AIDS, which he contracted through a blood transfusion during open-heart surgery nine years ago, said his daughter, Laurie.


Reynolds Net Plunges 40%
The Reynolds Metals Company said that depressed aluminum prices caused its second-quarter profits to decline 40 percent.
The company on Monday reported earnings of $61.4 million, or $1.04 a share, compared with $103 million, or $1.75 a share, in last year's second quarter.
Revenues fell nearly 2 percent, to $1.52 billion from $1.55 billion.


Nicor Inc. reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Yale Medical Dean To Join Bristol-Myers
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company announced yesterday that Dr.
Leon E. Rosenberg, dean of the Yale University School of Medicine and an author ity on metabolic diseases, had been named head of the company's pharmaceutical research operations.
Dr.
Rosenberg, who is known as Lee, is a member of the National Academy of Sciences and is the C.N.H.
Long Professor of Genetics at Yale.
He will succeed Dr.
Edgar Haber as president of the Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute on Sept. 1.


Hollywood Seeks A White Audience For New Black Films
John Singleton's "Boyz N the Hood," a film about a black teen-agers growing up amid gang warfare in Los Angeles, opened on Friday to excellent reviews, strong box office receipts and sporadic incidents of violence.
The film, the first work by Mr.
Singleton, who is 23 years old, is the most recent and among the most conspicuous signs yet of the warm embrace of a remarkable group of black film makers by Hollywood's white Establishment.
Besides Mr.
Singleton, the group includes Matty Rich, who directed "Straight Out of Brooklyn," Mario Van Peebles, who made "New Jack City," and the grand old man of the young black film makers, Spike Lee.


Fulton Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Home Loan Banks' Bond Rates Set
The Office of Finance of the Federal Home Loan Banks announced yesterday that it had set the interest rates for a two-part debenture offering totaling $1.4 billion.
The bonds are being offered through various securities dealers, with a $500 million six-month issue due Jan. 27, 1992, priced at par to yield 6.05 percent, or about 7.5-hundredths of a percentage point more than Treasury securities wiith a comparable maturity.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the strike at Legal Services of New York referred incompletely to the mission of the Legal Aid Society.
It handles civil cases as well as criminal ones.


Business Digest
The Bank Merger Troubled banking giants are searching for a new and narrower role amid stiffening competition and changing rules, as the merger by Chemical and Manufacturers Hanover shows.  [ Page A1. ]
Chemical and Manufacturers are discussing consumer issues like what interest rate to charge on bank credit cards.  [ D6. ]  Volume in options on Manufacturers' stock soared last week.  [ D8. ] The Economy


Arguments End; St. John's Trial Heads for Jury
The chief prosecutor in the trial of three St.
John's University students charged with sexually assaulting a female student told a Queens jury yesterday that the woman was a "naive" and "physically helpless" victim.
But the lawyer for the student portrayed by the prosecution as a leader of the attack insisted that his client was in fact the innocent victim of a "scorned" and manipulating woman.


U.S. Indian Colleges Get First Big Corporate Gift
Struggling against isolation and inadequate government financing, Indian tribal colleges are about to receive substantial help from corporate America.
The colleges, most of them situated on remote reservations in 12 Western and Midwestern states, will receive a total of $1 million in assistance this year from the USWest Foundation, the charitable arm of United States West, a telecommunications corporation.


Corestates Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Disabled Protest in Texas
Advocates for the disabled spent the night in Gov.
Ann Richards's reception room at the Capitol to protest the lack of services available to them.
About 40 people, some in wheelchairs, refused to leave the Governor's reception room on Monday and stayed through the night.


Horse Racing; Foreign Investors Heat Up Keeneland
The sales market for thoroughbred race horses, which has been depressed for half a dozen years, remained soft tonight as the annual two-day auction of selected yearlings ended at Keeneland race course.
Most of the action and cash in the market were still being provided by investors from abroad, especially the Maktoum family, the rulers of the Persian Gulf emirate of Dubai, who once more emerged as the busiest buyers at the sale.


New York at Work; Rats Are His Bread, Roaches His Butter
Now that he has annihilated millions of cockroaches and rodents, not to mention preposterous quantities of silverfish, cereal mites, carpet beetles, bedbugs, ants, wasps, termites and a few snakes, Sam Bloom figures he knows a thing or two about pest control.
Don't serve beer to the cockroaches.
Make sure the rats don't get into the bulldozer seats.
Stick your empty soda cans in the dishwasher.
Mr.
Bloom runs Standard Exterminating in Long Island City, one of the city's oldest exterminators.
It will gladly eradicate pests anywhere within the five boroughs.
Occasionally, it will dispatch someone into the suburbs for a good flying ant or earwig problem.
"And we don't really charge anything for our service," Mr.
Bloom likes to say.
"Just a dollar apiece for the little funerals."


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
The jazz trumpeter MILES DAVIS received one of France's highest cultural honors yesterday when he was made a knight of the Legion of Honor.
JACK LANG, the French culture minister, described Mr.
Davis as "the Picasso of jazz."
"With Miles Davis, you are in a constant musical adventure," Mr.
Lang said.
"He has been able to cross all the eras while staying eternally avant-garde."


Iraq Steps Up Pleas to End Trade Ban
Iraq stepped up its campaign today to bring about some easing in the United Nations trade embargo imposed on this country.
It made public a market survey showing that the price of many basic foods has risen by 2,000 to 3,000 percent on the free market since the sanctions took effect a year ago.
Saying poor Iraqis are simply unable to afford food at today's prices, Trade Minister Mohammed Mehdi Saleh said at a news conference that the United States, Britain and France were trying to starve the Iraqi people into a revolt against President Saddam Hussein by refusing to let Iraq sell oil to buy food.


Coalition to Aid Dinkins Seems To Break Away
A liberal, labor and minority coalition that began several weeks ago as an effort to strengthen Mayor David N. Dinkins's hand in dealing with the newly empowered New York City Council and the city budget is now apparently breaking with the Mayor because of his budget cuts affecting city workers and social-welfare programs.
Dennis Rivera, president of Local 1199 of the Drug, Hospital and Health Care Employees Union -- a coalition leader, along with his close friend, Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch -- has said the group "is not a Dinkins coalition."


Unit of Cadwell Davis To Focus on Drug Ads
Cadwell Davis Partners, New York, has established a new division called Pharmedia, to assist clients in the growing niche of creating prescription drug advertising that is aimed at consumers.
Heading Pharmedia as its director will be Eliot Glazer, 39 years old, who is an executive vice president at Cadwell Davis.


Collective Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U S West in Deals With the Soviets
U S West Inc. said today that it had teamed up with the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications in the Soviet Union to install and operate three switching stations for international calls to and from Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev.
U S West also announced that it would be a minority partner in a cellular telephone system for Moscow.
The announcements reflect the Soviet Government's growing interest in tapping American companies to modernize its creaky communications system.
U S West said it would invest about $18 million in three new switches, called "gateways," that route calls into and out of the Soviet Union.
The cellular system, to cost about $7 million, will be owned by four partners.
The Soviet telecommunications ministry will own 50 percent; U S West will own 22 percent; Millicom Inc., a New York telecommunications company, will own 20 percent, and the remaining 8 percent will be owned by a Soviet eye institute.


ICN Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Results Plus
TENNIS  Krickstein Upset Markus Zoecke won tie breakers in the first and the third sets yesterday to upset seventh-seeded Aaron Krickstein in the second round of the $600,000 Sovran Bank Classic in Washington.
Krickstein became the first of the top eight seeded players to be eliminated when the 23-year-old German prevailed, 7-6, 2-6, 7-6.
In an opening-round match, 10th-seeded Jimmy Arias, a two-time finalist, outlasted Mark Woodforde of Austtralia, 6-4, 5-7, 6-4.
Fourth-seeded Richey Reneberg, No. 11 MalaVai Washington and No. 13 Grant Connell of Canada were extended to three sets before advancing, and Jim Grabb, unseeded this year after making the final last year, eliminated Ivan Baron, 6-3, 6-3. (AP) N.C.A.A.
Champion Wins in Mahwah: Sandra Birch of Huntington Bay, L.I., the reigning National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, won in her professional debut yesterday in the $150,000 Pathmark Tennis Classic in Mahwah, N.J.
Birch, who helped Stanford to the N.C.A.A. team title the last four years, rallied for an 0-6, 7-6, 6-2 victory over Penny Barg-Mager and advanced to the second round of the 28-player draw. (AP)
GOLF  Winner in Westchester  Rick Vershure of the Quaker Ridge Golf Club in Scarsdale, N.Y., shot a 66, the best round of the tournament, and followed with a 70 to finish with a seven-under-par, 54-hole total of 206 to win the Westchester Golf Association Open championship at the Siwanoy Country Club in Bronxville.


Defendant Accused in Plot To Assassinate Prosecutor
A jailed defendant awaiting trial on a drug-related murder charge has been indicted by a Manhattan grand jury on charges of ordering the murder of the prosecutor in the case for showing him "disrespect" at the defendant's arraignment last year, law-enforcement officials close to the case said.
The defendant, 25-year-old Herbert Daughtry, was also indicted along with three others on charges of murdering one witness and conspiring to murder two other witnesses to the killing he was originally charged with.


Mattel to Buy Aviva, A Sports Toy Maker
Mattel Inc. said yesterday that it had an agreement to acquire Aviva Sport Inc., a San Francisco-based manufacturer of sports toys.
John W. Amerman, Mattel's chairman and chief executive, said the acquisition would give Mattel, based in Hawthorne, Calif., a toehold in the activity-toy market, which includes items like construction sets, models and toy sports equipment.


Maxwell Plans to Spin Off Some American Operations
The Maxwell Communication Corporation said today that it planned to spin off its American operations to help accelerate their growth and raise money to reduce Maxwell Communication's $2.15 billion in debt.
The businesses include the publisher Macmillan Inc., which Maxwell acquired for $2.6 billion in 1988; the Official Airlines Guide, which it bought the same year for $750 million and which publishes worldwide airline scheduling information, and Berlitz International Inc., which produces language services, travel guides and home-study materials.


Rohm &amp; Haas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Advanced Micro Devices reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bank Loans to Asia Up
Western commercial banks sharply increased their lending to Asian countries in the second half of last year while cutting their loan exposure in Eastern Europe, according to a new survey by the Bank for International Settlements.
New lending was confined mainly to developing countries with dynamic economies.


Head of Clio Awards In Statement on Trouble
In his first statement since the Clio Awards ended in disarray last month, Bill Evans blamed a "conspiracy" among former employees and associates as well as the media forthe debacle.
"The Clio staff was always backbiting," Mr.
Evans, owner of the organization that gives the honors for creative excellence in advertising, said in a four-page statement faxed to the media late yesterday.
"Media sensationalism incited inquiries from concerned Clio fans around the world," the statement added.
"They made their sources' self-serving prophecies become self-fulfilling."


Service Merchandise Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Justin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Home Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kroger Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


Furor Over a Village Antique Shop: Americana or Souvenirs of Racism?
In an antique dealer's window here is a reproduction of a turn-of-the-century poster showing naked black babies laughing and crying.
Under the poster is the caption: Alligator Bait.
Inside, the dealer, Thomas Breen, has other items of what he calls black Americana, including a "Jolly Nigger" cast-iron mechanical piggy bank.
As Mr.
Breen describes the bank, "You put money in his hand and an arm goes to the mouth" and his eyes roll.
The bank was made in Taiwan; Mr.
Breen used a buffing machine to make it look like an antique.


Food Notes
Forecasting Food Trends
At last week's International Fancy Food and Confection Show at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, there were few surprises.


AMNESTIES OFFEND PRETORIA OFFICIALS
The attorneys general of South Africa's four provinces have objected that President F. W. de Klerk's amnesties have freed too many prisoners who were guilty of what the law enforcement officials called "serious and horrible crimes."
The letter, sent to Justice Minister H. J. Coetsee on Monday, was published in part today by The Citizen, a newspaper with contacts in law enforcement agencies.


Review/Film; Is He Called Just Plain Meat Or Should It Be Mr. Loaf?
"May I call you Meat?" asks an unctuous interviewer who pops up periodically throughout "Dead Ringer," a movie about the travails of being the rock star Meat Loaf.
"Yes, if I can call you Ernie," the star replies and goes on to regale the credulous reporter with the first of several bogus stories about his past.
"Dead Ringer," which opened today at the Anthology Film Archive, was filmed in 1981 and '82 but not released commercially.
It interweaves concert film of the 250-pound star with a slender story about the efforts of two brothers, one of whom bears a striking resemblance to the singer, to meet their idol.


Before Deal, Options Rose
Volume in options on Manufacturers Hanover's stock soared late last week, in advance of Monday's announcement that the bank would merge with the Chemical Banking Corporation.
Officials at the American Stock Exchange, where the options are traded, and the Securities and Exchange Commission declined to comment today on whether the surge was under investigation.


Man Seized in Rape of 3-Year-Old in Public
A Manhattan man raped his 3-year-old niece about 25 feet from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive at the start of the rush hour Friday evening, the police said, and a tow-truck operator who captured the man reported that dozens of people watched the attack from their cars and did little to stop it.
The suspect, Leroy Saunders, 29, was caught a few blocks away after assaulting the girl under a tree on a grassy knoll on the west side of the highway near 115th Street, the police said.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.86
5.96
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.59
5.56
7.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.70
7.48
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.11
8.13
8.46
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.44
8.44
8.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.48
9.48
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.15
7.15
7.42
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


U.S. Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PC Software Maker Novell To Buy Digital Research
Novell Inc., the leading publisher of software for office computer networks, will announce today that it intends to acquire Digital Research Inc., Novell executives said yesterday.
Digital Research is a producer of software that controls the basic operations of desktop computers.
The acquisition would bring Novell into more direct competition with Microsoft, the largest publisher of personal computer software.


Kansas City Southern Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hollywood Seeks A White Audience For New Black Films
John Singleton's "Boyz N the Hood," a film about a black teen-agers growing up amid gang warfare in Los Angeles, opened on Friday to excellent reviews, strong box office receipts and sporadic incidents of violence.
The film, the first work by Mr.
Singleton, who is 23 years old, is the most recent and among the most conspicuous signs yet of the warm embrace of a remarkable group of black film makers by Hollywood's white Establishment.
Besides Mr.
Singleton, the group includes Matty Rich, who directed "Straight Out of Brooklyn," Mario Van Peebles, who made "New Jack City," and the grand old man of the young black film makers, Spike Lee.


Jackson County Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Financier Joins in Fairfax Bid
The Australian financier Kerry Packer has joined a consortium with the Canadian newspaper executive Conrad Black to bid for control of the John Fairfax Group, Australia's oldest media empire.
The partners will be battling bids from Independent Newspapers of Ireland, Jamison Equity of Australia and a Government wary of giving Mr.
Packer too much control of the country's press.


Bard (C.R.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hunt (J.B.) Transport (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film; A False Goddess: Thinness for Women
In "The Famine Within," an eye-opening documentary about American women's collective obsession with body weight, Katherine Gilday makes a thorough and cogent case for the larger importance of this issue.
"Every age has its own idea of perfect virtue for women," her film says, and it contends that our current ideal demands the triumph of will power over nature.
Faith in weight loss, the film maintains, has for many women taken on the power of religious conviction.
And yet the standard to which so many women aspire "really has less to do with beauty than with the deep cultural meaning of body type."
Ms.
Gilday's film, which opens today at the Film Forum, is an effective mixture of sobering statistics, perceptive observations and desperately sad anecdotes.
Chris Alt, the heavier sister of Carol Alt, the successful model, describes seeing a photograph of Karen Carpenter in the last stages of starvation and thinking "she was very lucky." Ms.
Alt recalls having "wondered how I could get that skinny without dying." Another woman remembers dieting frantically as a teen-ager because she had a chance to meet Elvis Presley in Las Vegas and indeed being complimented by Elvis on her good looks.
That accomplished, she ballooned back up to 200 pounds.


Dow Stocks Slip by 6.71; Volume Up
Stocks edged lower yesterday, but trading picked up sharply.
Even the bank stocks, which enjoyed a one-day flurry Monday after Chemical and Manufacturers Hanover announced a merger plan, gave way.


Badger Paper Mills reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Constant Urge to Buy: Battling a Compulsion
THE couple had a combined income above $350,000, but neither of them could control the urge to go on spending sprees.
Finally, at the end of one month they found themselves penniless, their credit cards to their limit, their checking account overdrawn.
They did not know how they would find the money to eat for the last few days of the month.


Integra Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Honeywell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Merging Banks Turn to Consumer Questions
Now that Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover have decided to merge, they are beginning to deal with the issues that concern consumers, such as what interest rate to charge on bank credit cards (Chemical's are lower) and how much will a customer have to keep on deposit to have a no-fee checking account ("Manny Hanny's" $1,500 minimum or Chemical's $3,000.)
"We don't have any idea yet how we'll answer these questions," said Alan M. Silberstein, Chemical's executive vice president for consumer banking.


British Airways
British Airways P.L.C. said it was in talks with the Soviet airline Aeroflot about buying part of a planned new international carrier, Air Russia.
"I hope that the venture will come about," said Lord King, British Air's chairman, after the company's annual shareholders meeting.
"It's a way for us to expand." Air Russia is to operate from a new Moscow airport, but plans are still in the early stages.


New York and California Set School Bonds
The New York State Dormitory Authority and California State University yesterday both tentatively priced tax-exempt revenue bonds totaling $186.7 million.
For the $93.46 million New York Dormitory issue being sold on behalf of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, interest and principal payments for the revenue bonds are insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corporation, giving the issue a rating of Aaa by Moody's Investors Service and AAA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


British Open Becomes Norman's Acid Test
The British Open is the only major championship Greg Norman has ever won, but it is also the tournament at which he began his steep slide from the top one year ago.
Since shooting a dismal 76 to Nick Faldo's 67 in a third-round showdown of the world's top-ranked players at St.
Andrews, golf's most hallowed grounds, Norman has gone without a victory and played some of the most uninspired golf of his 16-year career.


A New Getaway: Bed, Breakfast, Spirituality
You say you've had your European tour, your Caribbean cruise, your Club Med, your spa.
You say you've bed-and-breakfasted New England, barged through Burgundy, hiked the Rockies.
And now, you say, your Lewis and Clark response to summer vacation is interrupted by recurring visions of Walden Pond.
You are not alone.
Thousands of Americans are packing for a different kind of journey this summer.
Destination: a higher spiritual plane.


New Pesticides That Nobody Hates
Last month, when the Mycogen Corporation's genetically engineered pesticides became the first to win approval from the Environmental Protection Agency, one element was conspicuously absent: opposition.
Normally, the prospect of spraying plants with genetically altered, pesticide-producing bacteria would raise loud protests from environmentalists fearful that these new microbes would multiply and spread, with untold consequences.
But Mycogen won approval because in its products, the bacteria are already dead.
The dead bacteria, it turns out, are perfect capsules for delivering pesticides.


General Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Commerce Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Louisiana-Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Development Plan in Atlanta
A Swedish developer said today that he plans to spend $1 billion over the next 15 years to develop 10 square blocks of real estate along Atlanta's main thoroughfare, Peachtree Street.
G.
Lars Gullstedt, the owner of Gullstedt Gruppen of Stockholm, announced plans to build more than 15 million square feet of hotel, commercial, retail and residential space in midtown Atlanta.


Jewish Group Attacks Author of 'Chutzpah'
The American Jewish Congress has accused Alan M. Dershowitz of making things up in his best-selling new book, "Chutzpah," which contends that Jews in America have accepted second-class citizenship.
A letter from Robert K. Lifton and Henry Siegman, respectively the president and executive director of the Jewish group, said Mr.
Dershowitz's book included "false and defamatory" statements.
The two men suggested they would seek legal action because their reputations had been damaged.


SENATE COMMITTEE DELAYS HEARINGS ON C.I.A. NOMINEE
The Senate Intelligence Committee today delayed until mid-September confirmation hearings on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, a serious but not necessarily fatal setback for Mr.
Gates.
The committee said the postponement was needed for it to investigate whether Mr.
Gates, President Bush's deputy national security adviser, knew more than he has acknowledged about the Iran-contra affair when he served as deputy C.I.A. director in 1986.
The extra time also gives the committee a chance to examine other potentially troublesome issues that have surfaced in recent days.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  MIAMI HEAT -- Named Bob Staak assistant coach.
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Announced Robert Casciola, executive vice president and chief operating officer, is leaving the team to become executive director of the National Football Foundation and College Hall of Fame.
Continental Basketball Association  RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Named Philip Averbuck assistant director of basketball operations.
United States Basketball League  EMPIRE STATE STALLIONS -- Signed Fernando Sanders, forward.
Waived Dwight Moody, guard.
World Basketball League  YOUNGSTOWN PRIDE -- Placed Gary Massey, forward, on injured reserve, retroactive to July 15.
Football  National Football League  NFL -- Named John Wooten director of player programs.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Eric Thomas, cornerback.
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Kevin Scott, defensive back, to a multiyear contract.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Agreed to terms with Anthony Dilweg and Blair Kiel, quarterbacks, on two-year contracts.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Jon Vaughn, running back.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Agreed to a contract with Jeff Hostetler, quarterback.
Placed Adrian White, safety, on preseason physically-unable-to-perform list.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Al Baker, running back.
Agreed to terms with Troy Johnson, linebacker.
Placed JoJo Townsell, wide receiver; Dannie Lockett, linebacker; Troy Taylor, quarterback; A.B.
Brown, running back, and Dennis Price, cornerback, on the physically unable to perform list.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Signed Luis Sharpe, offensive tackle.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Agreed to terms with Adrian Cooper, tight end.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Floyd Fields, safety.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Mike Tice, tight end, to a one-year contract.
Golf  T.C.
JORDAN GOLF TOUR -- Named Annette Britton assistant executive director and Becky Mays assistant to the executive vice president.
Soccer  Major Soccer League  KANSAS CITY COMETS -- Announced the team will end operations immediately.
College
METRO ATLANTIC ATHLETIC CONFERENCE -- Announced the resignation of Joe DeBonis, men's basketball supervisor of officials.
BOSTON UNIVERSITY -- Named Brian Doyle assistant soccer coach.
FAIRLEIGH DICKINSON -- Named Fred Hill men's assistant basketball coach.
FORDHAM -- Named Mark Lugris men's assistant soccer coach.
HARVARD -- Named Paulo Dias men's assistant soccer coach.


Landmark Bancshares Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Illness Forces Entire PDM Team to Quit Tour
Stricken by a mysterious ailment that team officials suspect was food poisoning, the remaining members of the PDM cycling team withdrew today from the Tour de France.
The casualties included Erik Breukink, a Dutchman who was third in the overall standing and who was a favorite in the three-week bicycle race.
Five riders for PDM, which is ranked No. 1 in the professional cycling world, had withdrawn Monday.
The other four were not allowed by their coach, Jan Gisbers, to start today because they were suffering with high temperatures and pain.
In addition to Breukink, those forced out today were Raul Alcala, Sean Kelly and Joes Van Aert.


Pentagon Cites Some Gulf War Lessons
In its first comprehensive assessment of the Persian Gulf war, the Defense Department said today that American military forces must improve their ability to gather battlefield intelligence and develop better defenses against tactical ballistic missiles like the Iraqi Scud.
In an interim report on lessons learned from the war that was ordered by Congress, the Pentagon also acknowledged that searching out mobile Scud missiles was "costly and difficult," and that the United States was ill prepared at the outset of the crisis to protect its troops against biological weapons.


Romanov Nostalgia
To the Editor:
Jacques Bacic (letter, July 3) tells us that Yakov Sverdlov, chairman of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee in 1917, was the first "Soviet President." Not quite true: Lev Kamenev was the first chairman of the executive committee and thus the first Soviet President, though he resigned almost immediately and was replaced by Sverdlov.


Dollar Posts a Slight Rise After Greenspan Comments
The dollar rose in cautious trading yesterday, supported by comments from Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve Board chairman, but held in check by fears of central bank intervention.
Gold prices edged lower.
In New York, gold fell 20 cents to close at $368.90 an ounce on the Commodity Exchange.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $368.75, unchanged from Monday.


A New Commodity to Be Traded: Government Permits for Pollution
Ever searching for new ways to make markets and money, commodity exchanges have broadened their horizons from familiar products like soybeans and wheat to concepts like Eurodollar futures contracts that only a business school graduate could love.
Now the nation's largest commodity mart has gone a step further, approving trading in Government permits to pollute.
The Chicago Board of Trade voted yesterday to create a private market for rights to emit sulfur dioxide.
The rights are to be issued to electric utilities by the Environmental Protection Agency as part of Washington's strategy to reduce acid rain.


Avignon Journal; They Stood for France, So Where Do They Stand?
Anxious not to be taken for any of the two million or more Arab immigrants in France, Messoud Cheraga reached in his pocket and produced the identity card of a French citizen and a citation from the French Army praising him as "an excellent commando leader."
Standing beside him and looking far older than his 54 years, Kaddour Bouras quickly followed suit.
He picked through his wallet and carefully unfolded his citation.
It described him as "devoted and loyal" and noted that he showed bravery when he was wounded in battle.


Violence Attended Soviet Union's Birth
To the Editor:
"Kalinin and Sverdlov, Two Soviet Presidents" by Jacques Bacic (letter, July 3) contains inaccuracies.


First Florida Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


James McCallion, 72, Movie Actor, Is Dead
James McCallion, a character actor who appeared on Broadway as a child with Errol Flynn and in movies with James Cagney, Edward G. Robinson and other stars, died on Thursday.
He was 72 years old.
Mr.
McCallion's Broadway career began in 1927 opposite Flynn in "Yours Truly." He was 9 years old.
Subsequent Broadway appearances in "Roosty" and "But for the Grace of God" led to a film career with the Universal, RKO and Warner Brothers studios.


Free Cable TV (Only It's Hard to Make Out)
Some 3,000 Manhattan residents turned on their television sets recently and, like Odysseus in the underworld, confronted hazy shadows and flickering images in an unfamiliar world.
The appearance of several phantom television channels was all part of a marketing effort gone awry, courtesy of Manhattan Cable Television, the company that provides cable services to the borough's West Side south of 79th Street and the East Side south of 86th Street.
To promote new programming, the Time Warner subsidiary decided to give Manhattanites a free glimpse of the 11 commercial channels it is adding to the 35 the system already carries -- not including pay channels -- in most of its service area.


Citicorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wheelabrator Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Books of The Times; From Dunkirk to the Rudolf Hess Peace Mission
Ten Days to Destiny The Secret Story of the Hess  Peace Initiative and British  Efforts to Strike a Deal With Hitler By John Costello Illustrated. 600 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.
In "The Grand Alliance," the third volume of his magisterial six-volume history of World War II, Winston S. Churchill devotes seven telling pages to one of the most puzzling incidents of the war: the solo flight from Germany to Scotland, on May 10, 1941, by Rudolf Hess, Hitler's deputy and acolyte, presumably to make a peace overture.
Although Churchill paraphrased some of the material in his history on security grounds, his version of the Hess flight is generally accepted, as told from his viewpoint as Prime Minister.


Editorial Notebook; Probation, Georgia Style
The convict comes to the door dressed only in a pair of cut-off jeans and the ankle bracelet that keeps him in touch with the monitoring equipment downtown.
He looks reluctant when the probation officer thrusts the black box in his face.
But he knows he has no choice.
When he blows into the disposable white tube, the little Breathalyzer's digital readout goes into orbit: .172 blood alcohol level.
That means drunk.


Guardian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lessons in Middle Eastern Cooking, Lovingly Given, From the Nader Kitchen
French fries and pork chops, hot dogs and ketchup, whipped cream and frosted cakes won't be found at Rose Nader's table in Winsted, Conn.
A native of Lebanon, Mrs.
Nader is better known for Mediterranean delights like hummus, tabbouleh, kibbee, lamb kaftas and grape leaves stuffed with chickpeas.
"If you eat healthy food, you nourish your body and your brain; I believe that," said Mrs.
Nader, who has raised four children, including the lean and brainy consumer advocate Ralph Nader.
"When you eat junk food, you feel irritated and you don't know why. It is all in the food; it all goes together."


Realty Concern Set Afire in Case Linked to Bias
A Brooklyn real-estate agency was set afire early yesterday morning, two days after workers there reported receiving threatening calls about selling property to minorities in a predominantly white neighborhood, the police said.
The fire, which the police have deemed a bias incident, began around 4 A.M. on the roof of the Fillmore Real Estate agency at 9301 Flatlands Avenue in the Canarsie section, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.
The building was unoccupied at the time and incurred minimal damage from the fire, which firefighters quickly put out, Sergeant Mohrmann said.


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
Stock prices in Tokyo declined today.
At the end of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks was down 314.45 points, or 1.35 percent, to 23,060.70.
The index lost 50.43 points on Tuesday.


Hong Kong Guilty Plea
The flamboyant former chairman of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, Ronald Li, has pleaded guilty to two more counts of corruption, according to the Independent Commission Against Corruption.
Mr.
Li, who was given a four-year prison sentence in October on two counts of corruption, told the High Court last week that he illegally accepted shares or commissions from two companies in exchange for supporting or not opposing their listing on the exchange in August 1987.
Mr.
Li, 62 years old, will not be sentenced until the cases of seven other former senior exchange executives, who have been jointly charged with him, are resolved, the court said.
The others have pleaded not guilty to corruption charges.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Bo Jackson Gets Back Into Swing of Things
BO JACKSON took batting practice yesterday for the first time this season and Chicago White Sox Manager JEFF TORBORG said there was a possibility that the outfielder-running back with the injured hip could resume his baseball career next month.
Jackson faced approximately 75 underhanded pitches from teammate FRANK THOMAS in a batting cage beneath Comiskey Park.
Jackson then went on the field and threw for about 10 minutes with pitcher MELIDO PEREZ.


Sports of The Times; Where Had Joe and Ted Gone?
MANY newspapers and nightly newscasts in this country will report the melancholy fact today that Joe DiMaggio failed to get a hit in three times at bat against the Indians in Municipal Stadium in Cleveland, thus ending his record streak of having hit in 56 straight games.
Today, that is, plus 50 years.
I don't know if anyone will have to go and get looped to ease the pain when they hear the news, but they must understand that everything has to end sometime, though just yesterday, after No. 56, The Times reported: "If there was ever a time during his streak DiMaggio seemed unstoppable, it had to be after this game. In July, he was getting hits half the time on his first time at bat."


Elite Athlete Chases More Than a Medal
As Ross Davis lowered his head and began a frantic 100-meter sprint in his wheelchair, he was chasing more than a finish line and a medal.
He did not want a record, but a label.
Davis wanted to prove that he was an elite athlete, not a speed demon on wheels.
It took 18 seconds for Davis to reach the finish line, 2 seconds slower than the best time in his career but 1 second better than any other competitor on this day.
When it was over, Davis had proved to be the fastest man with cerebral palsy in the United States.
But he was less certain about the more significant message he was trying to deliver.


3 Teen-Agers Are Held In Attempted Murders
Three teen-agers were charged with attempted murder because, the police said on Tuesday, they tied up two younger boys and dumped them into a pond and then stole their bikes.
The victims, both from Waterford, are 10 and 13 years old.
The older boy was also struck in the head with a bat as many as three times and was admitted to the intensive-care unit at Lawrence and Memorial Hospital with multiple injuries and fluid in his lungs, the police said.
The younger boy was not seriously injured.


AAR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Trade Is Rumored at Coke: Air Jordan for Mr. Robinson
Can anyone fill Michael Jordan's sneakers?
Maybe not in playing basketball or selling shoes, but the up-and-coming David Robinson might get the chance to see if he can do as well in pitching soft drinks.
The advertising and marketing industries have been abuzz for the last month with talk that Mr.
Jordan will soon halt his two years of endorsements for the Coca-Cola Company for a more lucrative, longer-term deal to swallow Gatorade for the Quaker Oats Company.
Until now, no one has suggested whom Coca-Cola might sign to replace the Chicago Bulls superstar.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 17


Knicks Hoping Rookie Will Help Out on Defense
One of the Knicks' glaring weaknesses last season was the lack of a "defensive stopper" at the small-forward position.
In the coaching vernacular, a stopper is a player with the ability to come off the bench and contain shooters like Reggie Miller and Dominique Wilkins, or frontcourt players who don't post up like A. C. Green and Detlef Schrempf.


LSB Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accounts
*
The Australian Tourist Commission to the London office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles for its European advertising.
The agency said that the other finalists, all in London, were Chiat/Day/Mojo; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, the incumbent; McCann-Erickson, and Lintas Worldwide.
Billings are estimated between $7 million and $10 million.


Market Place; Memorex Telex's Bankruptcy Plan
MEMOREX TELEX, a product of two leveraged buyouts organized by Eli S. Jacobs, said yesterday that it had reached a tentative deal with its bondholders that effectively strips Mr.
Jacobs and other shareowners of any significant interest in the company.
The agreement, which is to lead to a so-called prepackaged bankruptcy filing, hands small damage to the banks, significant losses to senior bondholders and even larger losses to the junior holders, who financed the original leveraged buyout of Memorex from Unisys in 1986.
Telex was bought in a 1988 buyout from public holders.


Mead Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Man Who'll Put the Merger All Together
Of all the tasks that will result from the merger of the Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover, perhaps no other job will be so demanding and unpleasant as that given Joseph G. Sponholz, Chemical Bank's chief financial officer.
As "merger implementation manager," Mr.
Sponholz will not only have to oversee the integration of the two banks into the nation's second- largest banking entity after Citicorp, but willalso have to pare both the staffs and branches of the two present banks, as well as contend with their often different methods of operations and corporate cultures.


Jefferson Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ICF International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Dodgers Nagged by Concerns
One wouldn't think that a team with one of the best records in baseball and the healthier division lead in the National League would have any worries.
Think again. The Dodgers have two big ones: Orel Hershiser and Darryl Strawberry.


Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
The Orion Pictures Corporation says it lost $24.8 million in its March-to-May quarter, mostly because of its discontinued television production unit.
Orion, whose recent hit movies include "Dances with Wolves" and "Silence of the Lambs," said on Monday that the loss from its discontinued television operations totaled $30.2 million.


Orion Pictures Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Brenton Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


VF Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


A Voice From Prison
To the Editor:
Thank you for publishing Jean Harris's moving indictment of Rust v.
Sullivan, the case in which the Supreme Court supported a ban on abortion counseling in federally funded family-planning programs (Op-Ed, June 25).
No one has expressed more powerfully the absurdity -- and the social costs -- of the policy that decision sustains.
Ms.
Harris's intimate involvement with the parenting program at Bedford Hills Correctional Center and her analysis of the problems she observed there make her judgment especially convincing.


Johnny Vergez Baseball Player, 85
Johnny Vergez, an infielder with the New York Giants World Series champions in 1933, died on Monday at the University of California-Davis Medical Center.
He was 85 years old and died of kidney failure, the medical center announced.
In 1933, Vergez hit .271 with 16 home runs and 72 runs batted in in 123 games before missing the final month of the season for surgery on his appendix.
He also missed the World Series because his wife, Helen, became ill.


Abu Dhabi Criticizes Regulators on Bank Closing
Abu Dhabi officials assailed banking regulators today for abruptly closing the Bank of Credit and Commerce International while they were preparing to recapitalize it.
In their first remarks since the bank was seized 11 days ago, Abu Dhabi officials also criticized Price Waterhouse, the bank's auditors, for not uncovering the wrongdoing sooner.
The ruler of Abu Dhabi, Sheik Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahayan; the Abu Dhabi Government, and the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority became majority shareholders last year, when they more than doubled their stake in the bank to 77 percent.


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Summit in London; U.S. 'Determined to Get It Right,' Baker Says of Strategic Arms Pact
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said tonight that Soviet and American experts had yet to work out a technical problem that was blocking the announcement of final agreement on a strategic arms reduction treaty.
At a news conference in London, where he is attending the economic summit meeting of seven leading industrial nations, Mr.
Baker said: "This is a very serious treaty. It deals with the strategic balance for the next 15 or 20 years, and we are determined to get it right."


Grenada Sunburst System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Banc One Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Universal Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fredric P. Sutherland, Environmental Lawyer, 52
Fredric P. Sutherland, president of the Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund, died Sunday in an automobile accident in Fallon, Nev., while vacationing, the fund reported.
He was 52 years old and lived in Mill Valley, Calif.
Mr.
Sutherland was a graduate of San Diego State College and the University of California at Los Angeles Law School.


Abu Dhabi Criticizes Regulators on Bank Closing; Founder Speaks Out
Aga Hassan Abedi, the ailing founder of the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which was seized by international bank regulators this month says "collective management" should take the blame for the bank's failure.
"The collective leadership of the bank should take responsibility," Mr.
Abedi said in an interview that was published here today.
The interview was conducted by Pakistani journalists for the Jang group of newspapers in Karachi; parts of the interview were published in India.


Ponce Federal Bank FSB reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oce-van der Grinten NV reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


First Bond Offer By Clorox Priced
The Clorox Company yesterday made its first public bond offering when it priced $200 million in 10-year notes through underwriters led by J. P. Morgan Securities.
The notes, with a maturity on July 15, 2001, have an 8.8 percent coupon and are priced at 99.5 to yield 8.878 percent, or about 62 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity, just about where traders expected it would be.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Security Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First of America Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Central Bancshares of the South Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Bank System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Net Falls 21.7% At Honeywell
Honeywell Inc., citing a weak market, today reported a 21.7 percent drop in its second-quarter net earnings, to $77.6 million.
The international controls maker, based in Minneapolis, said its earnings per share totaled $1.10, compared with earnings of $99.1 million, or $1.29 a share, for the second quarter of last year, which included $6.7 million from discontinued operations.


Pyramid Executive Helped A.T.&amp; T. Win Big Contract
Monday's announcement that the Treasury Department would buy a $1.4 billion computer system from the American Telephone and Telegraph Company has put the spotlight on the Pyramid Technology Corporation, which is A.T.&amp; T.'s principal subcontractor in the deal.
The award has also highlighted the career of Edward W. Scott Jr., Pyramid's executive vice president and former employee of the Federal Government who negotiated the Treasury deal.
He also negotiated the original agreement that brought A.T.&amp; T. and Pyramid together in October 1989.


About New York
Thomas F. Upton, age 83, graduated from college last month, realizing his grandest ambition.
He forthwith set his next goal: "A Ph.D or 100, whichever comes first."
Mr.
Upton, Fordham University '91, was an Army Colonel, then a businessman.
But he never thought conventionally, even as he played conventional roles in a life that originated in Manhattan and found a winding way to his present home in Forest Hills, Queens.


Recasting the Big Banks; Weakened Giants, in Humbling Mergers, Are Fighting to Regain Their Dominance
A decade ago, the big "money center" banks like Citicorp, Chase Manhattan, Chemical and Manufacturers Hanover were all things to all people.
They dominated America's financial centers of New York, Chicago and San Francisco and were an integral part of the nation's monetary system.
They loosened up on credit when Washington gave the nod, and they pulled on the reins when the policy makers signaled it was time to tighten.
They also catered to an array of customers from multinational corporations and third-world nations to small businesses and passbook savers.
Growth was their religion, and they pursued it with self-confidence, even arrogance.
Other Stars Are Rising
But the proposed merger of Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover, announced on Monday, is the latest evidence that the troubled giants of banking are moving to find a new and narrower role amid stiffening competition and changing rules.


First Citizens Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Union Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Foreign Affairs; Mr. Bush's Fateful Blunder
The real blunderer in the fateful weeks before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait was not Ambassador April Glaspie, but President George Bush -- and/or top aides acting in his name.
The senators who are about to investigate the matter should look beyond the weak messenger to the senders and their message.
Here is what is now evident based on the previously secret telegrams that flashed between Washington and Baghdad one year ago:


Arafat Safe as Car Overturns At High Speed on Iraqi Road
Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestinian Liberation Organization, escaped injury when his car overturned while speeding across Iraq at more than 100 m.p.h, a official of the P.L.O. said today.
A bodyguard threw himself on Mr.
Arafat, who is 61 years old, as the car rolled over.
The guard's arms were broken, the official said.
He said the driver and two others were bruised.


Frames on America
To the Editor:
How anyone could consider as fair comment the bitter and nasty posed photograph, and accompanying text, of a priest holding a crucifix like a gun to the head of another man is beyond me ("Four Frames on America," Op-Ed, July 6).
What a way, in the words with which you preface the photographs, to "mark the Fourth of July weekend." What other group of Americans would you allow to be so misrepresented and insulted on your opinion page?
Happy Independence Day to you, too.
JOHN E. BYRNE Alexandria, Va., July 6, 1991


Sexual Abuse Case of St. John's University Students Goes to Jury


Baseball; It's Indians Again For DiMaggio
Joe DiMaggio spent the 50th anniversary of the last game of his historic 56-game hitting streak watching his hometown team, the Oakland Athletics, play the team his Yankees faced on July 16, 1941, the Cleveland Indians.
"This summer has been quite hectic, and I'm not one who likes to have all this attention," DiMaggio said tonight as he was honored in a pre-game ceremony by the Athletics.
"I've never seen so many interviews I've had over the years being replayed. In fact, I don't watch any of them anymore."


Frank Rizzo of Philadelphia Dies at 70
Former Mayor Frank L. Rizzo collapsed and died of a heart attack today just months after staging a comeback with an upset victory in the Republican mayoral primary.
His death leaves the Republicans without a candidate at a time when the rules for replacing candidates are under litigation in Federal court here.
Mr.
Rizzo, 70 years old, was stricken at lunchtime during a routine day.
An aide found him collapsed on the floor of a bathroom at his downtown campaign headquarters, and after efforts to revive him failed, he was taken to Jefferson University Hospital.
He was pronounced dead at 2:12 P.M.


Chemical Waste Management reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yields Off Slightly At Banks
Yields were down slightly on certificates of deposit and money market accounts for the week ended yesterday.
According to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest rate publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla., the midyear economic recovery so many had expected has not come, despite some rosy economic indicators.
"A full recovery is still six to nine months away," said Robert K. Heady, the publisher.


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Profits Fall At Industrial Concerns
Industrial companies in a variety of fields reported lower second-quarter earnings yesterday, with most of them attributing the decline to a sluggish economy.
"Recessionary conditions in most major markets continued to hamper our performance," said John D. Ong, the chairman of the B. F. Goodrich Company, one of the companies that released net income figures.


First Maryland Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Surgical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Expelled Moroccan Dissident Returns to Paris After Furor
A Moroccan dissident expelled from France as a danger to state security returned to Paris today after a court overturned a Government decision to deport him.
The June 20 expulsion of the writer, Abdelmoumen Diouri, raised a furor in France from rights groups and opposition politicians.
Critics accused the Government of expelling Mr.
Diouri because his forthcoming book accuses Morocco, a French ally, of corruption.


Chemical Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wine Talk
THERE are more people than you might think who would rather visit an orthodontist than a wine shop.
The terrors of the dentist's chair are known to all; the wine shop, for too many would-be customers, is terra incognita.
The image of the imperious wine clerk dies hard.
But, like his counterpart, the snooty headwaiter, the uncooperative clerk is mostly a projection of our own inadequacies.
Good wine salespeople -- inept ones don't usually last too long -- may not have all the answers, but they have a lot of them.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11
President Gorbachev gained support from the leaders of seven big industrialized nations, who agreed to special status for Moscow in the I.M.F. and promised that their chairman would meet each year with the Soviet leader.
Page A1


Coca-Cola Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Citizens Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ameritrust Plans Talks
The Ameritrust Corporation said today that its board had authorized the start of merger talks with interested financial institutions, including the National City Corporation.
National City, also based in Cleveland, said in May that it was prepared to make an $870 million merger offer to Ameritrust that would create the nation's 17th-largest bank holding company.
Ameritrust said afterward that it was withholding a decision to review its options.


Football; Major Effort To Revamp Jet Defense
Clearly, the Jets could score last year.
But the defense couldn't keep teams from scoring, especially late in the game.
The Jets led at halftime in 11 games and at the end of three quarters in seven games, but they finished the season at 6-10.
So the team went out and did something about it.
Of the Jets' 11 1991 draft choices, 7 were defensive players, and all five of their Plan B free-agent pickups play defense.
And today, the emphasis on defense was clear in the new faces that showed up at the Jets' camp, leading up to the 7 P.M. deadline for arrival.


CHRONICLE
VLADIMIR POSNER, the spokesman and commentator for the Soviet broadcasting system, has quit his job and is to become a host with PHIL DONAHUE on a syndicated news talk show.
Mr.
Posner, who said he quit his own television show because he opposed the state directive banning criticism of Soviet President MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV, signed a deal last month with Multimedia Inc., which produces "Donahue." The company would not comment on his salary.


U.S. Is Faulted in Human AIDS Vaccine Tests
The National Institutes of Health failed to safeguard the lives of human subjects adequately in tests of experimental AIDS vaccines that led to three deaths outside the United States, according to an internal report that was disclosed today.
The report singles out vaccine experiments performed by a French scientist, Dr.
Daniel Zagury, in France and Zaire, including research in which three Frenchmen died, officials at the institutes said today.
Dr.
Zagury failed to notify United States officials of the three deaths, the agency found.


Genicom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Football; Hostetler Agrees to Contract
Jeff Hostetler, who will battle Phil Simms for the starting job as the Giants' quarterback, agreed to a contract and drove here today with his family from his home in Morgantown, W. Va.
He was expected on the training-camp practice field Wednesday.
Hostetler and his agent, Robert Bennett, would not disclose details of the contract.
Other agents estimated that he would receive $800,000 this year and $1 million next year.
Hostetler was paid $425,000 last year.


Mercantile Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BRIEFS
*
AEG A.G., Frankfurt, a unit of Daimler-Benz A.G., and Deutsche Aerospace said they had formed a microelectronics group to be based in Stuttgart, Germany. *
Cray Electronics Holdings P.L.C., London, said it had received valid acceptances of 632,853 common shares of SD-Scicon P.L.C., representing 0.31 percent of the firm's ordinary-share capital.


Hawaiian Electric Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Scripps (E.W.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports People: TRACK AND FIELD; Suggestion for Johnson
The organizer of a Swiss track meet next month suggested yesterday that BEN JOHNSON run in a relay race to avoid the humiliation of having to compete in the "B" 100 meters.
"I do not want to humiliate him by relegating him to the B series because of his poor times so far," said RES BRUEGGER, the Swiss organizer of the Aug. 7 Grand Prix meet in Zurich.
"But he is free to race for Canada in the men's 100-meters relay, which will be one of the evening's highlights."


Quotation of the Day
"We are well on the path of actually achieving the type of goals which we've set out to achieve: a solid economic recovery with the unemployment rate moving down to its lowest sustainable, long-term rate, with growth at or close to its maximum long-term sustainable pace, with inflation wholly under control." -- Alan Greenspan, chairman Federal Reserve Board.  [ D1:4. ]


Frank Rizzo of Philadelphia Dies at 70; A 'Hero' and 'Villain'
Mr.
Rizzo was one of those seemingly larger-than-life figures, destined to be hero to some and villain to others.
One view was that the former Police Commissioner and two-term Mayor was the last bastion against threats to middle-class residents of the city's row-house neighborhoods.


Review/Pop; A Very Long Night of Rock In Very Different Styles
Sunday night's show at the Palladium, the opening party for the New Music Seminar, seemed like it had a point to make.
One of the bands, the Nits, comes from the Netherlands and plays cute pop music.
Pop's Cool Love comes from New York and plays psychedelic rock.
Crystal Wa ters, the headliner, is a dance club diva.
Perhaps the idea was to argue the diversity of music.
Or the similarity.
In any case, nothing was made clear.
In practice, the pairings didn't make sense at all, and by the time Crystal Waters ambled out, nearing 3 A.M., it didn't make much difference what the point was.
Ms.
Waters, riding the surprise hit "Gypsy Woman," sang to prerecorded music, which left her no room to improvise.
She has a distinct, acidic voice, but it wasn't used much, and her stage presence, wry and yet exuberant, was wasted.
The whole performance seemed rushed, as if her success had caught her off guard.
Ms.
Waters had a small orchestra on stage, used as a prop, and in between the few other songs she sang (if that's the word for it), the tape kept on repeating snippets of "Gypsy Woman," as if that was all she had to offer.
Her dancers, vogueing and dancing, paid homage to her audience.


Home Federal Savings Bank-Georgia reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Baroque Eclipses Mozart at Aix Festival
Over the years, the summer music festival at Aix-en-Provence has become so identified with the revival of Mozart's operas that it should have good reason to feel smug as the rest of Europe now scrambles to mark the bicentennial of the composer's death.
Since the festival began in 1948 with what has become a legendary version of "Cosi Fan Tutte," its productions of Mozart operas -- at least one every year -- have frequently been acclaimed as innovative.
And this year it is putting on two, "The Marriage of Figaro" and the little-known sacred drama, "The Duty of the First Commandment."


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
A player who gave up the game after his student days and returned to it 40 years later would have to learn some new conventions, but he would also have to adjust to stylistic changes.
Some bids that were forcing in his youth are now non-forcing, and vice versa.
Others that were strong have become weak, although the converse is rare.
An example of the rarity, a new strong bid, is the jump raise of an overcall, which is pre-emptive in serious tournament play.
To show strength and invite game, the modernist jumps in the opponent's suit, an action with no meaning for the traditionalist.


Old Kent Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ketchum Gets Account For Bank of America
Ketchum Advertising San Francisco yesterday won the $25 million Bank of America account after an unexpectedly long seven-month review that several advertising executives in that city called arduous.
Ketchum beat at least three other finalists whose San Francisco offices made pitches: Hal Riney &amp; Partners, J. Walter Thompson and Grey Advertising, the 23-year incumbent.
A bank spokesman declined to elaborate on the reasons for the review or how it was conducted.


Climb the Jagged Mountain
Following are excerpts from a commencement speech that Clarence Thomas, President Bush's nominee to the Supreme Court, gave at Savannah State College on June 9, 1985.
I grew up here in Savannah.
I was born not far from here (in Pinpoint).
I am a child of those marshes, a son of this soil.
I am a descendant of the slaves whose labors made the dark soil of the South productive.
I am the great-great-grandson of a freed slave, whose enslavement continued after my birth.
I am the product of hatred and love -- the hatred of the social and political structure which dominated the segregated, hate-filled city of my youth, and the love of some people -- my mother, my grandparents, my neighbors and relatives -- who said by their actions, "You can make it, but first you must endure."


Roger Revelle, 82, Early Theorist In Global Warming and Geology
Roger Revelle, an early predictor of global warming and a leader in several fields of science, died Monday at the Medical Center of the University of California at San Diego.
He was 82 years old.
The medical center, which he co-founded, said he had died of complications after cardiac arrest.


First Empire State Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Book Notes
A Title Change
Donald Trump, it seems, is finally looking reality right in the eye.


Summit in London: Reporter's Notebook; To Mitterrand, Lateness Is Still Tres Fashionable
Among diplomats here, it seemed an egregious breach of etiquette: three times in the first two days, President Francois Mitterrand of France has been late for official summit sessions.
On Monday afternoon, and again this morning, he was the last of the seven leaders to turn up at Lancaster House, the 19th-century hall where the meetings are taking place.
On Monday, his tardiness prompted a brief alert among security officials who weren't sure where he was.


Chefs Come and Chefs Go, But for Puck, the Flavor Lingers
SPAGO means "string" in Italian, and sometimes spaghetti.
But on the fickle, frenzied Los Angeles dining scene, it stands for success.
After nearly 10 years in business, Spago, a simple, tiled, whitewashed dining room with picture windows overlooking Sunset Boulevard in West Hollywood, remains fully booked.
But not so Wolfgang Puck, its energetic, trend-setting creator and driving force.
He still has a little spare time.
Otherwise, how could he possibly add yet another restaurant to his portfolio, which already includes three other highly successful enterprises, Chinois on Main in Santa Monica, Eureka in West Los Angeles and Postrio in San Francisco?


Economic Scene; Competition In a Hothouse
IF the smaller fry in the long-distance phone business cannot keep pace with A.T.&amp; T., is it Washington's job to fix the race?
When the Justice Department forced the breakup of the national telephone monopoly in 1984, the Federal Communications Commission assumed that less competition would eventually mean more -- that A.T.&amp; T. needed to be hobbled, lest it reach out and crush someone.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Gerome Ragni, an actor and the co-author of the 1967 musical "Hair," misidentified Stephanie Williams Ragni.
She is Mr.
Ragni's widow, not his mother.


Winnie Mandela Given Right To Appeal Six-Year Sentence
Winnie Mandela won a reprieve today from a six-year prison sentence for kidnapping and assault when a judge gave her permission to appeal her conviction.
Mrs.
Mandela, the wife of Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress, smiled when Justice M. S. Stegmann delivered the decision after a brief hearing in the Witwatersrand Supreme Court.


STRAUSS OPPOSES BROAD SOVIET AID
Robert S. Strauss, the Ambassador-designate to Moscow, said today that he was opposed to providing the Soviet Union with a large-scale aid program, arguing at his Senate confirmation hearing that the Soviet Government remained too unwieldly to digest large amounts of assistance.
At a Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearing marked by joviality and soft questioning, the former Democratic Party chairman gave a skeptical assessment of the prospects for a smooth Soviet transition to democracy and capitalist development.
He stressed that American business executives were justifiably cautious about investing in the Soviet Union.


Dissident Held for 30 Years In a Castro Plot Is Released
Mario Chanes de Armas, one of Cuba's longest-held political prisoners, was released today after 30 years in prison on charges of plotting to kill President Fidel Castro, the Mexican press agency Notimex said.
In a dispatch from Havana, the agency said Mr.
Chanes, who was jailed by Mr.
Castro's Government in 1961, was freed 24 hours before his sentence was set to expire on Wednesday.


Mutual Benefit Seized By New Jersey Officials
New Jersey took control of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company by court order today, and the state Insurance Commissioner attributed the company's tottering finances to a run on the company coffers by panicky policyholders.
"No company in the world can meet its financial obligations if they are all presented at once," said Insurance Commissioner Samuel F. Fortunato, who said cashed-in policies by jittery customers would hit $1 billion by the end of the month if not stanched immediately.


Primerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Likud, Levy Is Often Odd Man Out
David Levy says he never set out to be the one moderate in a Government whose other members are all staunch right-wingers.
As Israel's Foreign Minister, he is forever butting heads with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and others, and is attacked and maligned for trying to push Israel an inch forward here, another inch there, toward the American proposal for regional peace.


Syria's Move Toward Peace Talks: Is It Primarily to Improve U.S. Ties?
For the first time since Israel seized part of its territory more than 24 years ago, Syria appears to have signaled a willingness to take part in direct peace negotiations with the Israelis as part of an American-organized Middle East conference.
That is why President Bush has called the letter he received on Sunday from the Syrian President "a breakthrough" in Middle East diplomacy.
The exact wording of President Hafez al-Assad's letter has not yet been made public, but from what Mr.
Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d have been saying, the Syrians have apparently departed from the "rejectionist" Arab camp, which had refused to negotiate directly with Israel.
The Syrians have moved much closer to the views of the Egyptians, the only Arabs who have signed a peace treaty with Israel.


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stanley Salzman, Architect-Teacher At Pratt, Dies at 67
Stanley Salzman, an architect and industrial designer who received many honors as a teacher in both fields, died on Monday at the New York University-Bellevue Medical Center.
He was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of stomach cancer, a family spokesman said.


Teco Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Centura Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Personal Health
FOR many of the nation's nearly seven million cancer survivors, the most challenging problems began after they had successfully completed treatment.
Instead of a joyous re-entry into the world they had enjoyed before cancer struck, they once again found themselves victims -- this time of fear, ostracism, lost relationships, job discrimination and inability to get medical insurance.
"The cancer stigma still lives on," said Bill Soiffer, a 15-year survivor of Hodgkin's disease, a cancer of the lymph system.


Atmel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A.M.A. Is Planning Reports Sponsored By Drug Companies
The American Medical Association has announced plans to publish single-topic medical reports sponsored by drug companies.
The reports would include articles rejected by the Journal of the American Medical Association and its specialty journals, transcripts of symposiums and articles from other journals that a drug company might want to send to a larger audience, the association said.


G.E. Net Climbs by 3.7% Despite Weakness at NBC
The General Electric Company reported an earnings increase of 3.7 percent in the second quarter, bucking the recession and weakness at its NBC broadcasting network.
Earnings rose to $1.13 billion, or $1.30 a share, from $1.09 billion, or $1.22 a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Sales in the quarter increased 2.8 percent, to $14.8 billion from $14.4 billion.


Henley Group Sells A Methanol Plant
Fletcher Challenge Ltd. of New Zealand has become the world's largest methanol producer with the purchase of Cape Horn Methanol Ltd. from the Henley Group Inc., Henley said today.
Fletcher Challenge paid $45 million in cash and $45 million in its stock for Cape Horn, which produces methanol from natural gas in southern Chile.
Fletcher also assumes about $190 million in liabilities for the plant from Henley, based here.


Sports People: BASKETBALL; Arrivederci Theus?
The Nets are near an agreement to release shooting guard REGGIE THEUS from the final year of his contract, team officials said yesterday.
The 33-year-old Theus has reportedly been offered a three-year, estimated $4 million deal with Ranger Varese in the Italian League.
New Jersey was not ready to extend Theus's contract until after the 1991-1992 season, and did not want to stand in his way, according to JOHN TUDHOPE, a team spokesman.


Dinkins Gets Way on Bill For Gun Ban
The leadership of the New York City Council, giving in to Mayor David N. Dinkins after months of wrangling, said yesterday that they would pass a ban on assault rifles with penalties even tougher than the ones the Mayor had sought.
Apparently succumbing to a barrage of negative publicity in a city buffeted by murders and other crimes committed by people with guns, the Council leadership also seemed to be trying to show that they were tough on crime and not beholden to the powerful gun lobby.


From Dinkins to Cuomo: A Hint, or a Warning, on '92
In his trademark elliptical way, Mayor David N. Dinkins gave Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo a taste of his own medicine yesterday: musing aloud on the political pitfalls of any greater role by the State Financial Control Board in overseeing New York City's troubled finances.
When Mr.
Cuomo muses on the issue, he repeatedly says that his goal is "cooperation, not control" -- a not-so-subtle way of reminding the world that control is a possibility.
But yesterday the Mayor reminded the Governor that while
his
goal was friendship, not feuding, feuding was a possibility that could produce trouble for any Presidential aspirations the Governor might have.


Freddie Mac's Net Rises 13%
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, the secondary mortgage market company, said that its earnings rose 13 percent in the second quarter, largely because of rising interest earnings.
The company, known as Freddie Mac, reported record earnings of $133 million, or $2.21 a share, for the quarter ended June 30, compared with $118 million, or $1.97 a share, for the similar period last year.


Intergraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Japan Air Selects Pratt &amp; Whitney
The Japan Airlines Company, Japan's largest airline, said it had decided to adopt Pratt &amp; Whitney Inc. engines for the McDonnell Douglas MD-11 planes that J.A.L. will begin operating in 1994.
J.A.L. said that it had ordered 10 MD-11's with options for 10 more last year, and that Pratt &amp; Whitney's PW-4460 model engines would be installed on all of the planes.
Delivery of the planes, which seat 250 to 350 people, is to start in September 1993.
J.A.L. said it had selected the Pratt &amp; Whitney engines after considering ones made by the General Electric Company and Rolls-Royce P.L.C. of Britain.
The airline said the total cost to purchase 20 MD-11's would be about $2.2 billion.


Difficult to Diagnose Who Is Dangerous
To the Editor:
The similar circumstances surrounding the slaying of Alexis Welsh near Central Park (news article, June 9) and the killing two years ago of Dr.
Kathryn Hinnant in her office at Bellevue Hospital point up our continuing failure to deal appropriately with major mental illness.


First Tennessee National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Publisher of Military Newspapers Rejects an Ad About Gay Troops
Three weekly newspapers widely read by American military personnel have rejected an advertisement praising gay soldiers in the Persian Gulf war because the publisher said the armed forces had no homosexuals, the American Civil Liberties Union said today.
Yet only weeks ago, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney acknowledged that there were many homosexuals in the military despite Defense Department policy barring them from the armed forces.


Applied Magnetics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Let's Build on New York City's Promising Math Test Scores
To the Editor:
Over the years, I have seen evidence of a slow and steady erosion in the mathematics preparation of students entering Queensborough Community College.
Eighty-five percent of the students who enrolled at our institution last fall required mathematics remediation before beginning college-level course work.


Comerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A correction in this space yesterday referred incompletely to dates for a children's swimming instruction program at New York City pools.
The first session began last Wednesday; a second session begins on Aug. 2, with registration on Aug. 1.


Milk Quotas for U.S. Dairies Make No Sense
To the Editor:
Can you imagine the United States Government requiring the registration of every dairy farmer in the nation for the purpose of assigning quotas that dictate how much milk each one can sell?
The Livestock, Dairy and Poultry subcommittee of the House Agriculture Committee has just approved such a bill.
In exchange for this Government-imposed straitjacket, dairy farmers would receive a 25 percent increase in the milk-support price.


A Long Road From Damascus
In President Bush's judgment, Syria's apparent agreement to deal directly with Israel at a Middle East peace conference is a breakthrough.
That sanguine assessment will soon be tested by Secretary of State Baker, who is off today on yet another exhausting swing through the region, his fifth since the end of the Persian Gulf war.
But this is diplomacy by wing and a prayer; the real breakthrough needs to occur in Jerusalem, where a wary Israeli Government resists any concessions that might result in surrendering occupied lands for a risky peace.


Keycorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Upjohn Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dexter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jefferson Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Maryland Unit's $134 Million Issue
A $134 million revenue bond issue by the Maryland Community Development Administration was tentatively priced yesterday with a maximum yield of 7.45 percent for bond due in 2032 through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The tax-exempt financing is divided into $75 million of bonds, which for some investors may be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax and $58.9 million that are not, underwriters said.


MacMillan Bloedel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Colorado National Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Volcano Stills City by Base In Philippines
This once-thriving city of nearly 300,000 people has begun to look like the ghost town that many residents fear it is now destined to become.
Hastily scrawled "For Sale" signs are set in the windows of shops and restaurants that have been shuttered since early last month, when a volcano showered Angeles with a dense layer of ash and forced the evacuation of the area's largest employer, the American-run Clark Air Base.


Citizens Banking reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


L.I. Man, 20, Is Arrested in Fatal Ambush
A 20-year-old man was arrested last night and charged in a daring ambush and robbery in April near Grand Central Terminal in which one man was killed and two others were wounded, the police said.
The suspect was identified as Phong Nguyen, of Medford, L.I.
He was charged with murder, criminal possession of a weapon and auto theft, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


States From Virginia to Maine Vote to Study Tougher Smog Curbs
Representatives of all the states from Virginia to Maine agreed yesterday to explore adopting the strict California standards on automobile pollution.
Meeting in Boston, the representatives from 12 states and the District of Columbia said they supported the standards.
The six New England states, New York and New Jersey had previously pledged to adopt the California standards, and the action yesterday signified an even broader agreement.


Navy Jet Bid Will Be Led By Grumman
The Grumman Corporation said yesterday that it would team with the Lockheed Corporation and the Boeing Company in a bid to build a new generation of carrier-based bombers for the Navy.
Grumman, which is based in Bethpage, L.I., said it would lead the team's efforts to build the new plane, which is being called the A-X.
The plane would replace the fleet of A-6 Intruders built for the Navy by Grumman starting in the 1960's.


Eating Well
JOAN DYE GUSSOW, author, lecturer, professor, gardener and cook, has been trying to change the way Americans eat for years.
Once a lone voice pushing the virtues of fresh, seasonal, locally grown food, Dr.
Gussow's views have become part of the mainstream.
Now she is preaching the delights of simple foods simply prepared.
"The best Italian food," she told the audience at the 20th anniversary conference of the Center for Science in the Public Interest last month in Washington, "is often laughably simple, a really ripe tomato and fresh mozzarella on a slice of crusty bread, or pasta cooked 10 minutes and dressed with an uncooked tomato, basil and garlic sauce."


Thomas Wins Support From Nunn for Court
Senator Sam Nunn announced today that he would support President Bush's nominee to the Supreme Court, Clarence Thomas.
Senator Nunn, a Georgia Democrat, also said he would formally introduce Judge Thomas, a native of Georgia, when Senate Judiciary Committee hearings are held in September.
"I'll be proud to be with him there," Senator Nunn said.


Review/Pop; Fela Spreads the Word in Song and Sermon at the Apollo
Fela Anikulapo Kuti, who is one of the most important public figures in African music, likes to preach.
On Monday night at the Apollo Theater, an introduction to a song stretched into a 30-minute lecture touching on African medicine, the Gulf war ("When Iran ran, Kuwait was waiting, so Iraq rocked them too"), sex, pollution, Black Muslims, poverty and his own remarkable physical condition ("I am 53, but I never get tired and my wrinkles are healing. I'm getting younger.").
But the song that followed, "M.A.S.S." (Music Against Second Slavery) was in proportion; it lasted more than an hour as members of the 30-person troupe, Egypt 80, took instrumental and dance solos.
And the inspired music was as confident, eccentric and earthy as the speech.
It was a leisurely concert, with Mr.
Anikulapo Kuti -- universally known as Fela -- leading the band for three hours, following a half-hour of warmup, including a tune sung by the bandleader's young son, Olaweseun.


U.S. Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


John P. Dodd Is Dead; Lighting Designer, 50
John P. Dodd, a lighting designer for theater, dance and music, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 50 years old and lived in Manhattan.
A friend, Michael Smith, said he died of AIDS.


Yeshiva Files for Bankruptcy To Avert Foreclosure Auction
A yeshiva facing the loss of the Westchester County site it bought from New York City in 1977 but has not paid for filed for bankruptcy today to avoid a foreclosure auction scheduled for Wednesday.
Rabbi Abraham Blum, who heads the K'Hal Adas Kashau yeshiva in Bedford, said, "We declared bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy code simply to block the auction and to make sure our people are not put out on the street."


Ohio Edison reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


UJB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cooking and Sweating Together in the Kitchen and the Park
The basement kitchen of St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn had not seen such commotion in years as about 20 young people from six countries became chefs for the night and prepared native dishes.
They took over the kitchen Monday night after a hard day's work using pickaxes and shovels, digging up dirt, clearing soil and planting trees for the Urban Peace Trees program.
The program is an environmental project sponsored by a private American group, the Earthsteward's Network, to bring together young people from different countries.


BB&amp;T Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
ANTON MOSIMANN, one of Britain's best-known chefs, failed to sell one of his prized possessions: a Lincoln limousine built for Joseph P. Kennedy when he became the United States Ambassador to Britain in 1938.
The car failed to attract the minimum price, $50,000, at an auction by Christie's in England on Monday.


Summit in London; Excerpts From Communique: What the 7 Decided
Following are excerpts from the political communique issued today by the Group of Seven at its summit conference here:
With the East-West confrontation of the last four decades behind us, the international community must now build on this new spirit of cooperation not only in the Middle East but wherever danger and conflict threaten or other challenges must be met. . . .


Profits Fall At Citicorp In Quarter
As a second wave of big banks reported earnings yesterday, results for the second quarter continued to be generally weak.
Citicorp, the nation's largest bank, said that its earnings for the period plummeted 83 percent.
On the West Coast, Wells Fargo and Security Pacific also reported sharp declines for the three months.
Meanwhile, Banc One, a big Midwest bank, showed a gain.


Outboard Marine Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Miscellany
*
Coors Brewing Company, Golden, Colo., has agreed to pay New York State $100,000 in a settlement with Attorney General Robert Abrams over a dispute about its "Won't slow you down" slogan for Coors Light.
The move follows an earlier agreement between Coors and the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, in which the company agreed to withdraw the phrase from its advertising.
Mr.
Abrams said that Coors would also stop using its "silver bullet" jet and race car in television commercials. *
Nike Inc., Beaverton, Ore., has become the first corporate member of the Association of Black Sporting Goods Professionals.
The company's move to join the year-old group is the latest in a series of steps the country's largest athletic-shoe company has taken in the wake of criticism from black orgaanizations about its record on hiring members of monorities.


Goodrich (B.F.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


All share earnings have been restated to reflect the 5-for-4 common stock split in the second quarter of 1991.Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Inter-Regional Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


People
*
Robert F. Dreveny Jr., 37, and Rory Monaghan, 38, have been promoted to senior vice presidents at Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago, from vice presidents.
They also retain their posts as creative directors.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about new terms for the acquisition of Businessland Inc. by JWP Inc. misstated the percentage of Businessland shares tendered under the old terms.
It was more than three-quarters.


Eagle Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Finning Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Summit in London; 7 Nations Voice Support for Gorbachev
On the eve of their potentially pivotal meeting with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the heads of the seven leading industrialized democracies voiced support today for his reform efforts, agreed to special status for Moscow in the International Monetary Fund and promised that their chairman would meet each year with the current Soviet leader.
But as Mr.
Gorbachev arrived in London, reportedly with fresh economic proposals in his briefcase, Western leaders were still divided on just how far they were willing to go to help the Soviet Union, short of immediate large-scale infusions of cash, which they have all ruled out as impractical.


Sports People: FOOTBALL; Alzado Undergoes Tests
LYLE ALZADO, the former All-Pro defensive end who has been battling inoperable brain cancer, underwent tests yesterday after being hospitalized for possible dehydration, his agent said.
Alzado was admitted to an undisclosed hospital in the Los Angeles area on Sunday after two days in which he could not hold down food or liquids, said his agent, Greg Campbell.


Questions Raised On Northrop Deals
The Northrop Corporation continued to receive Government contracts while it was under suspension for fraud, a Congressional report says.
The report, released on Monday by the House Committee on Government Operations, said the military contractor was given 161 subcontracts during the suspension, which was imposed in 1989 and lifted last September.
In several cases, the Air Force testified, Northrop's suspension had been waived because the service needed to buy equipment from a Northrop division that held proprietary rights to the product.
The House investigation began after Northrop pleaded guilty last year to 34 counts of fraud and agreed to pay fines of $17 million.
The panel's major findings were released last month, including recommendations for harsher punishment of wayward military contractors.


New Software From Data General
The Data General Corporation, one of the few bright spots in an otherwise bleak high-technology picture, today introduced 30 communications, office and network management software products for its Aviion computer line.
The software allows users of a wide range of computer equipment from competitors like I.B.M., Apple Computer Inc. and the Digital Equipment Corporation to connect to a Data General Aviion computer.


Milk Quotas for U.S. Dairies Make No Sense; Farm-Bred Prices
To the Editor:
On "The Death of a Farm" by Amy Jo Keifer (Op-Ed, June 30): It's amazing that essential people like farmers are losing their farms because they cannot receive an adequate price for their crops.
All other producers in our society set the price for their products, and so do wholesalers and retailers.
The utilities base their rates on cost plus a fair return on their investment.


Lilly and Upjohn Earnings Climbed in Second Quarter
Two big drug makers, Eli Lilly &amp; Company and the Upjohn Company, reported increased second-quarter earnings yesterday as sales of their products increased worldwide.
Lilly reported a 16 percent rise in second-quarter profits; Upjohn posted a 12 percent rise.


State Street Boston reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


As Tensions Ease, Algerian Army Lifts Five-Week-Old State of Siege
The Algerian Army announced today that it was lifting a curfew imposed throughout much of the country since early June.
The curfew was imposed after Islamic fundamentalist opposition members provoked a series of strikes and demonstrations, bringing the army into the streets and leading to at least 60 deaths and nearly 5,000 arrests.


Albanian Oil Deal For Occidental
The Occidental Petroleum Corpration and Albania signed an agreement giving the company the right to search for oil off part of the Balkan country's Adriatic coastline.
Under the agreement, Occidental, based in Los Angeles, will also underwrite the training of some Albanian oil workers.
On the New York Stock Exchange today, Occidental's shares were unchanged, closing at $22.
Albania is thought to be rich in offshore oil reserves but unable to develop most of them without foreign help.
Decades of isolation and mismanagement under the former Stalinist regime have crippled Albania's industries.
The country began seeking foreign aid and investment last year, after the ruling Communists expressed a commitment to democracy and a free-market economy.


Baybanks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Chip Adds to Net at Advanced Micro
Buoyed by strong sales of its new 386 microprocessors, Advanced Micro Devices Inc. reported higher sales and what it called "solid profitability" in the second quarter.
The Sunnyvale, Calif., semiconductor company also said today that Siemens A.G., the German electronics giant, was considering the sale of its 9.9 percent stake in Advanced Micro, which it has held since 1977.


Lance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


Dispute Over '90 Census Heads for Courts, Again
In 1988, New York City went to court to force the Federal Government to adjust the 1990 census count using a procedure that had never been tried.
Today, the city is back in court, but this time as an advocate of a procedure that has now been found by Government experts to improve the count for most of the nation.
While Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher was making his rounds on Capitol Hill, defending his refusal to adjust the census before a friendly panel of Senators and a somewhat more skeptical House subcommittee, lawyers for New York and other cities were beginning their review of a new mountain of material that may bolster their case that their clients have been shortchanged in the census.


Baseball; Batting Woes Sinking Yankees
Was it the anticipation of facing Oakland?
The relative letdown after reaching .500?
Just bad hitting?
Stump Merrill slumped in his chair today and addressed all the questions, but he focused first on the Yankees' sudden hitting slump, which has taken on significant proportions.


The Pop Life
Out of the Mainstream
"I always seem to be singing against the grain," Morrissey said the other day.
"Even though I've been reasonably well known for quite a long time, I still can't get a record on daytime radio or on MTV. I know I will never have a hit single in America.


A Fund for a Museum in Leningrad
It was not quite a visit to the old neighborhood that took Katusha Davison to Leningrad, where she had never lived, but rather a journey into family history, to a town house where her family lived for a century and a half before the revolution.
The journey was more than sentimental because, after two generations of separation, Mrs.
Davison was renewing a family role in the maintenance of the house, which in May was rededicated, this time as the new home for the Leningrad State Museum of Theater and Music.
Before her marriage to Daniel P. Davison, she was Catherine (Katusha) Cheremetoff, the French-born daughter of Count and Countess Basil Cheremetoff, an emigre family that fled Russia after the Bolshevik takeover.


This Sommelier in Paris (Tiens!) Is an Englishman
HERE along the banks of the Seine, overlooking Notre Dame and containing one of the most illustrious wine cellars in all of France, sits La Tour d'Argent .
With a history that spans more than 400 years and bottles that date to the time of Napoleon, the restaurant has long prided itself on perfectly preserved wines of the finest vintages.
Indeed, in a mark of its unabashed pedigree and persuasion, the cellar contains no fewer than 350,000 bottles, every last one of which, aside from a few vintage ports, is French.


New Signaling Glitch Could Delay Atlantis
The space agency solved one problem with the space shuttle Atlantis today but found another that could delay next week's launching, a spokeswoman said.
Atlantis is scheduled to carry five astronauts on a satellite-delivery mission on Tuesday, with the countdown starting Saturday.


Football; Rogers Getting a Fresh Start With Bills
Reggie Rogers rolled out of bed this morning for his third day here at the Buffalo Bills' training camp.
His muscles were sore but his mind was sharp.
"This is the first time I can remember, since my sophomore season in college," he said later, softly, "coming to practices without a hangover."


Los Angeles Takes First Step To Limit Police Chief's Term
The City Council took the first step today to limit the police chief's term, starting the process of Chief Daryl F. Gates's retirement and the selection of a replacement.
The president of the Council, John Ferraro, introduced a motion to schedule a special election for voters to approve changes in the chief's job, as recommended by an independent commission investigating the department after the beating of a black motorist by white police officers on March 3.


Services Already in Place In the New York Region
While most states are scrambling to provide federally mandated preschool programs for handicapped 3- to 5-year-olds, Connecticut and New Jersey have had programs in place for a decade and New York is working to bring order to its two-year-old program.
New York is making the transition to a program run by local school districts, and away from a system in which family courts ordered services on a case-by-case basis.
In the dozen or more years that the court system was in place, state educators say they had no authority to set rates and standards for various providers of services and could not monitor the programs to make sure children were receiving appropriate services.


LTV and U.S. Agency Agree On Paying of Pension Fund
The LTV Corporation said today that it had reached a tentative agreement on payments to its severely underfunded pension funds.
The issue has been a sticking point in the steelmaker's efforts to emerge from bankruptcy protection.
But under a tentative deal with the Federal pension insurance agency, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, LTV would be allowed to pay $950 million into the steelworker pension plans in return for smaller annual payments in the future.
Approval from creditors, however, is still needed.


Spilled Herbicide Nears California Reservoir


Net of Federal Express Falls
The Federal Express Corporation said its earnings for the most recent fiscal year plunged 95 percent, as the recession and expansion costs hurt profits.
Net income in the fiscal year that ended on May 31 came to $5.9 million, or 11 cents a share, on revenues of $7.7 billion, the company said on Monday.
In the 1990 fiscal year, the company earned $115.8 million, or $2.18 a share, on revenues of $7 billion.


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about Henry Lee Munson, a retired fund-raising executive, misstated his age.
He was 79.


Public &amp; Private; Rust, Roe and Reality
I never thought I would have a good word to say about Rust v.
Sullivan, the ridiculous Supreme Court decision upholding regulations barring doctors in federally financed clinics from discussing abortion with pregnant patients.
But the advantage is in the adjective.
It seems to me that many Americans who paid no mind to abortion rights have been perplexed by the ridiculous nature of the ruling. (It has also generated terrific editorial cartoons, cartoonists being among our finest commentators. I can't decide which I prefer, the one of the doctor with a gavel in his mouth, or the one of the clinic sign: The Supreme Court has prohibited us from informing you that having an ABORTION IS A LEGAL ALTERNATIVE.)


Security Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rizzo Dies in Midst of Philadelphia Campaign


MAINE LEGISLATURE APPROVES BUDGET
After 16 days of intense negotiations and an on-and-off government shutdown, Maine legislators adopted a budget today for the 1992 and 1993 fiscal years.
Gov.
John R. McKernan, a Republican who had wrangled with the Democratic-led Legislature over spending, taxes and workers' compensation insurance laws, is expected to sign the two-year $3.2 billion budget, pending final adjustments in a proposal to revise the workers' compensation laws.


Scripps Net Shows Gain
The E. W. Scripps Company said today that it earned $19.9 million in the second quarter, after the media company lost $162,000 in the comparable period last year.
The loss last year was related to payments made to the Persis Corporation in an agreement to terminate joint operations between Scripps' Knoxville (Tenn.) News-Sentinel and the Persis-owned Knoxville Journal.


EXECUTIVES
*
Birmingham Steel Corp., Birmingham, Ala., announced the following board and management changes: James A. Todd Jr. has been named chairman, retaining the title of chief executive.
He succeeds E. Mandell de Windt, who will become chairman of the board's executive committee.
Phillip E. Casey has been named vice chairman, and will continue as chief financial officer.
Paul H. Ekberg has been named president and chief operating officer. *
Consumers Union, Yonkers, the publisher of Consumer Reports magazine, named Josephine Lerro associate director-administration, and Conrad Harris chief financial officer.


Nationwide Revolution in Education Is Giving Handicapped a Headstart
In a landmark expansion of an educational mission that traditionally begins with kindergarten, all the states but two have committed themselves to providing extensive free preschool programs for handicapped children from 3 to 5 years old.
From Hawaii to Maine, school districts are identifying children who need special help and putting together teams of specialists to provide it.
By July 1, all the states but Oregon and Alabama had qualified for Federal subsidies that will deliver millions of dollars to help pay for special classes and other services for children with learning disabilities, speech or language impairments, retardation or severe physical or emotional problems.


60-Minute Gourmet
MARINADES can make the difference between great barbecued food and something that is just acceptable.
One can have lots of fun adding different flavors with various combinations of oils, vinegars, fruits and herbs, especially at this time of year when supermarket produce bins are so abundant.
Marinades also serve a tenderizing function.
There are two ways to tenderize a piece of meat.
One is to damage it physically: pounding, piercing, grinding, cutting.
All of these break down fibers.


Review/Music; At Ease With Mozart, As If in a Living Room
For better and for worse, the Mostly Mozart chamber music concert that Isaac Stern, Yefim Bronfman and three of their younger colleagues played on Monday evening had the quality of an informal get-together in one of the players' living rooms.
The better side of that approach is an innocence and intimacy that overcame the vastness of Avery Fisher Hall.
But that homeyness sometimes came at a cost in the kind of freedom, real or illusory, that one hears in readings that have been arduously rehearsed for public consumption.
That is not to suggest that the performances of four Mozart works were haphazard.
But the players were well into the program before the glaze of professionalism melted into a sense of real engagement and interplay beyond what one gets from simply playing what is on the page.


INSIDE
Syria's Move, and Motives
In accepting an American plan, Syria has apparently left the "rejectionist" Arab camp opposing direct talks with Israel.
News analysis, page A6.


ACM Managed Multi-Mart reports earnings for As of May 31


Insurance Woes Are No Disaster
Is the life insurance industry another savings and loan fiasco in the making?
That fear was tripped when New Jersey insurance regulators took control yesterday of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, the nation's 18th-largest life insurer, ending withdrawals by panicky policyholders that threatened to bankrupt the company.
Earlier this year state regulators were also forced to take over large, failing life insurers in Virginia, New York and California.


Yeshiva Files for Bankruptcy To Avert Foreclosure Auction
A yeshiva facing the loss of the Westchester County site it bought from New York City in 1977 but has not paid for filed for bankruptcy today to avoid a foreclosure auction scheduled for Wednesday.
Rabbi Abraham Blum, who heads the K'Hal Adas Kashau yeshiva in Bedford, said, "We declared bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy code simply to block the auction and to make sure our people are not put out on the street."


2 Rebel Armies Create Chaos As Colombia Longs for Peace
No celebrations broke out the other day when geologists confirmed a large oil discovery that doubled Colombia's proven oil reserves.
The remote eastern department of Casanare, site of the Cusiana oilfield, was without power because of guerrilla sabotage.


Learonal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Sports People: PRO WRESTLING; Steroid Use Admitted
VINCE MCMAHON, the owner of the Worldwide Wrestling Federation, admitted to having used steroids that he received from DR.
GEORGE T. ZAHORIAN 3D, who was convicted last month of illegally selling the body-building drugs.
"I used a steroid that I got from Dr. Zahorian very briefly about three and a half or four years ago," said McMahon, who is not a wrestler himself but does do some body building.
He used the steroid only once, he said.


Grainger (W.W.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Riegle Offers A Third Bill On Banking
The chairman of the Senate Banking Committee introduced a plan today to revive the ailing banking system that would keep far more contraints on the industry than either the version proposed by the Bush Administration or the bill adopted last month by the House Banking Committee.
The outlines of the legislation emerged last week, but today Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr., Democrat of Michigan, provided details, which he said represent "a consensus that accommodates the broad views of many of my colleagues."


First Albany Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cooker Restaurant Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Johnson Controls reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dutch Bank To Buy Talman
The Dutch banking company ABN AMRO Holding N.V. said today that it planned to buy the Talman Home Federal Savings and Loan Association, the largest savings bank in Illinois, for $430 million.
The price includes a $330 million infusion to enable Talman to meet regulatory requirements, and $100 million, or $10 a share, for Talman's shareholders.


Summit in London; Gorbachev's Big Gamble
In his special plea to the world's industrial powers, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is attempting one of the most ambitious strategies of an adaptive career: he is trying to move the withered economic heart of the Soviet domestic agenda into the theater of global politics, where he flourishes.
He has no such touch at home, where he faces cynicism toward himself and his reconstruction program.
In turning to the world forum, he is seeking a morale lift from the world at large for the sagging national spirit, as much as traditional foreign aid.


2d-Quarter Record Net At Merrill
In a sign of the continuing rebound on Wall Street, record second-quarter profits were reported yesterday by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's largest brokerage firm, and by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, the brokerage subsidiary of the Primerica Corporation.
Merrill reported a second-quarter net income of $184.3 million, or $1.58 a share, on revenues of $3.1 billion.
That compared with 1990 results of $74.1 million, or 64 cents a share, on revenues of $2.8 billion.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Alabama Housing Finance Authority is tentatively offering $47.3 million in tax-exempt single-family mortgage revenue refunding bonds with a maximum yield of 7.125 percent for an issue due 2011 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs.
Yields on serial bonds range from 4.9 percent in 1992 to 6.6 percent in 2002.
For longer maturities a bond due 2006 yields 7 percent, while a bond due 2011, which makes sinking fund payments and has an average life of 3.5 years, yields 6.5 percent.
Underwriters expect a triple-A rating by Moody's and S.&amp; P. Common Stock *
Medchem Products Inc., Woburn, Mass., a manufacturer of biomedical products used in surgical markets, is offering 2.25 million common shares at $12.50 a share through Furman Selz Inc. *
Smith's Food and Drug Centers Inc., Salt Lake City, is offering globally 4.6 million common shares, with 3.8 million to be sold in the United States, at $38 a share through Goldman, Sachs. *
Water Technologies Corp., Plymouth, Minn., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for 800,000 common shares through Equity Securities Trading Co. and Hayne, Miller &amp; Farni Inc.


Scott Paper reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Jury Is Told That Swaggart Spread Rumors on Rival Out of Jealousy
The defamation trial of the evangelist Jimmy Swaggart opened today with the plaintiff's lawyer saying Mr.
Swaggart had spread rumors out of jealousy.
The lawyer, Hunter Lundy, told the jury that Mr.
Swaggart had felt threatened by the rising popularity of his client, the evangelist Marvin Gorman.
Mr.
Swaggart was able to ruin Mr.
Gorman's ministry by spreading rumors about the preacher's sex life, the lawyer charged.


Mellon Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Treasury Issues Little Changed
The semiannual report by Alan Greenspan to Congress on the economy and monetary policy, normally an event of some note in the credit markets, was greeted with a yawn yesterday, and prices of Treasury securities were little changed in very slow trading.
In his remarks to a subcommittee of the House Banking Committee, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board painted a portrait of an economy climbing out of recession while inflationary pressures continued to moderate.


Weicker Goes On TV to Press For Income Tax
In an unusual prime-time televised speech from the Governor's mansion, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. conceded tonight that his budget plans had failed to win over the legislature and appealed to residents to end Connecticut's drawn-out fiscal crisis by pressuring their representatives to accept an income tax.
He appeared to be digging in his heels in his battle with the legislature and gave no hint that he was ready to drop his insistence on a plan that most of the lawmakers have never even come close to accepting.


Power Company's 30-Year Bonds
The Pennsylvania Power and Light Company is offering $150 million in 30-year bonds through the underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The 9 3/8 percent first mortgage bonds due to reach maturity on July 1, 2021, are priced at 99.541 to yield 9.42 percent, or about 98 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percntage point.


Turkish Diplomat in Greece Wounded in Car-Bomb Attack


Baseball; Mets Back on Track but Pirates Aren't Pausing
Night after night, inning after inning, the Pirates have piled up runs on the corner of the scoreboard in right field at Shea Stadium that monitors scores from the rest of the National League.
The Mets have stared as the numbers have flashed up, and they have shaken their heads.
The Mets insist they've shaken their heads in admiration and not frustration.
Maybe they have.
But whether it's been an exercise in appreciation or futility, they've got to be growing tired of it.


A&amp;W Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Community Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nestle Is Assailed
The Church of England today called for a boycott of Nestle's instant coffee to protest the manufacturer's free distribution of infant formula in the third world.
Church officials said many babies fed the formula in unhygienic conditions die each year.
A Nestle Company spokesman, Allan Allbeury, said that if the members of the General Synod had all the facts, they would have come to a different decision.
Nestle said free formula is given to hospitals only after the company receives a written request from hospital authorities.


First Security Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dauphin Deposit reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Intech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


C&amp;S/Sovran Says Board Is Not Certain on NCNB Tie
The chairman of the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation said yesterday that he would continue merger talks with the NCNB Corporation but that his directors were still not committed to combining the two big banking institutions.
The statement from Bennett A. Brown, the C&amp;S/Sovran chairman, came after he reported to directors that earnings fell modestly during the second quarter, by 19.8 percent.
The decline was smaller than Wall Street analysts had expected and quieted fears that C&amp;S/Sovran might be forced to cut its yearly dividend of $1.56 a share.


Sports People: ROAD RACING; Only Name Changes
Manufacturers Hanover Trust sponsorships of the New York Marathon and Corporate Challenge road races in the United States and Europe will continue after the bank's proposed merger with Chemical Bank, which was announced on Monday.
"There'll be no change," said CHARLES MCCABE, executive vice president of Manufacturers Hanover.
"They'll just be under a different name. Chemical sees the benefits of continuing the sponsorships, especially the Corporate Challenges." The merged bank will operate under the Chemical name.


Wells Fargo &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Senate Defeats Abortion Compromise
Dealing the Bush Administration a defeat on the abortion issue, the Senate today refused to change a bill that would allow abortion counseling in federally financed family planning clinics.
The White House had opposed the measure, preferring to keep regulations that bar abortion counseling.
But reflecting its uneasiness at the prospect of a veto that might be overridden, the Administration offered a compromise measure to allow clinics receiving Federal financing to refer women to clinics that perform abortions.


Greenspan Optimistic On Economic Outlook
Alan Greenspan, named last week to another four-year term as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, gave Congress today one of the most optimistic assessments of the economy he has offered in years.
He proclaimed the recession over, reported "promising signs of a slowing in inflation," predicted "marked progress on the deficit" and said he expected the debt of individuals and companies to flatten out after the surge in the 1980's.


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Los Angeles Boxer Captures Gold in Countdown for Barcelona
Oscar de la Hoya, a highly regarded fighter from East Los Angeles pounded out a decisive 44-15 decision over Patrice Brooks to win a gold medal in the 132-pound class at the United States Olympic Festival here tonight.
De la Hoya, considered one of this country's better bets for a gold medal next year at the Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, started fast.
Time and again he landed strong right hands to Brooks's head in the opening round.


Some Airlines Offer Breaks Amid Slowdown in Travel
Reflecting a weak travel market, two large airlines announced lower fares or steps to make discounts more widely available yesterday.
USAir said it would ease the penalties and refund rules on its most popular discount fares beginning Aug. 5, while Northwest Airlines announced lower summer fares for travel to and from the Northeastern United States.
Calling its decision the first such step by a leading airline, USAir said that when passengers wanted to exchange nonrefundable tickets for other flights, they would not have to meet the normal advance-purchase requirements for discount fares for booking the new flight.
The airline will continue to charge penalties of at least $75 for changing nonrefundable flights.
On tickets that can be refunded only with penalties, passengers can apply the ticket's value, minus the penalty, to future travel, also without meeting advance purchase requirements.


Abbott Labs
Abbott Laboratories said it had received approval from the Food and Drug Administration to market a drug developed to treat a life-threatening condition in some premature newborns.
About 50,000 premature infants each year are born before their bodies have developed the ability to produce surfactant, a foamy substance that coats the inside of the lungs and keeps them from collapsing when the infant exhales.
The condition is called hyaline membrane disease.
Abbott's Survanta drug is administered through a breathing tube into the lungs.


Norwest Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Austria Fund reports earnings for As of May 31


Public Service Enterprise reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Football; An Old End Becomes The Giants' New One
For the first time since a sexual-harassment incident last year brought him more notoriety than his football exploits ever did, Zeke Mowatt put on a Giants uniform today with his familiar number, 84.
He took part in the team's morning workout at training camp here at Fairleigh Dickinson University.
Then, at a news conference that was unusual for someone who had always shunned the media, he talked of his year away from the Giants, a year he would rather forget.


Man Held After 9-Year-Old Fires Gun at Bronx Building
The police filed weapons charges yesterday against a man who had been living with the aunt of a 9-year-old boy who fired a 9-millimeter gun at a Bronx office building on Monday.
A police spokesman, Detective Joseph Gallagher, said detectives arrested the suspect, Jesus M. Cruz, 29 years old, near his apartment at 3540 Decatur Avenue in the Bedford Park section, a couple of miles from where the shooting took place.


Corrections
A picture caption on the Fashion page yesterday about motorcycle jackets for women misstated the price of a leather Chanel jacket at Bergdorf Goodman.
It costs $4,860; the belt shown with it is $870.


Ameribanc Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 12
July 5
July 13
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.1
7.2
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
214.2
216.2
215.6
Distillate stocks
117.1
112.9
114.7
Crude imports, daily
5.8
5.6
7.0
Product imports, daily
1.5
2.1
1.9
Crude stocks
348.8
350.2
385.3
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.4
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
86.4
88.4
92.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


ACM Managed Income Fund reports earnings for As of May 31


Baseball; Mets' Deal for Burke Brings Doubts in Clubhouse
Ron Darling's locker at the center of the clubhouse stood empty yesterday.
The rest of the room, though, was full of all sorts of stuff: emotion, speculation, confusion, anxiety.
If the Mets were optimistic that Monday's trade of Darling to Montreal for Tim Burke had cleaned the clubhouse of questions and doubts, they had to have been disappointed by the scene there yesterday.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
The scene is 51st Street and First Avenue.
As the traffic light turns red, a car pulls up on the east side of the street, leaving not enough room for the cars behind to pass.


Keystone Heritage Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Baseball; A's Hawkins Discovers There's Life After the Yankees
He looks the same and sounds the same, but this isn't the Andy Hawkins whose exit from New York two months ago resembled the sudden closing of a Broadway flop: no final ovation, no last goodbye.
Just the door.
This Hawkins -- revitalized and apparently resilient -- is a savior of sorts for the Oakland Athletics, who picked him up to become a fifth starter on their struggling pitching staff after he was released by the Yankees.


Jersey City Officer Kills Man in Ticket Dispute
A 23-year-old man was shot and killed by a plainclothes police officer on Tuesday night after a dispute that began with a summons for illegally repairing a car on a street and escalated into an attack on the officer and his partner.
As angry friends of the victim, Maximino Cintron, argued today that the shooting was unjustified, the Hudson County Prosecutor, Paul M. DePascale, said the police and witnesses had given conflicting accounts of the fight and the shooting.


Zilog Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Summit in London: A Foot in the Door; Gorbachev Hasn't Clinched His Sale, But He Has the Customers Listening
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev received his first hard lesson in capitalism today in the form of a reminder that the burden of crossing over from Communist decay must ultimately be born by a transformed Soviet Union.
His day of special pleading for sympathy and help before the Group of Seven leading industrial nations was laced with warm welcomes, promises of an ongoing audience and the extension of some inexpensive technical advice.


Healthsouth Rehabilitation reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


National Intergroup reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Colonial Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Huntington Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sun Lights, Moon Lights
ROBERTO GEROSA, an architect who lives in Florence, Italy, designed a couple of lamps for himself a few months ago.
After he had a few friends over to tea, those friends, and their friends, started insisting that he make lamps for them, too.
Mr.
Gerosa now offers the lamps for sale.
He twists copper wire into frames, then molds a wax-covered paper, found only in Germany, over the frames.
He ties it all together with grosgrain ribbon into his distinctive lamps.


Orion May File for Bankruptcy Protection
The Orion Pictures Corporation, troubled by large debts and a severe cash crunch, said today that it might be forced to seek bankruptcy protection if it cannot raise new money by the end of August.
The struggling studio, which had box office hits with "Dances With Wolves" and "The Silence of the Lambs," said in a quarterly financial report to the Securities and Exchange Commission that it had borrowed all of the available amounts under a $300 million credit agreement with banks.
It said it had $70.79 million in outstanding letters of credit.


Consolidated Rail Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Todd-AO Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Onbancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Talking Deals; CSX and Virginia Split a Company
THE RF&amp;P Corporation, based in Richmond, is a little-known company that operates a 113- mile rail line and owns some valuable real estate in Virginia.
Since early 1990, it has been at the center of marathon negotations that have included budget politics in Virginia and the role of the state's $12.5 billion public pension fund.
"I've never seen a transaction as complicated financially, managerially and politically," said John Rosenblum, a RF&amp;P director who is also dean of the Darden Graduate School of Business at the University of Virginia.


Make That a Deduction
To the Editor:
Norman Ornstein calls for a tax credit of as much as $200 for each individual to finance Congressional campaigns in "Reforming Campaign Reform" (Op-Ed, June 25).
A tax
deduction
of that amount, which comes off income, would raise the $50 million to $300 million of which he speaks.


DPL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Snap-On Tools Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Kent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Bankers First reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Soviet Dancer Finds Opportunity in England
Irek Mukhamedov captured the hearts of New York ballet audiences in 1987 as a principal with the Bolshoi Ballet -- a bravura dancer who displayed the big bold company style but with a softer, more introspective quality that was all his own.
He is now back in New York, dancing with the Royal Ballet tonight and over the weekend in Sir Kenneth MacMillan's "Manon."
When Mr.
Mukhamedov joined the English company a year ago, leaving the Russian troupe in whose school he had trained and with which he had become a star, times had changed enough in the Soviet Union that this was not regarded as a defection.
Talking of that departure in a backstage interview this week at the Metropolitan Opera House, Mr.
Mukhamedov said it was mostly a matter of his and his wife's concern for the unborn child they were expecting at that time.
Their daughter, Aleksandra Cholpon, is now 10 months old.


Producing Illusions in an Edith Wharton Show House
Curtains were scarcely on Edith Wharton's list of "ruling passions." In fact, "The Decoration of Houses," which she wrote with the architect Ogden Codman Jr., contains this precept: "The better the house, the less need . . . for curtains."
This may be one reason the 16 decorators of a Beaux-Arts mansion here that opens to the public Sunday as the Edith Wharton Designer Show House mostly declined to dress up the windows.
Then, of course, there were those views of the Berkshire Hills.


ICM Property Investors reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gibson (C.R.) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Barbara J. Eichner, Administrator, 52
Barbara J. Eichner, director of the Family Life Center of the Hackensack Medical Center in New Jersey, died on Saturday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
She was 52 years old and lived in Closter, N.J.
Mrs. Eichner died of breast cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


More Job Cuts Made at Unisys
The Unisys Corporation, the troubled computer maker, said today that it had laid off about 400 more employees to reduce costs.
The company did not announce the layoffs but confirmed them, saying the employees had worked in the Information Systems division, the domestic marketing arm that produced nearly a third of its $10 billion in revenues last year.
A spokesman, J. Peter Hynes, said about 25 programmers and data-processing workers at the software development group in Radnor, Pa., had been laid off; that two dozen workers had been laid off in Detroit, and that the rest were spread across the country.
James A. Unruh, the Unisys chairman, had said in April that the company would cut its work force to less than 70,000 by the end of the year.
It was down to 72,000 by the end of the first quarter.
No current figure is available, Mr.
Hynes said.
In New York Stock Exchange trading today, shares of Unisys were unchanged, at $3.75.


Three Big Military Contractors Report Profits for Quarter
The General Dynamics Corporation and the Northrop Corporation, two of the nation's largest military contractors, reported higher profits today for the quarter ended June 30.
Another big aerospace company, the Rockwell International Corporation, posted a decline in earnings.
General Dynamics said its net income for the quarter was $211 million, or $5.04 a share, compared with a $240 million loss in the corresponding period last year.
Reflecting the decline in Pentagon spending, sales for the quarter were down almost 7.7 percent, to $2.42 billion from $2.62 billion.


Tiverton Petroleums reports earnings for Year to March 31


Mine Safety Appliances Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


By Design, Deutsch Chooses A Non-Madcap President
CAN a respected, and respectable, account executive who works for straitlaced packaged-goods clients like Unilever and dresses like an investment banker find happiness at one of New York's most aggressively creative and controversial advertising agencies?
Tune in today, and every day, to Steve Dworin, the new president of Deutsch Inc.
"Steve is, on the surface, as opposite to the culture of Deutsch as can be," Donny Deutsch, the agency's creative director, said yesterday in an interview at the agency on Park Avenue South in Manhattan.
"And that's by design."


Metro Datelines; Jury Chosen for Trial In Fire That Killed 87
Jury selection was completed yesterday in the trial of the man who is charged with setting the Happy Land social club fire that killed 87 people.
The man, Julio Gonzalez, 37 years old, is accused of setting the blaze with a dollar's worth of gasoline on March 25, 1990.
The authorities said he was angry with a former girlfriend who worked as a coat-checker in the club.


Bridge
Some bridge deals give players the impression that they are accompanying Alice in the looking glass: everything is topsy-turvy.
In the diagramed example, noted by Dave Treadwell of Wilmington, Del., in the Pan-American Pairs in Memphis in May, the winning defense went totally against the grain.
Four North-South pairs arrived in four hearts, in one case doubled, and all succeeded.
If a top club was led and ruffed in the dummy, the best South could do was to lead a spade.
East now had to play with great care, cashing the club queen before continuing spades to promote a trump for West.
If he fails to cash the club queen, South can ruff the third spade with the heart jack, cash two top hearts and play diamonds.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival award ceremonies on Sunday in Durham, N.C., misidentified the reader of a citation for the award recipient, the choreographer Anna Sokolow.
The citation was read by Senator Terry Sanford, Democrat of North Carolina, not the festival director, Charles L. Reinhart.


Cambodian Factions Agree to Share Seat at U.N.
In a step toward ending their long civil war, Cambodia's warring factions announced today that they had agreed on how they should be represented in the United Nations.
They also agreed to call for a special United Nations team to visit Cambodia and back up the cease-fire that is now precariously in place.
The United Nations mission would be charged with determining how to control the cease-fire.
It would also evaluate how to enforce the ban that the factions have agreed to on outside military aid.
"It's quite significant," a diplomat said, referring to the results of the talks.
"The bad sign would be yelling and screaming and all of a sudden the sound of breaking chairs and people running out of the room. But certainly that's not what's happening."


High Rating For Weicker But Tax Goal Isn't Reached
The televised speech by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. on Tuesday night about the state budget crisis drew almost as many viewers as would typically watch "Entertainment Tonight," "Jeopardy" and "Hard Copy" combined, local television programmers said.
It was a clear success in the ratings.
But the Governor's call for state residents to rise up and yell for the income tax, and thus avoid the no-income-tax budget being considered by the legislature, appeared to strike an ambivalent chord, at best.


Goran Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New York Takes a Big Step Toward Subway Fare Cards
The long, tortuous road to bringing magnetic fare cards to the New York City subways took another turn yesterday, leading a top transportation official to say that the city can finally move forward with a technology that is already in place in many other major cities.
Or at least it looks that way.


Loss for Apple; Record Profit at Intel
Apple Computer Inc. today reported increased revenues but a net loss for its third fiscal quarter because of lower profit margins and charges associated with layoffs and reorganizating.
Apple also said that while growth in shipments of its Macintosh personal computers remained strong, the growth rate fell to 60 percent, from 85 percent in the quarter a year earlier.


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coca-Cola Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jasper F. Frand, Executive, 70
Jasper F. Frand, a senior vice president of Helmsley-Spear Inc., a Manhattan real-estate concern, died on Tuesday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 70 years old.
He died of cancer, a family spokesman said.


CHRONICLE
A woman who was given her walking papers as personal secretary to VANESSA REDGRAVE was dismissed unfairly, an industrial tribunal in London ruled on Monday.
The tribunal awarded the woman, CORINNA GILBERT, about $15,000 after deciding that Ms.
Redgrave and her brother, CORIN REDGRAVE, had acted unreasonably.
Mrs.
Gilbert said she was fired from Vanessa Redgrave Enterprises for showing an actor around the headquarters of the British Marxist Party, where Ms.
Redgrave has her offices.
Mr.
Redgrave is general secretary of the party, which also suspended Mrs.
Gilbert as a member for a year because of the visit.


Regan Says He'll Sue To Block Loan Plan At Thruway Agency
The State Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, threatened today to sue Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to block the state's plan to balance its budget by borrowing $80 million from the State Thruway Authority.
It would be the first time the Republican Comptroller has gone to court to challenge the state's use of what he has called "fiscal gimmickry," said his spokesman, Marvin G. Nailor.


AMR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Waste Management Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Maree Planning to Run For U.S. at '92 Games
SYDNEY MAREE, the middle-distance runner who was born in South Africa, said yesterday that he would run for the United States in the Olympic Games in 1992 in Barcelona, Spain, and not for his homeland.
He has been an American citizen since 1985.
"I feel it would be an act of betrayal if I did not run for America," said Maree, who is 35 years old and is competing this week at the United States Olympic Festival in Los Angeles.
"When I needed America most, it embraced me. It is only fair that I don't turn my back."


First Fincorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oil Shares Up Sharply but Dow Dips 5.14
New rumblings in the Persian Gulf sent oil shares sharply higher yesterday, and trading soared to its strongest level in a month and a half.
But other important areas of the market showed significant weakness..
The two big oil stocks in the Dow Jones industrial average -- Chevron and Texaco -- lifted the blue-chip index 6.3 points, but heavy selling in Disney, Philip Morris, Alcoa and General Electric was strong enough to clip the index 11.4 points, so that at the end of the day the Dow closed at 2,978.76, down 5.14.


American Reliance Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Colonial Gas Co.  reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Aerovox Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


General Building Products reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Lower Diabetes Risk Found in Men Who Exercise
Middle-aged men who exercise regularly lower their chance of developing adult diabetes, the most common form of the disease, a study suggests.
Although doctors usually urge diabetics to lose weight and exercise, scientists said the study was the first to suggest that exercise might prevent diabetes from occurring.


First Peoples Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


F.D.A. to Explore Drugs' Suicide Tie
The Food and Drug Administration said it planned to explore the link between suicide and antidepressant drugs like Prozac, which is made by Eli Lilly &amp; Company.
The agency said it wanted to meet with companies that make such drugs after recent reports linking Prozac and suicidal impulses.
But the agency said the issue of violent and suicidal behavior concerned all antidepressant drugs.


Morrison Knudsen reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pop in Review
Legendary Pink Dots Limelight 660 Avenue of the Americas, at 20th Street Manhattan
Every few years since the late 1960's, arty rock has fallen out of fashion, only to be revived by the next coterie of earnest literary types.
The Legendary Pink Dots, an English band now based in the Netherlands, hold onto the old art-rock impulse; they definitely know the meaning of the word "pre-Raphaelite."


New York License Fees (and Voices) Rise
It became more expensive yesterday to own a newsstand, manage a pool hall, drive a cab or even get married in New York City as the Mayor signed into law a bevy of increases in the fees for licenses.
While most of the increases are not enough to hamper the profits of small businesses, they were enough to irritate owners, many already facing higher taxes while customers decline.


Xilinx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Philip Morris Profits Up 21.6% in 2d Quarter
The Philip Morris Companies, the world's largest consumer-products company and the maker of Marlboro cigarettes, reported yesterday that profits in the second quarter rose 21.6 percent, to $1.15 billion, or $1.24 a share, from $948 million a year earlier, or $1.03 a share.
The rise was at the low end of analysts' expectations.
Much of the revenue and profit rise was attributed to last year's $4.1 billion acquisition of Jacobs Suchard A.G., a giant Swiss company that makes coffee and expensive candies like Toblerone.


Senators Vote for $23,000 Raise And a Ban on Speaking Payments
Senators voted 53 to 45 tonight to grant themselves a $23,200 pay raise and ban the acceptance of speaking fees, bringing their pay in line with that of members of the House.
The narrow, bipartisan vote came after less than two hours of debate.
Twenty-five Republicans joined 28 Democrats in supporting the measure.


Senate Backs Bill Allowing Abortion Counseling
The Senate voted today to overturn a Federal regulation that prohibits abortion counseling in federally financed family planning clinics.
But the voice vote, conducted in a rush with only a few senators on the floor, was an inconclusive indicator of whether the measure would survive a Presidential veto.
The bill, sponsored by Senator John H. Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island, would bar the Department of Health and Human Services from enforcing the regulations, which it wrote in 1988.
Those regulations were upheld by the United States Supreme Court in May.


Multi-Color Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


HOME IMPROVEMENT
FLAGSTONE steps, walkways and patios need occasional maintenance and repair, usually to renew the mortar between the stones or in the case of stones laid without mortar, to level those that have tilted or sunk.
The work is not complicated, but it can be strenuous if moving stones is required.
In that case, work carefully as described below, both to avoid injury and to prevent the stones from breaking.


BKLA Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Federal S&amp;L-Lenawee reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Greek Chief Hopes Bush Will Help on Cyprus
Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis says he is looking to President Bush to settle the 17-year-old dispute between Greece and Turkey over Turkish military occupation of part of Cyprus.
After two discussions about the issue, Mr.
Bush has agreed to help, he said.
Mr.
Bush will arrive here on Thursday from the summit in London.
He will then travel to Turkey on Saturday.


Quotation of the Day
"Today has meant a lot." -- Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  [ A10:1. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12
Agreement on a strategic arms pact was reached between the United States and the Soviet Union.
President Bush agreed to meet President Gorbachev in Moscow late this month.
And Mr.
Gorbachev begged the leaders of seven economic powers for help in reforming his nation's economy.
Page A1


Signet Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Bill Ripken, second baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Shane Turner, infielder, from Rochester of the International League.


U.S. Note and Bond Prices Decline
A report showing that conditions in the housing industry improved more than expected in June, and concerns about coming auctions of new securities prompted credit market participants to sell Treasury notes and bonds yesterday.
The housing report, which showed that housing starts rose 5.2 percent in June, to slightly more than a million units at an annual rate, was somewhat stronger than most economists had forecast, though analysts noted that the improvement did not suggest that housing was undergoing a robust recovery.


Credit Markets; Phoenix Prices A Bond Offering
The City of Phoenix yesterday priced $174.5 million in general obligation bonds through competitive bidding.
The offering was awarded to a group of underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation and produced a maximum yield of 6.9 percent for an issue due in 2016.


William W. Palmer, Retired General, 64
Maj.
Gen.
William W. Palmer, retired, a former staff member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, died of cancer on Friday at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.
A 1950 graduate of the United States Military Academy, he served in the Korean and Vietnam wars.


Stretching Out With a Good Book
EMPHATICALLY in the Prairie style of Frank Lloyd Wright, the new Warroad Public Library and Heritage Center is the first real public library in the tiny town of Warroad, Minn. (population 2,000).
The $2 million, 9,000-square-foot library was designed by Sara Susanka of Mulfinger &amp; Susanka Architects in Minneapolis, and built through the Margaret W. Marvin Fund of the Minnesota Foundation.
Ms.
Marvin established Warroad's first library -- a lending shelf in the Village Hall -- in 1939.


Senator's Slip Costs Cloak-and-Dagger Agent the Rest of His Cloak
With an apparently inadvertent remark to reporters on Tuesday, the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee made very public the normally veiled identity of one of the Central Intelligence Agency's most senior clandestine agents.
The Senator, David L. Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, issued an aggrieved defense of his action today, emphasizing that the agent's name had already been disclosed in newspapers, a best-selling book and in a Congressional investigative record.


Basketball; 76ers Did Homework on Shackleford
Charles Shackleford is back in the National Basketball Association, a year after he left as an unwanted free agent with a checkered past.
After what the Philadelphia 76ers consider a thorough investigation into that past, the team has settled on the 6-foot-11-inch Shackleford as the answer to their five-year search for a center.


Upington Journal; Happy Ending to a Tale That Began on Death Row
"What is a home without a mother?" asks the small plaque in Afrikaans hanging on the wall.
By that criterion, Evelina de Bruin's modest blue house in the shabby black township of Paballelo was no home at all for the last three years.
Miss de Bruin, who has raised 10 children, sat in prison with her husband, Gideon Madlongwane, sentenced to be hanged for a slaying in which they insist they took no part.


Sealed Air Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


July Sales Were Down, but Not Spirits
Racing officials reported yesterday that prices were down nearly 11 percent in the final tally of the prestigious July sale of selected yearlings at Keeneland race course in Lexington, Ky.
But they expressed relief that there had been no worse decline in a market that had already plunged 40 percent in the preceding five years.


Profits Are Down by 92% at AMR
Second-quarter earnings of the AMR Corporation, the parent company of American Airlines, plummeted 92 percent, to $10.3 million, from $129.2 million a year earlier.
While the sharp decline underscored the continuing weakness of the airline industry, analysts said they were not surprised and predicted gradual improvement in the industry beginning later this year.
AMR's earnings, reported yesterday, reflect an $11 million charge relating to the retirement of Boeing 737's.


Pizza Hut Franchisee Aims Ad Back at Pepsi
A restaurant franchisee is attacking his parent company, Pepsico Inc., with a modified version of one of the corporation's own advertising slogans.
In an advertisement that appeared Monday in The San Antonio Express-News, a popular slogan for Pepsico's Diet Pepsi soft drink, "You've got the right one, baby, uh-huh!" was changed to, "You got the wrong one, Pepsi, uh-huh." The ad was placed by Art Torres, owner of Pizza Management Inc. of San Antonio, which operates 240 franchised Pizza Hut restaurants.


U.S. Needs a Merger In International Radio
To the Editor:
As probably the only person who has held responsible positions at Radio in the American Sector-Berlin, Radio Free Europe and the Voice of America, I feel qualified to comment on "The Raid on R.F.E." by William Safire (column, July 1), which opposes consolidation of Radio Free Europe with the Voice of America.


Marble Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Foster-Wheeler
A unit of the Foster-Wheeler Corporation said it had received a $122.3 million contract to supply engineering services and equipment for two petrochemical systems in an ethylene complex to be built in China.
The unit, the Foster-Wheeler Trading Company, based in Madrid, said the complex would be owned by the State Raw Materials Corporation, a unit of the China Petroleum Corporation, and the government of Tianjin, the city where the plant is to be built.
Foster-Wheeler's stock rose 25 cents today on the New York Stock Exchange, closing at $28.25.


President Quits Calgene
Zachary Wochok has resigned as president and chief operating officer of Calgene Inc., the agribusiness biotechnology concern, announced today.
He became president and chief operating officer in June 1989, when Calgene acquired Plant Genetics Inc.
He had been president of that company.
Calgene said that Mr.
Wochok had a two-year contract and that it was not renewed because Mr.
Wochok had fulfilled his role of overseeing the integration of Plant Genetics.
The company promoted Andrew Baum, vice president of operations, to senior vice president for operations.


Golf; In Spite of The Orange and Black, Stewart Cuts a Graceful Silhouette
Despite the ever-present N.F.L. logo and an occasional propensity for inserting foot in mouth, Payne Stewart is a golfer with a bent for the classical.
First, there is the swing -- long and flowing, yet solid enough to have conquered the United States Open at Hazeltine, Minn., last month.
In his customary knickers and cap, the graceful Stewart cuts a silhouette reminiscent of Bobby Jones, although it's doubtful Jones ever wore the orange and black of the Cincinnati Bengals. 'I Rate the Open First'
While it's true that the 34-year-old Missourian has a lucrative endorsement contract to wear National Football League team colors every time he competes, Stewart has also demonstrated a strong affinity for what is most enduring about the game.
When he and three friends spent last week traveling the coasts of Scotland to play the venerated links courses at Prestwick, Troon, Turnberry, Carnoustie and Gullane, it was for love of golf, not money, and Stewart will take that same spirit into Thursday's opening round of the 120th British Open at Royal Birkdale.


Wedding Cakes That Do Not March Down Aisle of Tradition
Weddings often take on a fantastical air: ethereal brides swathed in lengths of tulle; rambunctious little boys, dressed as ring bearers, transformed into still, solemn creatures.
At a window exhibit that opened today at Asprey, a gift store in Trump Tower in Manhattan, the wedding cakes no longer resemble cakes.
They look like boxes, baskets and pottery.


Chapter 11 For Taj Mahal
Donald J. Trump's Taj Mahal casino in Atlantic City has filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in a prearranged deal with creditors to reduce its $675 million "junk bond" debt.
Under the debt reorganization plan, filed Tuesday in Camden, N.J., Mr.
Trump will give up half his ownership in the casino in exchange for lower interest rates on its junk bonds.
The plan also calls for a reduction in the interest rate on the casino's first-mortgage bonds from 14 percent to 11.35 percent, with some interest paid in additional bonds instead of cash.
The $1 billion Taj Mahal, which opened last year, is the largest of Mr.
Trump's three casinos in Atlantic City.
It was his first Chapter 11 filing.
The plan still must be confirmed by the bankruptcy court in Camden.


The Eyes of Canada Are on Ismail's Debut
High atop a luxury downtown condominium that offers sweeping views of the Skydome, the city's sparkling skyline and Lake Ontario, Raghib (Rocket) Ismail settles into his new, spacious home and remembers the diminutive dorm room at Notre Dame that only a few weeks ago served as his special retreat.
"I think that if I was at Notre Dame right now that I'd just be finishing practice and me and the fellas would be in the weight room," Ismail said.
"I guess there would be a term paper that I'd have to finish later and then the next day there would be more classes and more practice. Do I miss it? Yeah. And then I think about it and the answer is, nah. There is so much more to look forward to."


Burnham Pacific Properties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Latshaw Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


United Investors Management Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Health &amp; Rehabilitation Properties Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nu Horizons Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


First Alabama Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Albert J. Bazin, Executive, 86
Albert J. Bazin, former senior vice president of Albert B. Ashforth Real Estate in Manhattan, died on Tuesday in Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 86 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y., and Jupiter, Fla.
Mr. Bazin died of lymphoma, a spokesman for the family said.


CHRONICLE
Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS, who has made an art of speaking carefully, said yesterday that he had finally found a new press secretary to speak for him: LELAND T. JONES, a City Hall press aide who has acted as Mr.
Dinkins's press secretary since ALBERT SCARDINO resigned in March.
The Mayor took his time deciding, and sounded out other candidates, but in the end settled on someone in his own backyard.
Mr.
Dinkins called Mr.
Jones, 41 years old, "a good mechanic and a hard worker" who had "done a hell of a job under difficult circumstances" and deserved to keep it.


Multimedia Profits Up; Tribune and Others Off
Three big media companies -- the Tribune Company, McGraw-Hill Inc. and the Pulitzer Publishing Company -- reported declines in second-quarter profits yesterday, but Multimedia Inc. reported a 50 percent increase.
Most media companies have been hurt by the recession, which has depressed demand for broadcast and print advertising.


LOT and Boeing
LOT, Poland's national airline, said it was talking with the Boeing Company about buying a fleet of medium-range planes, even though it signed a preliminary agreement last month to buy aircraft from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.
An official of the airline said the Government wanted the deal to include an investment by a United States manufacturer in Poland's aviation industry.
He said a letter of intent Poland signed with McDonnell Douglas in June for a $350 million deal for eight or nine twin-engine MD-80 jets "was an expression of our goal."


Cincinnati Bell reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Livable World
To The Home Section:
As alert to abuse of our environment as most children of the 60's, I nevertheless shudder to imagine living in a world populated by the self-righteous, puritanical eco-brats growing up today  [ "Newest Parental Nightmare: Eco-Smart Child," June 11 ] .


Measurement Specialties reports earnings for Year to March 31


Mixed Earnings Picture Is Presented by Banks
As the nation's banks report their second-quarter earnings, a mixed picture is emerging.
Earnings are generally down, hurt by the banks' need to set aside money for future bad loans.
But a few banks appear to have put their worst problems behind them.
Two banks reporting lowered earnings are among those involved in the recent spate of mergers.
The Fleet/ Norstar Financial Group yesterday reported quarterly earnings of $28 million, or 23 cents a share, down from $54.1 million, or 47 cents a share, in the 1990 period.
And the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation, engaged in merger talks with the NCNB Corporation, reported earnings of $64 million, or 45 cents a share, off from $79.8 million, or 57 cents a share, a year earlier.


Who's in Control?
To The Home Section:
Somehow, the vision of 5- and 6-year-olds haranguing their parents  [ "Newest Parental Nightmare: Eco-Smart Child," June 11 ] . and "making them" do certain things, proper though they may be, speaks more to the troubles of our society than all the plastic bags and aerosol sprays we use.
ROBERT BIERMAN North Tarrytown, N.Y.


Miller Diversified Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Novell to Buy Microsoft Rival
Novell Inc., the leading publisher of software for office computer networks, said yesterday that it would acquire Digital Research Inc., a producer of software that controls the basic operations of desktop computers.
The announcement had been expected.
The acquisition will bring Novell into more direct competition with Microsoft, the largest publisher of personal computer software.


New York City Weighs Lawsuit In Jail Dispute
Faced with a rising jail population that could force the city to release inmates, the Dinkins administration threatened yesterday to sue the state to take prisoners off its hands more quickly.
The dispute is over the custody of thousands of prisoners who have been convicted of felonies and are awaiting transfers to state prisons.


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Firstfed Michigan reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Furious Ferry Riders Get Full Service Back, for a While
Faced with a lawsuit and the wrath of harried commuters, New York City officials announced yesterday that full service on the Staten Island ferry would be restored next Tuesday -- at least for 30 days.
Service was reduced starting July 1 to save money, but passengers say the cuts have led to overcrowded ferries, fights for seats and mass confusion.


PACT IS REACHED TO REDUCE NUCLEAR ARMS; BUSH AND GORBACHEV TO MEET THIS MONTH; 7 POWERS GIVE SOVIETS NEW ECONOMIC ROLE
After nine years of negotiation, the Soviet Union and the United States reached agreement today on a strategic arms treaty, the first to mandate reductions by the superpowers, and President Bush immediately agreed to meet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in Moscow late this month.
Then Mr.
Gorbachev, the proud leader of the nation where Communism first flowered, sat down with the heads of the seven most powerful capitalist nations and asked them for help in reforming an economic system that has all but collapsed.
Almost 75 years after the Bolshevik Revolution, the Soviet President's pleas represented an admission of economic failure.


Michigan Court Backs Mother in Drug Case
The Michigan Supreme Court let stand a ruling on Tuesday that a woman who had admitted to smoking crack hours before giving birth could not be tried on a charge of delivering drugs to her baby.
The state's highest court refused to consider the case of the woman, Kimberly Hardy, who was charged with passing drugs to her baby through the umbilical cord.
In a unanimous decision, the Michigan Court of Appeals threw out the felony charge in April.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about patterns of genetic inheritance referred incorrectly to the inheritance of Prader-Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome, disorders caused by the same gene defect.
Prader-Willi syndrome arises if the defect is inherited from the father, and Angelman syndrome occurs only if the mutation is inherited from the mother.


Carolina First Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Calendar: A Look At Resorts By the Sea
Coastal Views Architectural League of New York, the Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 753-1722.
John Margolies, a photographer, will give an illustrated lecture tonight at 6:30 about the architectural history of resort areas in Florida and Georgia, including St.
Augustine, Hollywood Beach, Miami Beach, the Florida Keys and the Golden Isles.
Admission, $5 (free, members).


Summit in London; Clearing the Final Hurdles To a Strategic Arms Accord
In a brief encounter in the living room of the American Ambassador's residence off Regents Park, President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today ended one era in United States-Soviet relations and ushered in another.
Speaking through their interpreters, Mr.
Bush and Mr.
Gorbachev reached a compromise solution on a highly technical issue of throw weight on new missiles, the last remaining issue holding up the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty -- the first arms control agreement that will lead to an actual reduction in long-range nuclear weapons.


Robert S. Dunham, 84, Patent Law Specialist
Robert S. Dunham, former senior partner in Cooper &amp; Dunham, a New York law firm, died on Monday at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 84 years old.
Mr. Dunham died of congestive heart failure, his son, Christopher, said.


Paris Bank Seeks Air France Stake
Banque Nationale de Paris, the state-owned French bank, plans to take a minority interest in Air France by injecting $166 million into the airline.
Shareholders in the state-owned carrier now have about $1.81 billion in equity, but Banque de Paris will not know how much it will own until an evaluation of the airline's assets, an Air France spokeswoman said.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
IG Laboratories Inc., Framingham, Mass., a genetic testing services company, appointed Elliott D. Hillback Jr. president and chief executive. *
Koger Properties Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., a developer, named Jack H. Chambers vice chairman, president and chief executive. *
Morgan Products Ltd., Lincolnshire, Ill., a maker of building products, named Douglas H. MacMillan chief financial officer and vice president. *
Ohio Edison Co., Akron, Ohio, appointed Willard R. Holland president and chief operating officer, effective Sept. 1.  *
Simon &amp; Schuster, New York, a publishing subsidiary of Paramount Communications Inc., promoted Andrew C. Evans to executive vice president from senior vice president and chief financial officer.
Mitchell Haber was promoted to senior vice president for corporate development. *
Texas Industries, Dallas, a producer of building materials, named Ken Allen treasurer, and Barry Bone president of its Brookhollow Corp. land development unit. *
Xerox Credit Corp., Stamford, Conn., a subsidiary of Xerox Corp., announced that William J. Montgomery had retired as chairman and chief executive.
He was succeeded as chief executive by David Roe, who continues as president.


Arvin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


C&amp;S/Sovran Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Honors
*
Ketchum Public Relations, New York, has been named agency of the year by the trade publication Inside PR.
In its July issue, the publication ranked Ketchum first based upon interviews with 120 marketing and public relations professionals. *
Medical Advertising News, which covers the pharmaceutical marketing industry, selected Lewis &amp; Gace as agency of the year in its annual review of the top 50 medical advertising agencies.
The June issue of the trade magazine calls the Fort Lee, N.J.-based agency, established in 1998, the fastest-growing health care agency in the country, with billings of $48 million in 1990.


Books of The Times; A Vote for Joyce's Bloom As the Archetypal Jew
Fiedler on the Roof Essays on Literature and Jewish Identity By Leslie Fiedler 184 pages.
David R. Godine . $19.95.
You can dive anywhere into Leslie Fiedler's penetrating new book, "Fiedler on the Roof: Essays on Literature and Jewish Identity," and find yourself pushed and pulled by its powerful riptides.


BHA Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oxford Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Autodie reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; Looking for Clues In Options Prices
LIKE David W. Mullins Jr., a governor of the Federal Reserve who is studying the prices of Treasury bond options for clues about inflation expectations, individual investors and corporate treasurers may also benefit by studying options price movements.
Because the options market measures traders' changing perceptions of an asset's volatility, investors can use the measure to spot changes in the relative riskiness of the assets -- stocks, bonds, foreign currencies -- in their portfolios.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.81
5.91
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.60
5.59
7.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.73
7.48
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.16
8.11
8.46
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.49
8.44
8.55
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.52
9.48
9.64
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.15
7.15
7.42
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sports of The Times; Struggling To Conquer A Mountain
WHEN she was playing golf, her green eyes sparkled.
Tiny and tenacious, Heather Farr always went for it.
If she hit her ball into the woods, she tried to rip it out through the trees rather than play it safe.
On the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour, the word for Heather Farr was competitor.
It still is.


Realty Agency in Fire Subject to Bias Order
A Brooklyn real-estate agency damaged by a fire on Tuesday had been under a court order to show homes to black and Hispanic customers, and the New York City Commission on Human Rights suggested yesterday that the company had been attacked because it was complying with the order.
The police have described the early-morning blaze at the Fillmore Real Estate agency, at 9301 Flatlands Avenue in the Canarsie section, as a bias incident.
No one was hurt in the fire, which broke out two days after people who work at the agency reported receiving threatening telephone calls about selling property to minorities in the predominantly white neighborhood.


Martin Lawrence reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Does Photo Show 3 Vietnam M.I.A.'s?
The Administration has begun a diplomatic effort around Southeast Asia to check the veracity of a photograph that supposedly shows that three American flyers missing since the Vietnam War may still be alive, officials said.
The blurry black-and-white snapshot shows three mustachioed men posing in a woody setting with a white sign marked with the numbers "25-5-1990," which may be meant as the date May 25, 1990.
There is nothing visible in the photo that definitively establishes the location, time or identity of the men.
Nevertheless, relatives of three American listed as missing in action in Southeast Asia said today that the men shown in the photo were their relatives.


Review/Rap; Ice Cube the 'Gangsta' Heats Up the Apollo
"Don't look up to me," Ice Cube warned midway through his set on Tuesday night at the Apollo Theater, putting just a hint of distance between himself and the belligerent, woman-hating character he plays in his raps.
As a member of N.W.A. and in his current solo career, Ice Cube has proved himself the smartest and most complex "gangsta" rapper. (He also has a leading role in the film "Boyz N the Hood.") Over the simple, stomping beats provided by his disk jockey, Sir Jinx, he shouts violent stories involving guns, drugs, vicious cops and bad women.


American Electric Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Zfax Image Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


City Holding Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Champion International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Despite Repair, Shuttle Is to Fly on Tuesday
Despite plans to replace an electronic component in the solid-rocket booster system of the space shuttle Atlantis, the space agency said today that its launching was still on schedule for Tuesday.
The component is one of four electronic assemblies that pass signals from the orbiter to the twin boosters and enable them to separate two minutes into flight.


CP Forest Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Huffy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ratify the U.N. Rights of the Child Convention
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's deeply moving column on the 40,000 starving children who die around the world every day ("Is This Still News?" July 2) ends with the suggestion that the United Nations select as its next chief executive a "new kind of Secretary General" committed to conquering this growing health crisis.


Independence Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Baseball; Met Farm Team Harvesting Zeros
Anthony Young pitched a 9-0 shutout tonight against Syracuse to extend the streak of consecutive scoreless innings for Tidewater pitchers to 37 in the International League.
It was the fourth shutout in a row for the Mets' Class AAA team, three against Syracuse and one against Rochester.
The scoreless-inning streak stretches over five games, and breaks a club record of 30 set in 1982.


School Board Renews Debate Over Condoms
New York City's Board of Education reopened the debate over distributing condoms to students by voting yesterday to consider whether parents should be allowed to bar their children from getting them.
The action infuriated the Schools Chancellor and was opposed by the board's new president.


Review/Television; The Road Less Traveled, and at Odd Times
Hot and muggy summer is with us once again, so this must be the time when public television traditionally and half-heartedly does its duty by video artists and aspiring film makers.
At immediate hand are "Alive From Off Center" and "New Television."
PBS plans for them to run back to back from 10 to 11 o'clock on Thursday nights but, depending on how arbitrary local stations are, they can be scattered all over the schedule.
Channel 13 in New York is showing "Alive From Off Center" on Mondays at 11 P.M. (except next week, when it will be delayed a half-hour) and "New Television" on Fridays at 11 P.M.


Senators Approve Curb on Lotteries
A Senate subcommittee has approved a bill that would prevent the spread of state lotteries or other gambling based on the outcome of professional or amateur sports contests, the subcommittee's chairman said yesterday.
The bill, which exempts previously adopted sports gambling schemes in Delaware, Nevada and Oregon, would prevent the 47 other states from sponsoring or authorizing similar games.
It was approved, 5 to 0, by the Judiciary Committee's subcommittee on patents, copyrights and trademarks, according to the panel's chairman, Dennis DeConcini of Arizona.


Consumer Prices Rose 0.2% in June
Consumer prices rose modestly in June, the Government said today in a report indicating that the economic recovery was causing few inflation problems.
The Labor Department's Consumer Price Index was up only two-tenths of 1 percent, after a three-tenths of 1 percent rise in May.
A decline in energy costs helped to offset a sharp gain in the prices of fruits and vegetables.


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Former MCI Officers Named to Head Litel
Litel Communications Inc., a long-distance carrier in the Midwest, emphasized its desire to expand in the telecommunications market with the recent appointments of two former MCI executives to head the company.
Thomas J. Wynne was named president and chief operating officer of Litel this week, and earlier this month H. Brian Thompson was named chairman and chief executive.
Litel, which is based in Columbus, Ohio, provides voice, data and video transmission services to businesses in Illinois, Michigan, Indiana, Pennsylvania and Ohio.
The company also has some residential customers.


Merchants National reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lufkin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Officer Wounds 2 Superiors And Kills Himself at Meeting
A police officer shot and wounded two superiors and then killed himself today at police headquarters, the authorities said.
The officer, Calloway Hatcher, 56 years old, was meeting with the two over an accusation that he had sexually abused a 10-year-old girl, said Dennis Hill, a police spokesman.
Officer Hatcher pulled a gun and shot both of his supervisors and then shot himself in the head, Mr.
Hill said.


Novellus Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Utility Pressed by Creditors
The Tucson Electric Power Company, the struggling Arizona utility, said today that it was unnecessary for creditors to have filed petitions seeking to force the company to reorganize under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
Six creditors filed the petitions on Tuesday in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Phoenix.
The case has been transferred to Tucson.


Summit in London; Bush-Gorbachev Comments: 'We Accept'
Following are excerpts from the news conference held today by President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev:  OPENING STATEMENTS
BUSH: Well, may I say that it was a pleasure to have President Gorbachev in this embassy.
We've made a good deal of progress and we will -- he might have something to say about how much progress.
But from the standpoint of the United States and the economic front and the arms front, we are very pleased with this meeting. . .
GORBACHEV: Mr.
President, it was very short and that's because of the circumstances.
In fact, we didn't have a lot of time at our disposal, but we used it very well and very productively, and we were able to talk about quite a few things. . .
Now, what I wanted to say was, in view of the fact that we were told that all of the issues are solved on the Start treaty, we, with the President of the United States, have agreed to finalize everything in Geneva, and we will give commensurate instructions so that we could then sign that treaty. . .
Once again, I have invited the President to come to the Soviet Union on a visit at the very end of July.
And I hope that everything is clear now about the visit.
The visit will take place.
The Soviet people, all of us, will be ready to give our hospitality to the President of the United States, and I also hope to Mrs.
Bush, and to all those who will accompany him to Moscow. . . .
And the last point -- the President and I have had a discussion within the framework of what is happening in the context of this unique meeting with the G-7.
And we are pleased with the kind of discussion that has taken place on those issues.
So, I'm through.
BUSH: May I simply say that we accept with pleasure President Gorbachev's invitation.
I hope we can get a lot done.
And we've already accomplished a lot in treaty negotiations.
The goal, of course, is an economic goal.
We'd be cooperatively working with President Gorbachev, and I would say the rest of the G-7 and the rest of the world in integrating the Soviet economy into the rest of the world's economies.
. . .
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q.
Does this mean you have a Start treaty ready to sign now, and you are going to Moscow, and everything is on the line?
Who caved?
Who gave in?
BUSH: . . .
There was compromise on all sides and it's in the best interest of the United States, and I hope that the Soviet people feel it's in the best interest of the Soviet people.
Q. Well, does that mean that you will not build a new missile?
GORBACHEV: Let me say, I share what the President has just said.
We will not be able to succeed either today or tomorrow in building new international relations, new international security, in achieving a balance of interest in the world, if we try to achieve advantage and if we try to win.
We have to move reciprocally toward each other in the interest of both our peoples.
And I hope very much that the meeting that will take place in Moscow will be in the interest of all mankind, of all those who will be able to now breathe more quietly and to say that we have moved further away from the threat of nuclear war.
Q. What's the date -- pin it down?
BUSH: Well, we're pinning it down, but I'd say the very end of July.
Q. How long will the summit be?
BUSH: Oh, two or three days, but that's up to our hosts.
Q. Will you actually sign it then?
BUSH: We're trying.


Dash Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Tennis; Opening Round for Seles in Jersey: Lots of Questions
Jessica Emmons, one of the cast in a tennis play that could be titled, "Why, Monica?" wondered this afternoon when the star of the show would be making an appearance on the set.
She was told that Monica Seles, possessor of the highest ranking and, of late, the lowest profile in women's tennis, would soon be landing at Newark Airport.
"With or without child?" Emmons said, unable to hold back a smile.


16 Are Charged in Computer Parts Scheme
Federal authorities said that they had broken up a $6 million racketeering scheme that took discarded computer parts and illegally sold them.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation announced indictments on Tuesday against 16 people in the scheme.
Last month, the Digital Equipment Corporation, made similar accusations in a suit that named many of the defendants.


Keys the Jets and Sharks Would Fight For
JEFFREY HAGEDON never met Leonard Bernstein.
Growing up in Lansing, Mich., he played a scratchy LP of "West Side Story" over and over.
The closest he came to Bernstein was after he moved to Manhattan in the 1970's, in a seat way up in the balcony at Carnegie Hall, several hundred feet from where Bernstein was working the podium as only he could, jabbing the air and breaking batons.
David Fox never met Bernstein, either.
But he considers him the greatest composer and conductor since Gustav Mahler, who also did a tour as music director of the New York Philharmonic.
Maybe greater.


In the Nation; Bush's Faint Worries
With Desert Victory under his belt and a Start treaty on the verge, George Bush looks as if he might be able to walk rather than run to re-election next year.
On Capitol Hill, however, troubles that now seem little bigger than a man's hand could blow into a political storm.
The most recent comfort for Mr.
Bush was provided by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, who issued an optimistic economic forecast for 1992.
A flourishing economy is virtually a prerequisite for Presidential re-election.


Alltel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cycling; The Mountain Where the Cyclists Meet Their Match
On the horizon, through a haze of heat, loom the Pyrenees and their foothills.
The real Tour de France will begin there Thursday for the 149 remaining riders from a field of 198, who arrived here today by plane from Brittany.
Finished is the time of the sprinters and leadout men, who have had their field days over mostly flat country.
Their next opportunity arrives in three days, when the bicycle race reaches rolling terrain.


Industries and Towns Clash About Who Pays To Get Rid of Poisons
Years ago, before the perils of dumping poisonous chemical wastes were well known, some of the nation's largest industrial corporations disposed of them in hundreds of municipal landfills around the nation.
Now, after more than a decade in which the Federal Government has been singling out these polluters and making them pay for cleaning up those landfills, the companies are trying to force cities and small private businesses to share the costs.


Agency Hires a Specialist To Go For Isuzu Account
McElligott Wright Morrison White Inc., Minneapolis, one of the five finalists in the review of the $75 million American Isuzu Motors account, yesterday made a personnel move to strengthen its position.
The agency hired as vice chairman and director Guy Day, an automotive advertising veteran and the co-founder of Chiat/ Day, now Chiat/Day/Mojo.


Eastern Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Continental Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Credit Markets; Southern California Water District
The Southern California Water District is tentatively offering $300 million in water revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.882 percent for an issue due in 2021.
Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the senior manager on the offering, said the issue had been rated Aa by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P.


SENATORS SUPPORT 'STAR WARS' BASE
A Senate panel agreed today that the nation's anti-missile system should emphasize land-based missiles to protect the continental United States against a limited nuclear attack.
The agreement on the "Star Wars" system cleared the way for the panel, the Senate Armed Services Committee, to approve a $291 billion military budget bill for the 1992 fiscal year.


3,813 Pounds Down, 6,187 Or So to Go
IT was a moment of truth, as Sarah Brennan described it.
And all because of a bag of pretzels, definitely on the forbidden list.
"A counselor left the bag of pretzels on a bunk, and everyone in the cabin was standing around looking at it," said Sarah, who is 13 years old and lives in Rockville Centre, L.I.
"It took awesome self-control not to touch it."


Barnett Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Illinois Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


New Gene Therapy to Fight Cancer Passes First Human Test
The first attempt to treat cancer patients by inserting potent antitumor genes into their blood cells has not proved dangerous, as some had feared, a scientist said today, but whether it is working remains to be seen.
In his first comprehensive report on the status of the effort to use human gene therapy against terminal cancer, the scientist, Dr.
Steven A. Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute, said that the first two patients to take part in the pilot project were still alive.
They suffer from malignant melanoma so severe that they had not been expected to survive more than a few months when the trial began on Jan. 29.


INSIDE
Senate Votes on Raise And Abortion Guidelines
The Senate voted itself a $22,300 raise and banned the acceptance of speaking fees, bringing its pay in line with that of the House.
Page A15.
In a voice vote, it also approved a bill to overturn a ban on abortion counseling at federally financed family planning clinics.
Page A22.


Shawmut National reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hycor Biomedical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Discontinued China
Pattern Finders Ltd.
P.O.
Box 206D, Port Jefferson Station, N.Y. 11766; (516) 928-5158.
It is easy to break a teacup.
The challenge is to replace it, particularly if it comes from a china pattern that has been discontinued.
But for the last decade or so, there has been a growth in the number of mail-order businesses specializing in discontinued china patterns.


All Eyes on Cuba at Ibero-American Summit
Setting aside his domestic troubles for two days in the diplomatic limelight, President Fidel Castro of Cuba is to make a rare foreign appearance at an international summit conference here this week, seeking to shore up regional support for his Government.
The first Ibero-American Summit Conference, which will bring together leaders from 21 Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking countries on Thursday and Friday, has been billed as an important new vehicle for regional cooperation and economic integration.
The list of confirmed participants includes President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro of Nicaragua, King Juan Carlos of Spain and President Alberto Fujimori of Peru.
Castro the Focus of Attention
But ever since Mr.
Castro announced his intention to attend, preparations have been dominated by speculation about how the Cuban leader will be received by regional leaders whose friendship now looms as a vital lifeline for the weakened Cuban economy.


Fedders Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Golden West Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Guardsman Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


'PROBLEMS' ARISE IN NEW YORK MAP
The Justice Department official considering New York's new City Council map said today that he had "some problems" with the redistricting plan because it might not adequately protect the voting rights of the city's Hispanic residents.
The redistricting plan is the keystone of New York's effort to make its government better reflect the city's growing diversity.
It is subject to Justice Department approval under the Federal Voting Rights Act.
An objection by the department would throw into doubt the elections for the new and expanded Council, scheduled for the fall.


Conner Peripherals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Metro Datelines; Witnesses Sought In Reported Rape
The Manhattan District Attorney's office was seeking more witnesses yesterday to the reported rape of a 3-year-old girl alongside Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive during the Friday rush hour.
Gerald McKelvey, a spokesman for District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan, said the prosecutor's office was "very interested" in hearing from motorists or bystanders who witnessed the attack.
The girl's uncle, Leroy Saunders, 29 years old, has been arrested.He was caught after a brief chase and held for the police on Friday by a tow truck driver who said he saw the attack.


Software Toolworks reports earnings for Year to March 31


Whitman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Agency Urges Cut In Smoking on the Job
Tobacco smoke in the workplace is a health hazard and employers should do all they can to reduce it to the lowest levels possible, a Federal health agency said today.
The agency, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, recommended in a report that employers ban smoking in the workplace, offer classes to help workers stop smoking and offer incentives to encourage them to stop.


College Students Show Little Voter Apathy
To the Editor:
"Is the Vote, Too, Wasted on Youth?" (The Week in Review, June 30) provides a pessimistic account of the participation of younger voters in elections on the 20th anniversary of the 18-year-old vote.


General Dynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pope, Evans &amp; Robbins Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


U.S. Threatening to End Aid at 225 Schools
Seeking to gain control of the high default rates in Federal student loan programs, the Department of Education asked 225 educational institutions today to show why they should not be dropped from loan and other aid programs.
The department listed the institutions as facing suspension in making public default rates around the country.
The Federal programs provide a total of $18.4 billion in financial aid this year.


Pop in Review
Benny Golson  Fat Tuesday's 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street Manhattan Through Sunday
The tenor saxophonist Benny Golson, who started a six-night stand on Tuesday night, is in contention as one of jazz's most undervalued musicians.
In the late 1960's, Mr.
Golson dissappeared into the studios after making a reputation as one of the best jazz composers and band leaders.
When he made his reappearance in the early 1980's, he emerged a different player.
Utterly distinct, his improvisations brought together generations of approaches: the puffy sounds of swing tenor saxophonists blended with be-bop, modalism and a knotted and dense contemporary harmonic sensibility.


Hazy and Hot, and More to Come


Manufacturers National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ben A. Lindberg, 86, Dean and a Consultant
Ben A. Lindberg, a retired management consultant and former dean of the University of Alberta School of Commerce in Edmonton, Alberta, died on July 8 at a nursing home in Wilmington, Del.
He was 86 years old and lived in Wilmington.
Mr. Lindberg died of complications after a stroke, said his daughter, Nancy.


Lattice Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Environmental Tectonics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 24


First Charter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A front-page article on July 8 about the Cote d'Or restaurant in France, which recently earned a third star under its chef, Bernard Loiseau, misstated the first name of the chef at Lucas-Carton in Paris.
He is Alain Senderens.
The article also omitted the identity of Mr.
Loiseau's predecessor, under whom the restaurant earned two stars; he was Francois Minot.
When Mr.
Loiseau took over in 1975, the restaurant's ranking reverted to no stars, as is customary for a new chef.


Keystone International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


National Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Borland International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kaufel Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Jury Retires in St. John's Case
A jury began deliberating yesterday in the trial of three St.
John's University students charged with sexually assaulting a female student near the school's Jamaica, Queens, campus last year.
The jurors at State Supreme Court in Long Island City spent five and a half hours deliberating and having the testimony of a prosecution witness, Keith Wieczorek, read to them.


CHRONICLE
DR.
ROSEMARY E. STEVENS has been named dean of the University of Pennsylvania's School of Arts and Sciences, the university's largest school.
A graduate of Oxford University, Dr.
Stevens, 55 years old, earned her master's and doctoral degrees at Yale University and is chairman of the university's history and sociology of science department.


Schlichter Plans Return
ART SCHLICHTER, a former star quarterback at Ohio State, still thinks he can play in the National Football League and he wants the chance to prove it.
Almost six years after he was cut by the Indianapolis Colts, Schlichter said he would apply for reinstatement to the N.F.L. within two weeks.
"Maybe I'm not good enough to play again, but I certainly think I am," the 31-year-old Schlichter said in an interview published yesterday in The Columbus Dispatch.


Summit in London; Excerpts From Group of Seven's Declaration: Progress, Policies and Plans
Following are excerpts from the final declaration issued by the Group of Seven leading industrialized nations at the end of their economic summit meeting: Economic Policy


CCB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bruce Curll, Psychiatrist, 28
Bruce Curll, a former psychiatrist on the staff of St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan, died on Sunday at Brackenridge Hospital in Austin, Tex.
He was 28 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Dr.
Curll died of complications arising from AIDS, said a spokeswoman for the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, where Dr.
Curll received his medical degree in 1989.


Mugavero Is Eulogized as a 'Legend of Kindness'
Priests, politicians, nuns and hundreds of others jammed a Roman Catholic church in Brooklyn yesterday for the funeral of Bishop Francis J. Mugavero, the retired head of the Brooklyn Diocese, who was eulogized as a man who spent his life loving, giving and sharing.
"Today, Brooklyn's legend of kindness is laid to rest," Anthony Cardinal Bevilacqua, the Archbishop of Philadelphia, said of Bishop Mugavero, who died on Friday at the age of 77.


Why a Closed Bank Declines in Value
To the Editor:
"Bank Reports on Assets Are Doubted" (Business Day, June 25) states that regulators have said bank accounting practices hide reductions in asset values at troubled institutions.
No such statement has been made by anyone at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation -- the regulator responsible for investigating and paying for bank failures.


CFSB Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Northeast Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Warner-Lambert reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Puget Sound Bancorp ei reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gateway Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Compuchem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Home Video
Maturing Market
The video market may not be the wild young thing it was in the 80's, but as a mature entertainment medium there's still plenty of life left.
That was the gist of a report released last week by Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates, an investment banking firm with interests in the media.


Reviews/Dance; Travel Hints to Doomsday Courtesy of Dancenoise
The Dancenoise performance art duo of Anne Iobst and Lucy Sexton offered a typically skewering, helter-skelter bit of social commentary on Tuesday night in "It's a Girl," presented as part of the Serious Fun festival at Alice Tully Hall.
As in previous works presented by Dance noise, the viewer is pulled into a world of nightmare dreams and hilarious apocalyptic visions through which the two women travel with friendly, deadpan objectivity.
This time around, Miss Iobst and Miss Sexton are escaping doomsday, in their own good time.
They have some useful hints about packing for such a trip.
"Boy, that mime really takes it out of you," one says to the other after an immovable suitcase-shtick.
Along the way, they encounter a Swiss-German wild woman bearing blue plastic chairs and accompanied by three chorines named Sheba, Brahma and Vishnu.
A sardonic centaur with whom they contemplate hitching a ride tries unsuccessfully to celebrate his birthday, sad little cake in hand.
A Venus de Milo with arms tells them to "leave me alone, I'm art." And on it goes.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on July 9 about apples and the chemical Alar misstated the response to telephone calls seeking comment from David Fenton, a public relations executive.
His office indeed returned the calls; his secretary said he was on vacation and unavailable.


Home Federal Savings Bank-Mo.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Interwest Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Federal S &amp; L Assn of Fort Myers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Football; Hostetler Arrives Slinging Leather
Jeff Hostetler joined the Giants in training camp today, one day late, and his struggle with Phil Simms for the starting quarterback job officially began.
At some point, Coach Ray Handley said, Hostetler will win the battle and replace Simms.
The question, which remained unanswered by Handley, is whether that point will be reached in a few weeks or later in the season or before or during a future season.


Health-Care Companies Post Gains
Reports of double-digit profits growth during the second quarter continued flowing in from pharmaceutical companies yesterday, lustrous in the sea of earnings declines pouring out of banks, chemical companies, paper companies and airlines, among others.
Wall Street analysts were not surprised, however, by the 17.3 profit increase at the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company and the gains by three smaller phramaceutical concerns.


Meridian National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Republic New York reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Plasma-Therm Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Schoharie Journal; Despised, Small Band Remains In Its Valley
The remote valley of Polly Hollow is the unofficial capital of the sloughters, although those who visit would be well advised to keep this knowledge to themselves.
Along the sinuous West Middleburgh Road that makes its way through the rolling green hills lie crumbling old shacks surrounded by chickens, decaying barns, rusting farm machinery and tiny overgrown family plots.
Here, families with names that have been known in these parts for more than 200 years live lives that often seem untouched by modernity.
They also live with a stigma, perhaps racial in origin, that has branded them as the underclass of rural Schoharie County.


Plasti-Line Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Apple Computer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Software Makers Sue 2 in Canada
Four United States computer-software companies have sued two Canadian computer dealers for pirating programs.
The Ashton-Tate Corporation, the Lotus Development Corporation, the Microsoft Corporation and the Word Perfect Corporation jointly filed the suit against Cotech Computers Inc., Toronto, and Alberta Computers and Supplies, Calgary, Alberta, in the Federal Court of Canada.


A&amp;W Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sundstrand Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., New York, and NCR Corp., Dayton, Ohio, will hold a special shareholders meeting on Aug. 13 to vote on their proposed merger. *
Compression Labs Inc., San Jose, Calif., a video-technology company, will join the Advanced Television Research Consortium, a group of companies formed to develop a high-definition television system. *
First Empire State Corp., Buffalo, a bank holding company, will merge its commercial banking subsidiary, First National Bank of Highland, N.Y., into its principal banking subsidiary, Manufacturers and Traders Trust Co., Buffalo. *
Lotus Development Corp., Cambridge, Mass., a software company, introduced its 1-2-3 spreadsheet software for DOS Release 3.1 Plus. *
Procter &amp; Gamble Co., Cincinnati, the consumer products company, entered into an agreement with Eguimad of Argentina to market disposable diapers and feminine products in that country.
No price was disclosed. *
Rolls-Royce P.L.C., London, and General Electric Co., Fairfield, Conn., have each been awarded half of an estimated $160 million contract to supply gas turbine engines for eight new destroyers for the Japanese Navy.


Corrections
A listing on the Health page yesterday with an article about compulsive spending misstated the telephone number of the Consumer Credit Counseling Service.
It is (800) 388- 2227.


Galleries to Be Closed At the Morgan Library
Beginning Aug. 5, the reading and print room and exhibition galleries at the Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, will be closed for renovations.


Baxter International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lloyd's Seeking to Oust Seized Bank's Lawyers
The seizure of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the worldwide private bank based in Luxembourg, has raised a question about whether the bank can continue to be represented by Patton, Boggs &amp; Blow, the prominent Washington law firm that also represents the Abu Dhabi Government.
Before it was seized by the Bank of England this month, the bank was controlled by the ruler of Abu Dhabi, Sheik Zayed bin Sultan al-Nayan.
Once the Bank of England closed the bank, it appointed a receiver, Touche Ross, the accounting firm, to administer the reorganization of the institution.


Genentech Says TPA's Market Share Falls
Genentech Inc. said today that its share of the North American market for drugs used to treat heart attacks dropped to 53 percent in the second quarter from 60 percent in the first quarter and about 65 percent a year ago.
As a result, Genentech is now predicting that North American sales of its drug, known as TPA, will drop to about $180 million this year from $210 million last year.
Until now, Genentech, a biotechnology company based in South San Francisco, Calif., had been saying it expected this year's sales to be about equal to last year's.


China Mobilizes Flood Relief as Rains Let Up
Some 200 million people have reportedly been affected by the severe flooding in central China that has already killed 1,729 people, and hundreds of thousands of soldiers and civilians are mobilized along the swollen Yangtze River system to prevent the dikes from collapsing.
But relief may be in sight, as no severe rains have been reported there since Monday.
Official reports today suggest that the weather patterns associated with two months of downpours are moving north.
That would reduce the risk along the Yangtze but could lead to flooding along the Yellow River.


When I.B.M.'s Big Guns Won't Do
In windowless rooms here, jammed with personal computers and young programamers and littered with empty soda cans, I.B.M. is trying to prove that a giant company can produce software to match the best programs crafted by the wizards of Silicon Valley.
Writing brilliant software is still more art than science, best done by quirky and obsessive hackers willing to immerse themselves in thorny problems for months at a stretch.
Until now the world's largest computer maker has taken its usual regimented approach, sending out battalions of programmers to conquer problems with heavy artillery instead of a few rifle shots.


Minntech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Inquiry Clears Schoolteacher In Girl's Death
A gym teacher will not face criminal charges in the death of a 9-year-old girl who was crushed by a gymnasium partition door in March after the teacher jammed a safety device, Suffolk County's top prosecutor said today.
District Attorney James M. Catterson Jr. said that the victim, Deanna Moon, could have been instantly freed if a safety chain, lying uninstalled at the bottom of a grimy gear box, had been in place when the door was first installed.


Arthur Briggs, Trumpeter, 92
Arthur Briggs, an American trumpeter who was one of Paris's most popular jazz musicians in the years between the two world wars, died on Monday in Chantilly, a suburb of Paris.
He was 92 years old.
He died of kidney failure, his family said.


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Schering-Plough reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Michigan National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Robert Motherwell, Master of Abstract, Dies
Robert Motherwell, a major presence on the American art scene for nearly 50 years and one of the last giants of the Abstract Expressionist movement, died on Tuesday afternoon on Cape Cod.
He was 76 years old and had had a heart ailment for some years.
The cause of death was believed to be a stroke, his curator, Joan Banach, said.
She said that he died in an ambulance en route to Cape Cod Hospital.


Accounts
*
Health Net, Los Angeles, a health maintenance organization, to Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, Los Angeles.
An agency spokesman said the account, which has billings of about $5 million, had been handled by Ketchum Advertising Los Angeles. *
Texas Microsystems, Houston, a manufacturer of industrial micro-computers, to Dahlin Smith White, Salt Lake City, for business-to-business advertising.
An agency spokeswoman said the account, which has billings of $3 million, was previously handled by the company's in-house advertising department. *
Greenwood Mills Inc., Greenwood, S.C., a textile manufacturer, to Biederman, Kelly &amp; Shaffer, New York, for business-to-business advertising.
An agency spokeswoman said billings are $1 million.


Shelby Williams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Baseball; Hollins Helps Phillies Send Dodgers to 7th Loss in a Row
Dave Hollins's solo home run and Dale Murphy's run-scoring double today led the Philadelphia Phillies to a 4-2 victory over Los Angeles.
The loss was the seventh in a row for the Dodgers, their longest losing streak since 1987.
Tommy Greene (7-3) pitched seven strong innings before being relieved by Mitch Williams with two on and none out in the eighth.
Greene allowed four hits, two runs, six walks and struck out five.


Mismatching the Sofa as a Calculated Art
IT may have started out of sheer boredom.
Perhaps all those prissy, well-intentioned, oh-so-carefully executed sofas with matching pillows and color-coordinated welting and down filling (of course) were starting to look old hat.
Surely they were made by tradition-bound upholstery craftsmen.
Surely they were meant to last a lifetime.
But even in some soigne living rooms, they are now being upstaged by something new: the calculatingly mismatched sofa.


Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jacobs Engineering Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Breast-Implant Maker Releasing Data to Back Safety Claim
A leading manufacturer of silicone breast implants said today that it was releasing research that it said showed the implants do not increase the risk of breast cancer.
The manufacturer, Dow Corning Corporation, said it submitted the research, 329 studies it conducted over the past 30 years, to the Food and Drug Administration last week.


Quayle Says Thomas Critics Are Making Unfair Attacks
Vice President Dan Quayle lashed out today at critics of Judge Clarence Thomas, saying the Supreme Court nominee was the victim of unfair personal attacks by people who knew little about him.
"You have some people lining up against Judge Thomas without even looking at his credentials, his character and his experiences in life," Mr.
Quayle said at a breakfast of the Chamber of Commerce in Manchester, N.H.
"Instead, because they don't believe he shares their political views, they've set out to attack him personally."


4-Year-Old Girl, Finding a Gun, Shoots Herself
A 4-year-old Brooklyn girl found a loaded gun hidden in a pile of trash in her backyard yesterday, cradled the heavy weapon in her arms and accidentally shot herself, her father said.
"I thought it was a firecracker," he said.
"I looked, and then my little girl came running to me with blood coming down her arm. She was screaming, 'Daddy! Daddy!' "
The incident was the second this week in which children fired guns they had found.
On Monday a 9-year-old Bronx boy fired a gun from a bedroom window into an office building, narrowly missing a worker.
The girl shot yesterday was taken to Woodhull Hospital, where she was treated for a graze wound of the right arm and admitted for observation.
"Thank God it was not fatal," said her father, Jose Vivancon, 31, of 190 Wilson Avenue in the Bushwick section.
Holding Gun to Chest
"I immediately grabbed the gun," he said.
"It's a very tragic thing when kids can't even play in the back of their house."
He said his daughter, Niomi, was holding the heavy gun -- a 9-millimeter Mac-11 automatic handgun, the police said -- close to her chest with both her arms when it went off.
He said she was playing with her 5-year-old brother when she found the gun in a corner of the courtyard behind their two-story wood house, hidden among tin cans, bent metal and other rubbish.
The police said they were investigating the possibility that the brother might have accidentally fired the gun.
But the father insisted that the little girl shot herself.
Edwin Casillas, 30, the owner of a pool hall that backs onto the courtyard, said it was not unusual to hear gunshots in the neighborhood, but he said it was first time any shots had been fired in the courtyard.
"The kids are always playing here," he said.
The small dirt yard was filled last night with laundry hanging from clotheslines.
An old sofa was among the debris scattered around the edges.
Mr.
Casillas said that perhaps some neighborhood youths had hidden the gun in the courtyard.
"It's a tough neighborhood," he said.
"We have many shootings around here."
Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman, said the incident occurred at 6 P.M.
She said the gun contained one spent round and four live rounds when it was recovered by the police.
On Monday, a 9-year-old boy, alone in his apartment in the Port Morris section of the Bronx, found a gun in his 30-year-old aunt's bedroom, loaded it with a clip containing 22 rounds of live ammunition, pointed it out the window and pulled the trigger.
He fired one round that entered the window of an office building across the way at 190 Willow Street that went past a clerk working at her desk and pierced a metal cabinet before slamming into a wall.
On Tuesday, the police arrested the aunt's former boyfriend, Jesus M. Cruz, 29, of 3540 Decatur Avenue in the Bedford Park section of the Bronx.
He was charged with endangering the welfare of a child as well as unlawful possession of a deadly weapon.


Golf; L.P.G.A. May Have Found A Star
Brandie Burton is a 19-year-old rookie on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour, but she has already had plenty of success as a professional golfer and hits the ball so far that they call her Boom Boom Brandie.
Distance is just one of Burton's strengths on the golf course.
Her game is so complete and consistent, including temperament and composure, that she is rightfully viewed as the top prospect on a tour searching for an emerging star.


Reviews/Dance; The Royal's 'Swan Lake' With Sylvie Guillem
There was a time when "Swan Lake," especially when performed by the Royal Ballet or various Soviet dancers, could move even the most jaded ballet fan's heart.
But during its Metropolitan Opera House engagement, which will end on Saturday, the Royal's principals have been giving us little more than steps.
The best news so far in the company's otherwise splendid production was Sylvie Guillem, whose Odette-Odile on Tuesday night was partnered by Laurent Hilaire as Siegfried, and Monday night's debut by Stuart Cassidy, a young soloist who was the Prince to Viviana Durante's Swan Queen.


McGraw-Hill reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Northland Cranberries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Multimedia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRW Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oil Use Slumps by 4.1% In Sharp 6-Month Drop
With the economy in recession, oil demand was 4.1 percent lower for the first half of this year than in the 1990 period, the American Petroleum Institute reported yesterday.
Bucking recent trends, production rose slightly in the first half and imports fell.


Marion Merrell Dow reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Essay; Before Embracing Assad . . .
What's really in that letter from Syria's dictator, Hafez al-Assad, to George Bush?
News accounts say that Syria has unconditionally accepted our proposal to convene a Middle East conference.
Only a silent U.N. observer would be permitted, goes the Bush compromise; and if face-to-face negotiations stall, no running to a plenary session of outside powers can happen without both parties' consent.


DS Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Philip Morris Companies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United Telecommunications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


How to Surprise The Milanese
IF anyone has the right to call her shop Eclectica, it's Teresa Ginori Conti, who recently opened a store at 3 Corso Garibaldi in Milan, Italy.
Among the home furnishings and accessories she sells are an avant-garde four-poster bed by Tom Dixon and chandeliers by Deborah Thomas that are a conglomeration of glass shards.
There are also water holders from Rajasthan, in the north of India; pottery urns from Indonesia, and smooth alabaster vases from the Valley of the Kings near Luxor, Egypt.


Baseball; Mets, in Dust of the 9th, Become Believers Again
The explosion of dust had cleared, but nothing had been settled.
Runner Gregg Jefferies was flat on his chest.
Catcher Terry Kennedy was on his knees.
Umpire Bruce Froemming had his hands on his hips, signaling nothing.
"Then there was a mad scramble for the plate," recalled Jefferies.


Arms Pact: Final Steps
The last remaining obstacles to a treaty reducing the superpowers' strategic nuclear arsenals were cleared in a brief meeting between high American and Soviet officials at the United States Ambassador's residence in London.
The two sides resolved differences over the definition of "throw-weight" and over what constitutes a new missile.
Article, page A12.


College Students Show Little Voter Apathy; Registered Turn Out
To the Editor:
"Is the Vote, Too, Wasted on Youth?" (Week in Review, June 30) omits crucial information that brings light to the problem of low voter participation among youth and its solution.
While you cite turnout of all eligible voters to be 33 percent among youth and 57 percent of the population as a whole in 1988, you do not cite statistics for voter turnout among those who are registered.


Consumers Should See Their Credit Reports
To the Editor:
The problem you describe in "Credit Bureaus Draw Fire for Misuse of Data" (Consumer's World page, June 22) are quite real.
One of my constituents was refused credit because of an error in his credit rating files.
He would not have found out about this error unless he had been denied credit.


CIT Group Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hubbell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Guy Ferri, a Diplomat And a U.N. Official, 69
Guy Ferri, a Foreign Service Officer from 1954 to 1972 and then the deputy representative of the International Atomic Energy Agency to the United Nations from 1972 to 1983, died on July 8 at his home in Palm Coast, Fla.
He was 69 years old.
He died of cancer, a family spokesman said.


Drunken-Driving Ban
National Football League players convicted of drunken driving face a fine and four-game suspension under a new league policy instituted by Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE on Monday.
Under the policy, a drunken-driving conviction doesn't mean an automatic suspension and the player will be entitled to a hearing.
But first-time offenders are subject to a four-game suspension without pay and second-time offenders face six-game suspensions without pay.
"It gives the league and the commissioner the flexibility to suspend players after a first violation of the drug and alcohol policy, if it's a violation of the law," league spokesman GREG AIELLO said yesterday.


Intel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


State-O-Maine Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 18


Citibank Executive Given Posts at Parent
William R. Rhodes, a Citibank executive with long and varied experience as a lender and an administrator in the company's Latin American businesses, yesterday was named vice chairman and a director of Citicorp, the bank's parent company.
With his new title, Mr.
Rhodes will assume broader responsibilities for the company's foreign activities, which accounted for about 49.8 percent of Citicorp's profit in 1990.


Dollar Off as Traders Study Summit-Talk Implications
The dollar fell slightly yesterday as traders awaited further signals about the economy and the Group of Seven industrial nations' stand on exchange rates.
Gold prices rose, with a troy ounce climbing 80 cents in New York to close at $369.70 on the Commodity Exchange.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $369.30, up 55 cents.


Same Pool for Experimental Schools?
As part of his "America 2000" plan for improving the nation's faltering education system, President Bush proposed a privately funded corporation to help create a "new generation" of schools.
That's a worthy idea -- as long as the plan does not thwart existing experimental efforts to improve schools.
Last week Mr.
Bush named an 18-member board composed of prominent business, education and political leaders.
They hope to raise $200 million in corporate donations for research and development to create 535 new schools by 1996 -- at least one in each Congressional district.


Office Depot Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Calton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Elcotel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


7 OFFER MOSCOW TECHNICAL HELP
The Group of Seven industrialized democracies pledged today to provide large-scale technical expertise, but no substantial financial aid, to assist the Soviet Union's transition to a market economy.
The leaders of the seven major capitalist powers also invited Moscow to become an associate member of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank and announced that they and their finance ministers would make regular visits to Moscow to assist its efforts toward economic change.


Europe Airline Rules Proposed
The executive commission of the European Community proposed new rules today to liberalize the community's airline industry, allowing carriers greater freedom to set prices and routes.
Karel Van Miert, the community's transport commissioner, said the proposals would break down remaining barriers to free competition among airlines by 1993, when the community is to scrap internal trading barriers among the member states.
He said he hoped the 12 member states would approve the package within a year so the new rules would be in place when the single European market went into operation.


Fleet/Norstar reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A.T.&amp;T. Settles Bias Suit for $66 Million
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission today announced a $66 million settlement of a lawsuit in which the American Telephone and Telegraph Company would compensate 13,000 employees for job discrimination during pregnancy.
It was the largest cash settlement ever reached by the Federal agency, and is expected to cause a ripple effect among employers facing a work force with a rising proportion of women.


Provident Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


California Stalemate Ends in a Budget
California's long stalemate over the largest budget gap ever faced by a state has ended with an unwieldy package of new taxes and cutbacks in a dramatic reversal of fortunes for a state that just three years ago was debating what to do with its surplus.
As a result, children must now pay taxes on candy, fees for the California State University system will rise by 20 percent, income taxes will go up for the very wealthy and for renters and the state will lay off large numbers of employees and cut back on services.


Surgery for Uecker
Former major league catcher BOB UECKER, the voice of the Milwaukee Brewers for the last 20 years as he built a successful televison career, will undergo surgery tomorrow for an aneurysm of the abdominal aorta.
Uecker, 56 years old, will be admitted to Sinai Samaritan Medical Center, the Brewers said. (AP)


Pepsico in Poland
Pepsico Inc. will pay $25 million for 40 percent of Wedel, Poland's largest candy company, the Government said.
The investment is the biggest yet by a foreign partner in a state-owned Polish company that is being privatized, it said.
Wedel, founded in Warsaw in 1851, sold chocolate products and biscuits valued at $58 million last year.
Pepsico plans to invest $56 million over five years to modernize Wedel's operations and build a new factory.


Thomas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Earnings Up at United Telecom and Pactel
United Telecommunications Inc. said yesterday that its second-quarter profit more than doubled from a year ago, largely because of better earnings at its U S Sprint long-distance phone company.
Separately, the Pacific Telesis Group reported a 10 percent rise in its second-quarter profit but said most of the increase resulted from one-time gains.
Meanwhile, Ameritech, another regional phone company, said its profit slipped 14 percent.


Stung by Prostitution, Town Shames Customers
Many residents of this struggling hamlet have come around to feeling sorry for the prostitutes who haunt its streets and, desperate for crack money, charge less than $20 for their services.
But that sympathy does not extend to the men who come from out of town looking for sex.
"It's upsetting to the point where it's like a disrespect of you," said Daria Cooper, telling how she avoids even walking to the store because the out-oftown men often assume that any Wyandanch woman on the street is a prostitute.
For a neighborhood straining to pull itself up from a morass of poverty, drugs and crime, such an attitude is more than many residents can bear.


Pioneer-Standard Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


William J. Marschalk, Executive, 46
William J. Marschalk, an executive vice president of the Great Western Financial Corporation in Los Angeles, died Friday at City of Hope Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 46 years old and lived in Calabasas Park, Calif.
He was being treated for Hodgkin's disease, said a spokesman for the company.


Gephardt Makes It Official: He's No '92 Candidate
Citing the press of duties as House majority leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt announced today that he would not seek the 1992 Democratic nomination for President.
In a two-page letter sent to his Democratic colleagues in the House, Mr.
Gephardt said President Bush could be defeated in 1992, but that someone else would have to do it.


Housing Starts Rose 5.2% in June
Builders broke ground for new houses and apartments at an annual rate of 1,040,000 in June, the third straight increase and the first million-plus month since November, the Census Bureau reported today.
The 5.2 percent advance included a sharp rebound in the Northeast, albeit from very depressed levels, with the West being the only region to show a decline.


First Eastern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tribune Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the sexual abuse case involving students of St.
John's University reversed the identities of two defendants and rendered the name of the third incorrectly.
They were, from the left, Walter Gabrinowitz, Matthew Grandinetti and Andrew Draghi.


HOUSE VOTES LIMIT ON HIRING IN STRIKE
By a substantial but less-than-veto-proof majority, the House today passed a bill that would prohibit employers from hiring permanent replacements for union members on strike.
The vote followed five hours of debate in which Democrats repeatedly contended that the right to strike was disabled if employers could permanently take strikers' jobs away, and Republicans argued that the bill would tip the labor-management balance toward unions, cause more strikes and diminish American competitiveness.


Rollins Truck Leasing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Washington Mutual Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Loud Music, but No Alcohol or Drugs at This Cafe
It was a summer night in Fairfield County and teen-agers were hanging out.
Along Greenwich Avenue here.
In the Friendly's parking lot in Stamford.
At Calf Pasture Beach in Norwalk.
It was a typical Wednesday night at Christ Episcopal Church.
Upstairs in the parish hall, the music was industrial and everybody was dancing.
The Cafe was open.


Review/Dance; Premieres By Chicago At Jacob's Pillow
The performance that Ballet Chicago gave on Tuesday night at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival combined the excitement of adventure with the pleasure of stability.
What made the program adventurous was the fact that four of its five ballets were world premieres.
Even though this was an excursion into the choreographic unknown, the journey was not a rough one, for the Chicago dancers proved to be sleek and assured.
Credit for the choreographic enterprise and the high standard of performance should go to Daniel Duell, the former member of the New York City Ballet who has been the artistic director of Ballet Chicago since its founding in 1987.


First Interstate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oil Jumps to Highest Level Since Last Days of the War
The price of oil jumped yesterday to its highest level since the final days of the gulf war, surprising traders, who said a mix of news, rumors and speculation stirred the rally.
"It's kind of like the domino effect -- one thing starts building up, then another kicks in," said Victor Yu, vice president of futures at Refco Inc.


No Pan Am and United Pact
Pan American World Airways said yesterday that it had failed to reach an agreement with United Airlines over the sale of Pan Am's Latin American and Caribbean routes.
Alan Loflin, a Pan Am spokesman, said that the carrier wanted United to hire more Pan Am employees and that the price was not high enough.
Mr.
Loflin would not say how many employees United was willing to hire and would not specify the amount of the offer.


U.S. and Manila Agree on Terms For 10-Year Lease of Subic Bay
The United States and the Philippines announced agreement today on a new lease on military bases under which American forces will withdraw from Clark Air Base in the northern Philippines but will remain at the giant naval base at Subic Bay for at least 10 more years.
The United States decided to abandon Clark after the 89-year-old American base was severely damaged by volcanic ash unleashed in last month's eruption of Mount Pinatubo.


Joining Up on a Mission of Mercy


Therapy for Palermo
American League umpire STEVE PALERMO will undergo extensive daily therapy sessions to increase the strength and endurance in his legs, doctors in Dallas said yesterday.
Palermo and former Southern Methodist University defensive tackle TERENCE MANN were shot July 7 after chasing down four robbery suspects.
Mann, who was shot in the neck, abdomen and arm, was released after being hospitalized for several days.
Dr.
JOHN MILANI of the Dallas Rehabilitation Institute said that Palermo's rehabilitation would include daily sessions in physical and occupational therapy, nutritional services, nursing education, recreation therapy and behavioral medicine.


People
*
William Perkins, 38, has been appointed senior vice president and a managing partner at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, from senior vice president and managing director of J. Walter Thompson, Chicago. *
James J. Donoghue, 44, has been promoted to advertising director at People magazine, New York, from Detroit advertising sales director.
He succeeds David Long, recently named to the new position of vice president and director of marketing for the Time Inc.
Magazine Company. *
E.
Judy Dwyer, 49, has been promoted to executive vice president at Sally Reich Associates, New York, a recruiting firm specializing in direct marketing professionals.
She had previously been a vice president.


Pop in Review
Mzwahke and the Equals S.O.B.'s 204 Varick Street, at Houston Manhattan
Mzwahke and the Equals sputtered a bit on Tuesday night, then warmed up and finally caught the groove they were looking for.
The South African band, led by the poet Mzwahke, made the lilting and delicate dance music of the South African townships work, and the dance floor at S.O.B.'s filled quickly.


Humanities Nominee Rejected in Senate
After a brief, tense debate, the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee today rejected by one vote the controversial nomination of Carol Iannone to the advisory council for the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Nominations to the council -- like all Presidential nominations, they are subject to a Senate committee's approval -- are typically routine.
But the nomination of Ms.
Iannone, a literature teacher at New York University with outspokenly conservative views, has attracted extraordinary attention.
It has been opposed by some lawmakers and scholarly organizations and debated in editorials and by newspaper columnists as well as on Capitol Hill.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Builders broke ground for new houses and apartments at an annual rate of 1,040,000 during June, the third straight increase and the first million-plus month since November, the Census Bureau said.
The 5.2 percent advance included a sharp rebound in the Northeast with the West showing a decline.  [ Page D1. ]  Consumer prices rose two-tenths of 1 percent in June.
A drop in energy costs helped offset a gain in fruit and vegetable prices.  [ D10. ]
With the economic recession, oil demand was 4.1 percent lower for the first half of this year than in the 1990 period, the American Petroleum Institute reported.  [ D1. ]
Industrial corporations are trying to force cities and small private businesses to share the costs of cleaning up landfills.  [ A14. ]
A $66 million settlement with A.T.&amp;.T. for 13,000 employees who suffered job discrimination during pregnancy was announced by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.  [ A16. ] International
The Group of Seven pledged to provide technical expertise, but no major financial aid to the Soviet Union.  [ A1. ]
A question has been raised about whether B.C.C.I. can continue to be represented by Patton, Boggs &amp; Blow.  [ D2. ] Companies
Apple Computer had higher revenues but a net loss for its third fiscal quarter.
Intel reported record revenues.  [ D1. ]
Bristol-Myers Squibb profit rose 17.3 percent and Warner-Lambert and Schering-Plough also had gains.  [ D1. ]
Industrial companies continued to report generally depressed second-quarter earnings.
Most of them cited the effects of the recession as the primary cause.  [ D5. ]
General Dynamics and Northrop reported higher profits for the quarter.  [ D8. ]  Earnings of the the parent of American Airlines plunged 92 percent.  [ D9. ]  Coca-Cola's profit rose 17.7 percent.  [ D5. ]  Profits at United Telecommunications more than doubled.  [ D18. ]
Bank earnings are generally down, hurt by the need to set aside money for future bad loans.
FleetNorstar Financial and C&amp;S/Sovran reported drops for the quarter.  [ D8. ]
Pan American World Airways failed to agree with United Airlines over the sale of Latin American and Caribbean routes.  [ D9. ]
Citicorp's chairman, John S. Reed, said it was possible that the merger trend among large regional banking companies would eventually knock Citicorp from its No. 1 position.  [ D8. ]
Genentech said its market share for drugs used to treat heart attacks dropped to 53 percent in the second quarter.  [ D10. ]
Orion Pictures said it might be forced to seek bankruptcy protection if it cannot raise new funds by the end of August.  [ D21. ] Markets
The Dow closed at 2,978.76, down 5.14.
Big Board trading rose to 195.5 million shares, the highest since May 31.  [ D12. ] .
An improvement in the housing industry prompted credit market participants to sell Treasury notes and bonds.  [ D18. ]  Yields were mixed on money market funds.  [ D11. ]
The dollar fell slightly.  [ D19. ]  The price of oil jumped to its highest level since the final days of the gulf war.  [ D19. ] Today's Columns
Since early 1990, the RF&amp;P Corporation has been at the center of negotations that have included budget politics in Virginia and the role of the state's public pension fund.
Talking Deals.  [ D2. ]
Individual investors and corporate treasurers may benefit by studying options price movements.
Market Place.  [ D12. ]
Can a respected, and respectable, account executive who dresses like an investment banker find happiness as the new president of a controversial agency?
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D21. ]


Bigger Banks Can Be Better
America has too many banks.
The merger of two weak giants, Chemical and Manufacturers Hanover, makes sense for them and for the industry.
But excitement over "the biggest bank merger in history" implies their troubles are over.
The banks must still make the merger work.
Chemical and Manny Hanny, by their size, have suddenly focused attention on bank mergers.
But big regional banks have been growing bigger by merger for several years.
Even now, talks are under way between North Carolina's NCNB and Atlanta's C&amp;S/Sovran, whose merger would be the
second
biggest in history.


Robert Templeton, 62, Presidential Portraitist
Robert Clark Templeton, who painted Presidential portraits of Lyndon B. Johnson and Jimmy Carter, as well as leaders of the civil-rights movement, died on Tuesday at his home in Woodbury.
He was 62 years old.
He died in his sleep, apparently of a heart attack, said his wife, Leonora.


Reporter's Notebook; Press Gets the Scoop on the Next TV Season
In a semi-annual ritual, the press that covers the television industry heads to Hollywood for a three-week dose of details about the coming season.
This summer's event is being held in the Universal City Hotel, on a hill that overlooks a stage on the Universal Studio lot where tourists flock to watch the "Miami Vice" shootout attraction.
The purpose of the event is to give reporters and critics a chance to ask television executives, producers and stars about budgets, programming philosophies and how it feels to work with the famous Mr. or Ms.
So-and-So.
Parties are given, photos are staged, stars are paraded, all with the idea that reporters will go home dazzled and give the new season's offerings a helpful plug.


Ryan's Family Steak Houses reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Bombast at the Summi
The seven leaders gathered at the economic summit meeting this week in London faced two historic challenges: to jump-start a long-stalled international trade agreement and to help propel the Soviet Union toward a market economy.
They responded mainly with wind.
Trade issues were dutifully debated, but the Europeans had no intention of lowering trade barriers to benefit the international community, or even their own taxpayers, over a handful of farmers.
And when Mikhail Gorbachev appeared, the leaders applauded but offered more words than dollars.
As one of Mr.
Gorbachev's advisers recently lamented, the Soviets "need hard currency, not soft advice."


Geac Computer reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


2 Killed by Would-Be Robber
A gunman attempting to rob a department store employee in the store's parking lot fatally shot two customers on Tuesday, the authorities said.
The victims were two teen-age sisters who were leaving the store on their way to their car, said the police chief, Jack Aiken.
The suspect, Larry Eugene Hall, 29 years old, was in custody, Chief Aiken said.
Easley is 100 miles northwest of Columbia.


Reebok and Converse Land Big-Time Athletes
In the ever-continuing stuggle to find big-name athletes to wear their products, Reebok International, Stoughton, Mass., and Converse Inc., North Reading, Mass., have landed some highly visible players.
Whenever a member of the United States team wins a medal at the Olympic games next summer in Barcelona, Spain, he or she will appear on the victory stand dressed in specially designed Reebok "award suits." Reebok has become an official sponsor of the 1992 American team.
Converse has added Kevin Johnson, the point guard for the Phoenix Suns, to its roster of National Basketball Association players who endorse its athletic shoes.
Starting in the 1991-92 season, Mr.
Johnson will wear Converse's new Accelerator basketball shoes in games and will also appear in television commercials.


Football; Coslet Starts Anew by Looking Back
Day one.
Second season.
Coach Bruce Coslet meets the press.
What a difference a year makes.
"I was flying by the seat of my pants last year," Coslet said today at the official opening of the Jets' training camp.
"I didn't even know the names of the players or the secretaries. I'm more comfortable now. I know what to expect.


Foreman Suing Holyfield
Unable to get a bout scheduled with Evander Holyfield, George Foreman wants to slug it out with the heavyweight champion in a Houston courtroom.
Foreman and promoter Bob Arum are suing Holyfield, promoter Dan Duva and trainer Shelly Finkel.
The lawsuit, which seeks $100 million, asks that a judge issue an injunction to prevent Holyfield from fighting former champion Mike Tyson for the heavyweight title.
Holyfield and Tyson have scheduled a bout for Nov. 8 in Las Vegas, Nev.
The suit, filed Tuesday in Harris County District Court, contends that Holyfield, Duva and Finkel entered into a contract July 9 that stated that Foreman would meet Holyfield in a rematch of their April 19 bout, won by Holyfield on a unanmious decision.
The contract called for Foreman to be paid $12.5 million and 50 percent of the pay-per-view receipts over $7 million.
It would have paid Holyfield a reported $20 million.


United Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Track and Field; For a Budding Rivalry, Some Tips About Elbows
PattiSue Plumer stands 5 feet 4 inches in her track shoes.
She weighs 108 pounds, before a 3,000-meter race in 98-degree heat.
She is sick of getting pounded to the track in a noncontact sport.
"I don't like contact; I don't win races with contact," Plumer said yesterday at a press gathering for the New York Games to be held Saturday at Wien Stadium in northern Manhattan.
"But I know it's more exciting for the fans, and it's probably good for track."


Wendell Cherry Is Dead at 55; Hospital Leader
Wendell Cherry, vice chairman of Humana Inc., operator of a nationwide chain of hospitals and provider of health insurance for 1.6 million people, died on Tuesday at his home in Louisville, Ky.
He was 55 years old.
He died of lung cancer, said a spokesman for Humana.


Diagnostic Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


As Population Grows, Hispanic Power Lags
Last month, New York City's Districting Commission congratulated itself on having completed the most public reapportionment process ever -- one that it said complied with the City Charter's goal of "fair and effective representation of the racial and language minority groups" protected by the Federal Voting Rights Act.
But in carving new districts for an expanded City Council -- a task that could help define New York's politics for the next decade -- the mapmakers' failure to satisfy advocates for greater Hispanic representation reflected the slow political emergence of the city's fastest growing minority group.


Results Plus
TRACK AND FIELD Ottey Extends Streak  Merlene Ottey won the women's 100 meters yesterday in 10.87 seconds in the Golden Gala Grand Prix meet in Rome, extending her string of consecutive victories in the event to 52.
The Jamaican led all the way, with Carlette Guidry of the United States second in 11.07.
Colin Jackson of Britain won the men's 110-meter hurdles in 13.09.
Greg Foster of the United States was second in 13.10. (AP)


Valley National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Summit in London; Toward a Smaller World
What the leaders of the most powerful industrial democracies began with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today was a dialogue about what the world would be like if the Soviet Union became one of them.
As Mr.
Gorbachev and his host, Prime Minister John Major of Britain, said today, they are only at the beginning of the dialogue, but it is a turning point nonetheless.


Robert R. Gross, Spa Owner, 79
Robert R. Gross, co-founder with his wife, Joy, of the Pawling Health Manor, a spa in Hyde Park, N.Y., died on Friday at his home in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
He was 79 years old.
He died of colon cancer, said a funeral home spokesman in Rhinebeck.


Metro Datelines; 2 Versions in Plot To Kill Prosecutor
"Hit men" hired by a murder defendant to kill a Manhattan prosecutor had devised two plans for the killing, depending on whether the prosecutor took the subway or a car, prosecutors said yesterday in announcing indictments in the case.
District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan said the plot to kill Daniel Bibb, an assistant district attorney, was the most serious plot against a prosecutor since he became District Attorney in 1975.


6 Industrial Companies Report Declines in Their Earnings
Industrial companies continued to report generally depressed second-quarter earnings yesterday.
Most of them cited the effects of the recession as the primary cause.
Some executives, however, said they saw signs of an upturn during the remainder of the year.


Dean Foods Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


Keene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Commerce Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pop in Review
Urge Overkill CBGB 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street Manhattan
The burgeoning rediscovery of early 1970's rock promises to be far less reverent than previous rock revivals; even two decades ago, it was difficult to take much of 1970's rock seriously.
Urge Overkill, a band from Chicago that performed on Sunday night, skews its heritage with precision and glee.


Meindert DeJong, 85, A Children's Author
Meindert DeJong, an award-winning author of children's books, died on Tuesday at Allegan General Hospital in Allegan, Mich.
He was 85 years old and lived in Allegan.
He died of emphysema, said his wife, Gwendolyn.


Maine Goes Back to Business As Governor Signs a Budget
Gov.
John R. McKernan signed a $3.2 billion state budget early today, putting state government fully back in business for the first time in more than two weeks.
The Legislature passed the budget Tuesday.
The two-year spending plan authorizing $300 million in new taxes allowed 10,000 state employees to return to work.
They had been idle all but three working days since July 1.


Modine Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Status on McHale
KEVIN MCHALE underwent successful surgery yesterday to remove a bone spur and clean out ligament damage in the joint of his left ankle, the Boston Celtics said.
McHale underwent the procedure as an outpatient at New England Baptist Hospital and is expected to be available for the opening of training camp in October, the team said in a statement. (AP)


Rockwell International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Inter-Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reed Sees No Big Problem If Citicorp Falls From No. 1
Citicorp's chairman, John S. Reed, said yesterday it was quite possible that the merger trend among large regional banking companies would eventually knock Citicorp from its position as the nation's largest banking company.
But Mr.
Reed also said at a meeting of Wall Street analysts that a drop in rankings "because of regional combinations would be of little importance to us." What would be worrisome, he said, would be an erosion in Citicorp's share of the national consumer banking market or its position as the leading international bank.


Maytag Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


National Medical Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Marquest Medical reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Summit in London; Excerpts From Talks by Gorbachev and Major: Investing and Accepting
Following are excerpts from the news conference held today by Prime Minister John Major of Britain and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev after the Soviet leader addressed leaders of the Group of Seven nations:  OPENING STATEMENTS
John Major


Iraq Atom Effort Ruined, Inspectors Say
Contradicting reports that Iraq had produced enough nuclear material to build at least one atomic bomb, United Nations inspectors have concluded that bombing raids during the Persian Gulf war probably destroyed Iraq's uranium enrichment installations before they produced any weapons-grade material.
The inspectors, part of the team sent here by the Security Council to check on Iraq's nuclear potential, say Iraqi officials have deluged them with information about the enrichment program since Monday.
On that day, the International Atomic Energy Agency's Director General, Hans Blix, told the Security Council that Iraq's disclosures about its nuclear installations were still inadequate, even though Iraq had acknowledged that it had a secret enrichment program.


FMC Gold Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Basketball; Concerns Over Homeland Burdening Nets' Petrovic
This should be Drazen Petrovic's time, the moment to savor.
He came to the United States to prove that he could be a starting guard in the National Basketball Association, and the Nets are prepared to let him make his point.
With Reggie Theus set to take a $4 million deal in Italy, Petrovic will probably be the Nets' starting shooting guard when the season opens in November.
But that hasn't eased Petrovic's mind.
Theus may be heading overseas, but Petrovic's thoughts have crossed the Atlantic, too, as ethnic conflict has swept across his homeland of Yugoslavia.


Keith Brown, Pole Vaulter, 76
Keith Brown, who as a senior at Yale University in 1935 set a world record of 14 feet 51/8 inches in the pole vault, died on Monday at his home in Delmar, Calif.
He was 76 years old.
His son Steve said the cause of death was emphysema.


Nuclear Team Shifts Conclusion on Iraqis
United Nations inspectors now believe that allied bombing raids probably destroyed Iraq's uranium enrichment sites before they produced any material that could be used to make nuclear weapons.
The conclusion, which contradicts earlier reports that Iraq had enough material to make at least one bomb, seems to support Baghdad's claim that it is not hiding nuclear sites.


Northrop Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Owens-Corning reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Parker Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Central Pennsylvania Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Georgia Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Johnson to Skip 100
BEN JOHNSON is abandoning all hopes of regaining his 100-meter title in the world track and field championships next month in Tokyo, according to manager KEMEEL AZAN.
Johnson will not attempt to run in the 100, which is his specialty, but will try to earn a spot on Canada's 400 relay team, Azan said yesterday in Toronto. (AP)


Flowers That Arrive Before Their Time
BY far the handsomest plant in my garden right now is a huge colony of a crocosmia called Lucifer.
I would say that the plants have increased in number over the years until I almost have enough, except that there's no upper limit on my desire for it.
Rising as much as four feet above the handsome sword-like foliage, the flowers are borne on tough but wiry branching stems that grow at odd angles.
The flowers start opening at the base of their stemlet, which bears 20 or more buds.


Albany International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


William Wesley Peters Dies at 79; A Devotee of Frank Lloyd Wright
William Wesley Peters, an architect who devoted much of his career to preserving and promoting the work of Frank Lloyd Wright, died yesterday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Madison, Wis.
He was 79 years old and had homes in Spring Green, Wis., and Scottsdale, Ariz.
He died of the effects of a stroke he suffered on July 5, said a spokesman for the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation, of which Mr.
Peters was chairman.


Credit Markets;
A $110 million tax-exempt issue of Dade County, Fla., aviation revenue bonds was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Fancies Frozen in Stone
ALTHOUGH the Jewish Museum, at Fifth Avenue and 92d Street, still needs to raise $6 million to complete its new wing, a group of stone carvers, both masters and apprentices, are nearly finished with the French Gothic carvings that will ornament the facade.
The limestone comes from the same quarry in Indiana that provided the stonework for the original 1908 structure, which was designed by C. P. H. Gilbert as a home for Felix Warburg, the financier.
The new ornamentation is being made by Cathedral Stoneworks, which trains unskilled young people in stonecutting.
Cathedral Stoneworks is a partnership between the Episcopal Cathedral of St.
John the Divine and David Teitelbaum, a preservation developer.


At Last, Hope for the Everglades
Florida has finally agreed to stop fighting responsibility for the Everglades.
An enlightened agreement between Gov.
Lawton Chiles and the Justice Department holds promise for purifying the poisoned water that is killing the "river of grass."
The agreement would settle a bitterly contested three-year-old suit by the U.S. attorney in Miami, Dexter Lehtinen.
With strong backup from environmentalists and Everglades National Park officials, he charged the state and the South Florida Water Management District with violating the state's own standards.


Three Israeli Soldiers Killed In a Shiite Guerrilla Ambush
Two Israeli officers and one soldier were killed on Tuesday night when their patrol was ambushed by Shiite fundamentalist guerrillas while the Israelis were on a mission in central Lebanon, the army said this evening.
One of the pro-Iranian Party of God guerrillas was killed in the operation.
The Israeli troops were apparently on a mission to attack Party of God locations when they were ambushed.


How Senate Voted On Salary Increase
Following is the 53-to-45 roll-call vote by which the Senate approved a measure for salary increase of $23,200 and a ban on accepting speaking fees.
A yes vote was a vote for the measure.
Voting yes were 28 Democrats and 25 Republicans.
Voting no were 27 Democrats and 18 Republicans.


Merging the Portfolios; New Chemical Bank to Have Big Amount of Real Estate Loans, and Their Troubles
The new Chemical Bank will have one of the largest portfolios of real estate loans in the nation and with it some equally big problems.
Even before the proposed merger with Manufacturers Hanover, Chemical Bank's hefty commercial real estate loans totaled $6.7 billion, with $1 billion of that delinquent and $544 million in foreclosed property.
With the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation now about to kick in its own $3.5 billion of commercial property loans, $385 million of which is delinquent, executives in the real estate department of the new Chemical Banking Corporation have a total of $1.385 billion worth of troubled loans.


Idex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Barr Labs Gains in Bid To Sell AIDS Drug
A New York company has won conditional approval to market the AIDS drug AZT if the Burroughs Wellcome Corporation loses its monopoly on the medication, Federal officials said today.
The National Institutes of Health granted the conditional marketing license to Barr Laboratories Inc., which is based in Pomona, N.Y., about 30 miles north of Manhattan, said Marc Stern, an agency spokesman.


Tokyo Stocks Fall Again
Japanese stocks fell today for the third straight trading session.
The Nikkei index of 225 stocks dropped 151.99 points, or 0.66 percent, to close at 22,908.71.
The Nikkei declined 314.45 points on Wednesday and slipped 50.43 points on Tuesday.


In Case Your Patio Has Shoals
FOR some people, there is no more haunting sound than that of the buoys bobbing in the harbors of New England.
Now, with a new series of metal wind chimes, the landlocked can dream away.
Harbor Bells, handmade of steel on the coast of Maine, reproduce the three notes of various buoys.


Yields Are Mixed on Money Market Funds
Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday.
Bank money market accounts, which compete with the money funds, were unchanged, at 5.25 percent, according to The Bank Rate Monitor's national index.


Summit in London: Reporter's Notebook; Leader of the Free World, or Just Plain 'Geoffrey'?
George Bush tried not to let it bother him that Mikhail S. Gorbachev was getting the lion's share of attention at the London talks, but on Tuesday night, the President's ego took a real blow.
At Queen Elizabeth's dinner at Buckingham Palace for the seven world leaders attending the talks, Bush aides recounted, the wife of a foreign minister came up to the President and greeted him warmly.


Robert-Mark reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Game Righetti Wants To Forget
By design, said Dave Righetti, the fastball was supposed to wind up inside on Kevin McReynolds.
The design, though, wound up a blueprint for calamity.
"The pitch never got to where it was supposed to get," the left-handed reliever for the Giants said after yesterday's game.
"And so it's tough to say where it was headed."


Coke's Net Up 17.7% In Quarter
The Coca-Cola Company, the world's largest maker of soft drinks, reported yesterday that its second-quarter profit rose 17.7 percent, to $482.4 million, or 72 cents a share, from $409.9 million a year earlier, or 61 cents a share.
The results were in line with, or slightly better than, analysts' expectations and showed Coca-Cola's continuing strength abroad, where its competitors, especially Pepsico, are relatively weak.
Revenue rose 11 percent, to $3.04 billion, from $2.74 billion a year earlier.
Coca-Cola's shares rose 50 cents yesterday, to $58.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.
A Promising Summer Cited
"This was a very good quarter" for Coca-Cola, said Emanuel Goldman, an analyst who follows the company for Paine Webber.
Moreover, June sales were strong, indicating a promising summer.
Hot weather stimulates soft-drink sales, and Mr.
Goldman noted that there seemed to be a heat wave developing in Europe, where Coca-Cola has some of its strongest and most profitable business.
Mr.
Goldman estimated that volume of soft drinks sold abroad by Coca-Cola, especially Europe and Japan, grew about 8 percent during the quarter.
That compares with slower growth of 3.5 percent in the United States, where soft-drink consumption is the highest in the world.
Moreover, Coca-Cola's domestic sales were lifted somewhat by special circumstances, including an 11 percent rise in fountain sales at restaurants, partly a result of Coca-Cola's winning the huge Burger King account last year.
By contrast, sales of cans and bottles, where Pepsi is a strong competitor in supermarkets, rose only 1 percent in volume in the quarter, Mr.
Goldman estimates.
A Reserve Fund for Litigation
The company held in reserve 2 cents a share, or $13.3 million, from its earnings, for what Coca-Cola called "potential one-time charges" related to 10-year-old litigation by Coke bottlers.
Earlier this month, a Federal court ruled in the company's favor against a small group of bottlers that contended Coca-Cola was gouging them on the price of concentrate for Diet Coca-Cola.
But the court, while ruling against most of the claims, said that the bottlers were entitled to a refund for certain sugar sweeteners bought by the bottlers between 1980 and 1987.
"The litigation has been going on for time immemorial," Mr.
Goldman said.
"The potential charges are very minor."


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Business Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Prisoners Release 2 Guards After Uprising in Maryland
Armed inmates who seized control of a maximum-security cellblock at the Maryland State Penitentiary ended a 23-hour standoff today by releasing a second guard held hostage, the authorities said.
All inmates involved in the rebellion surrendered peacefully, said Frank Nazzone, the assistant Maryland corrections commissioner.


River Forest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First City Bancorp (Tenn.) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Seattle is offering $59 million worth of water revenue bond anticipation notes due on May 1, 1994, that are priced to yield 5.5 percent through Chemical Securities Inc., which was awarded the issue in competitive bidding.
The financing is rated MIG-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and SP-1+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp., the highest ratings for short-term municipal securities.
Common Stock  *
Bank of New York Co. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to register American depository receipts for 100 million shares of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., the British advertising company. *
Hartmarx Corp., Chicago, is offering four million common shares at $9.50 a share through First Boston Corp. *
Micronics Computers Inc., Fremont, Calif., is making its initial public offering of three million common shares at $6 a share through Paine Webber Inc. *
Rotech Medical Corp., Orlando, Fla., is offering 1.3 million common shares at $7.50 a share through Wheat First Butcher &amp; Singer Capital Markets.
Financial+(wheat first)


PARENT &amp; CHILD
MARTHA BENES recalls the anxiety she felt the first time she and her husband, Sean Ward, took a vacation without their daughter.
The girl, Katherine, was 20 months old when relatives who thought her parents could use some time alone gave them, as a joint birthday present, a long weekend at a Vermont country inn.
And the relatives also offered to care for Katherine while her parents were away.
"I wrote down four pages of instructions about her daily routines as well as how they should handle any of the dozen emergencies I thought might happen," said Ms.
Benes, an office manager in Arlington, Mass., a Boston suburb.
"That was, of course, more for my benefit than for my daughter's."


Victorian Danger To The Home Section:
A cautionary note should be offered to anyone interested in old taxidermy  [ "Stuffed Victorian Birds and Beasts Are On the Prowl Again," June 20 ] .
These items may contain toxic substances.
In addition to arsenic, which was mentioned, mercury was often used and asbestos may be present.


Crompton &amp; Knowles reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Amsco International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ameritech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Manages To Dazzle In Debut
He said his legs were shaking and that they kept shaking, a nervous twitch that would not subside even after the first runback, the first catch or the first hit.
Raghib (Rocket) Ismail, in his professional debut here tonight, kept telling himself to calm down, "to take it down a thousand," he said later.
The Toronto Argonauts would whip the Hamilton Tiger-Cats, 39-18, in the Canadian Football League game before 41,178 fans in the Skydome, but as far as Ismail was concerned, all he did was finally whip himself into shape in his first game action since New Year's Day, when he wore a Notre Dame jersey.


Democrats End Lawsuit Against Bush Aide
The Massachusetts Democratic Party has dropped a lawsuit against one of President Bush's aides, saying it cannot prove that he conspired with a police union to disrupt the party's convention last year.
The party said on Wednesday that it was dropping its conspiracy lawsuit filed last year against the aide, Ronald Kaufman, the White House deputy assistant for personnel, and Stephen DeAngelis, a Republican campaign worker.
They attended the June 1990 state Democratic convention in Springfield, which was disrupted by a protest by Springfield Police Local 364.


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co. reports earnings for 12mo June 30


New York State Electric &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Robert West, 65, Dies; Professor of Economics
Robert L. West, professor of international economic relations at the Fletcher School of Economics at Tufts University, died Wednesday at his home in Wayland, Mass.
He was 65 years old.
Professor West died of cancer, said a spokeswoman for the family.


Walker Takes Lead After Taking a Nap
Colleen Walker has been around long enough to know how to recover from situations like the one she faced on the back nine today, when she made bogey-bogey-double bogey on three consecutive holes.
She followed it up with two birdies on the last four holes en route to a round of four-under-par 67 and the first-day lead in the $500,000 JAL Big Apple Classic.


Review/Art; In Westchester, Sculpture Meets Nature
"Sticks and Stones" at the Katonah Museum of Art is most striking for its diversity.
The 10 contemporary artists in this show approach sculpture in as many different ways, from Alan Sonfist's modest conservationist-minded constructions made of the branches of potentially endangered species of trees, to Patrick Dougherty's grandly scaled installation, which towers over one corner of the garden of this recently built museum.
What ties together the whole exhibition, as its title makes clear, is a shared interest by the artists in natural materials.
For some of them, like Ilan Averbuch in his "Shadow of the Sun," the use of wood, stone and even mud inextricably links their work to the themes of nature and landscape.
For others, like Mel Kendrick, whose wood sculptures have so much to do with Cubism, the link to nature is indirect.


Lightning, Meet Thunder: Steinbrenner Joins the N.H.L.
Sport's most improbable major league franchise -- the Japanese-controlled, English-financed team due to begin playing the Canadian national sport in Florida next year -- has apparently been rescued by an even less probable white knight: George Steinbrenner.
Executives involved with the club said yesterday that Steinbrenner had arranged emergency financing for the Tampa Bay Lightning, the National Hockey League expansion team headed by Phil Esposito, the former Ranger coach and general manager.


Traffic Alert
East Side Rezoning Alliance Third Avenue Summer Festival: Third Avenue will be closed Sunday from 42d to 57th Street from 10 A.M to 6 P.M.


Review/Film; Australians Forcing The Japanese Hand
Bryan Brown is shaping up as the Australian Gene Hackman, an actor with a never-ending stream of films, most of them well beneath his talents.
Mr.
Brown's "FX2" and "Sweet Talker" came and went in May.
His latest, "Prisoners of the Sun," opens today at the 57th Street Playhouse.
It is a sincere, competent courtroom drama that never matches the demands of its historical subject.
For a few early, harrowing moments, this fictional version of real events is as disturbing as it ought to be.
In historical fact, in 1942 the Japanese held 1,100 Australian soldiers in a prisoner-of-war camp on the Indonesian island of Ambon.
When the camp was liberated in 1945, only 300 had survived and the Japanese were tried as war criminals.


BankAmerica Profit Rises On Larger Volume of Loans
The BankAmerica Corporation, the nation's second-largest bank after Citicorp, yesterday reported a 2 percent rise in quarterly earnings, to $272 million, because of an increase in loan volume and a decrease in expenses.
Earnings per share were $1.16 for the second quarter, compared with $1.17 for the 1990 second quarter, when the bank earned $267 million.


Hanoi Says Man Supposedly in Photo Is Dead
Vietnam says that one of the men in a photograph that supposedly shows three missing prisoners of war is dead and that his remains were given to the United States last year, the Pentagon announced today.
But forensic experts have been unable to make a positive identification.
The Pentagon spokesman, Pete Williams, said the Hanoi Government reported that the remains of Col.
John L. Robertson of the Air Force were given to United States officials in April 1990.


A Raise for Senators
After voting Wednesday to increase their salaries by $23,000 and to ban the acceptance of speaking fees, Senators defended the vote in the name of ethics and equity.
Page A13.


Senate Adopts Tough Measures On Health Workers With AIDS
The Senate adopted a proposal today that would mandate prison terms of at least 10 years and fines of up to $10,000 for health workers who knew they had AIDS but had failed to inform patients on whom they had performed invasive procedures.
The vote was 81 to 18.
The Senate then voted 99 to 0 on a proposal, backed by the Senate leaders, that would virtually direct the states to require health professionals engaged in invasive procedures to be tested for the AIDS virus.
It would bar those infected from performing invasive procedures unless they received permission from a panel of experts and informed their patients.


U.S. Issues Up a Bit in a Quiet Day
Prices of Treasury securities inched higher in dull, thin trading yesterday.
The strongest activity took place late in the session, after the Federal Reserve Board reported that a key monetary aggregate posted a larger than expected decline of $6.9 billion during the week ended July 8.


Parcells Staying Cool At NBC Training Camp
Bill Parcells was not sweating, his natural state at this time of year while overseeing training camp in a 95-degree swelter.
In fact, the former Giants head coach was (dare I say it?) looking quite radiant yesterday in an electric blue shirt, white pants and white shoes (sans socks) in a cool Manhattan hotel ballroom.
His neatly coiffed hair was white as snow.
Here was the newly named analyst for NBC's "NFL Live" in the first real days of the rest of his life, attending a brand new summer camp, Camp O'Neil, a two-day conclave of NBC Sports' football announcers, producers and directors summoned annually by executive producer Terry O'Neil to prepare for the coming season, which will combine NFL and University of Notre Dame football.


Pop/Jazz; New Sounds From an Old Time
The rooms at Sun Studios, at 706 Union Avenue in Memphis, aren't very big, but they're crammed with history.
Black-and-white photos of Elvis Presley, Jerry Lee Lewis, Johnny Cash and other rockabilly legends who recorded there in the 1950's are hung, sometimes crookedly, on the dirty-white tile walls.
The ceiling is a bric-a-brac pattern instead of flat, because the studio's owner, Sam Phillips, knew that sound travels in sine waves and thought that the design would enhance the room's recording quality.
Old tape machines and reel-to-reel recorders are on display, and the front desk where the receptionist used to sit now bears a sales rack of original Sun singles.
When the rockabilly singer Billy Riley decided to make his first album in more than 20 years, he returned to Sun Studios, where he had recorded singles like "Flying Saucer Rock-and-Roll" and "Red Hot" between 1956 and 1959.
Co-producing the album with J. M. Van Eaton, who was the house drummer during the label's heyday, Mr.
Riley laid down new versions of Sun classics like "That's All Right (Mama)" (Presley's first single), Johnny Cash's "Folsom Prison Blues," Jerry Lee Lewis's "Whole Lot of Shaking Going On" and other rockabilly standards by Little Richard and Chuck Berry.
The album is titled "706 Union Reunion."


Pension Would Top His Pay
A New York City police panel has recommended that the department's highest-ranking uniformed officer be granted a disability pension that could amount to as much as $116,000 because of a hearing loss he suffered when firecrackers went off near him at a 1989 Rolling Stones concert.
The officer, Chief of Department Robert Johnston, is retiring after close to 40 years on the force.
Chief Johnston, who is 62 years old, currently is paid $107,779 a year.


Illinois Tool Works Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Best Way to Save the Banks
The megamerger of Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover vividly illustrates the changes rocking the American banking system.
These two giants were falling further and further behind in the fiercely competitive global marketplace.
Although no one knows if they will survive as one entity, they would likely have failed without this consolidation.
The deal is certainly a harbinger of more mergers.
We make a grave error, however, if we believe that consolidation, in and of itself, is a solution to the underlying problems of the banking industry.
We cannot make one healthy bank merely by combining two or more sick ones.
And big is not necessarily better, as the problems of Citibank in New York and Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank in Japan illustrate.


A Marketing Expert To Run Laura Ashley
What does a former automobile and electronics salesman know about selling flowered frocks and perfumed potpourri?
"I know what a consumer is," says Jim Maxmin, 48 years old and the new chief executive of Laura Ashley Holdings, the beleaguered purveyor of genteel household furnishings, toiletries and clothing that evoke the style of an English country manor house.


Time Warner Vice President
Philip R. Lochner Jr., a former commissioner with the Securities and Exchange Commission, has been named senior vice president of Time Warner Inc.
Mr.
Lochner will work closely with Time Warner's co- chief executives, Steven J. Ross and N. J. Nicholas Jr. as well as the vice chairman, Gerald Levin, and other senior executives, the company said yesterday.
He will help focus on corporate business strategy.


Colgate Palmolive reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


'Just and Durable' Peace: Resolutions 242 and 338
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said yesterday that the Middle East peace conference sought by the United States must be held on the basis of Resolution 242, which was approved by the United Nations Security Council on Nov. 22, 1967, and of Resolution 338, approved on Oct. 22, 1973.
Here are the resolutions:
Resolution 242
THE SECURITY COUNCIL,


Robert Nemiroff, 61, Champion Of Lorraine Hansberry's Works
Robert B. Nemiroff, a Broadway producer who championed the works of Lorraine Hansberry and who won a 1974 Tony Award for the musical "Raisin," based on the playwright's "Raisin in the Sun," died yesterday at Tisch Hospital, New York University Medical Center.
He was 61 years old and lived in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Jewell Handy Gresham.


A Founder Is Leaving Backer Spielvogel Bates
Stephen M. Leff, one of the founding partners of Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, announced his resignation yesterday, and the company said that its long-running changing of the guard was now ended.
Jay Schoenfeld, executive vice president and media director, will assume the media responsibilities that had been handled by Mr.
Leff, the agency's vice chairman and director of media and administrative services.
Mr.
Leff, who was among the executives who helped to start the agency in 1979, said he planned to pursue interests in broadcasting and related industries.
The resignation follows a series of personnel changes during the last two years at the United States subsidiary of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide.
They have been overseen by Carl Spielvogel, chairman and chief executive of the parent company, which is owned by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C.
"The restructuring in the U.S. company is over," Mr. Spielvogel said.
During that time, three other founding partners have retired, and the agency has seen the appointments of a new president, Ken Rogers; a new executive vice president and executive creative director, Don Easdon, and a new executive vice president and director of strategic planning and research, Larry Chiagouris.


Four Is a Crowd Inside Jets' Cockpit
Last season, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet decided on his starting quarterback less than a week before the season opener.
So if you are playing quarterback bingo with the coach this year, the uniform numbers to remember are 8, 7, 15 and 11, and not necessarily in that order.
The arrangement of those numbers simply reflects the alphabetical order for the team's four quarterbacks.
No. 8 is Browning Nagle, the strong-armed second-round draft choice out of Louisville, brought in to compete with the incumbent, No. 7, Ken O'Brien.
No. 15 is Turk Schonert, the insurance policy and former Bengal brought in by Coslet.


Robinson Takes Retirement Route
Stacy Robinson has always been a thinking man's football player: bright, analytical and logical.
In recent days, even while his agent, Tony Agnone, was negotiating for a new contract with the Giants, Robinson was wondering if he wanted to keep playing pro football.
On Wednesday, Agnone worked out a one-year contract for $275,000.
Today, before Robinson even looked at the contract, he retired from football.


Handicapped Find Transit More Accessible
When Raymond Garcia, a 25-year-old college student who uses a wheelchair, first started riding New York City buses three years ago, some drivers refused to pick him up.
Passengers accused him of making them late for work, and the wheelchair lift on the bus often broke down, stranding him for hours until a repairman came.
Today, things are different.
"I take the bus everywhere. I just wave my hand and the drivers stop," Mr.
Garcia said.
"The lifts don't get stuck as much anymore, and people don't stare and point when the driver uses the lift, because they are used to it."


In Reversal, Election Panel Rejects More Travel Costs for News Media
The Federal Election Commission reversed itself today and killed a recently passed regulation that would have allowed Presidential campaigns to charge news organizations to help pay for Secret Service agents' air travel.
The Secret Service, under a Treasury Department regulation, pays no more than first-class air fare, but the cost of campaign charters is usually much higher than that.
The 1988 campaign of Michael S. Dukakis, for example, is still reporting a debt of $523,555.36 on its books for unpaid Secret Service travel.


Ralph Friedman; Executive, 66
Ralph Friedman, founder of Magno Sound and Video in Manhattan, a concern that performed technical services for the film industry, died on Tuesday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 66 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.
He died of complications from cancer of the colon, his son Robert said.


The Salinger Papers
When J. D. Salinger's unpublished letters from the 40's and 50's were deposited in the Harvard, Princeton and University of Texas libraries, no one could have foreseen that this donation would one day set the publishing world on its ear, drive writers to the barricades and upset the writers of computer codes.
Doubtless, Holden Caulfield would have thought they had it coming to them.
Who could imagine that the whole business would become so tangled that a couple of Senators would have to find a cure?
It all started in 1983 when Ian Hamilton, literary critic at The Sunday Times of London, decided to do a book on the famously reclusive Mr.
Salinger.
He worked on "J.D. Salinger: A Writing Life" for the next three years.
His labors brought him to the libraries and the unpublished letters Mr.
Salinger had written to friends and associates between 1939 and 1961.
Mr.
Hamilton quoted from and paraphrased a number of them.
When Mr.
Salinger saw the galley proofs, he told his lawyers to sue for copyright infringement.
In 1987, the case was decided by the U.S.
Court of Appeals in New York.
Lawyers for Mr.
Hamilton and Random House, his publisher, argued that the unauthorized use of the letters was legal under the longstanding doctrine of fair use.
That doctrine enables reporters, teachers, critics and historians to quote excerpts of copyrighted material without obtaining permission.
The court found Mr.
Hamilton and Random House guilty of copyright infringement, principally on the ground that the letters used were unpublished.
What angered the writing world was the court's reasoning.
"Unpublished works," it said, "normally enjoy complete protection against copying." Worse, the court repeated this Draconian formulation in 1989 in a case involving the unpublished letters and diaries of the Scientology guru L. Ron Hubbard.
The Supreme Court allowed the Hubbard decision to stand.
Publishing houses, fearful of lawsuits, refused to accept those parts of manuscripts that quoted unpublished materials.
Writers feared they were barred from using the unpublished materials that constitute the soul of probing, illuminating history; They faced the specter of the heir who refuses to grant permission for the use of unpublished materials that might cast the departed in an unfavorable light.
Senator Paul Simon and I stepped in and introduced legislation to amend the fair use section of the Copyright Act.
A year ago, the House and Senate Judiciary Committees held joint hearings.
Writers like Taylor Branch and J. Anthony Lukas explained how the Salinger and Hubbard cases could have a devastating impact on work like theirs.
We two Senators did not want to open the gates to the wholesale use of unpublished materials.
When you or I write a letter, a memorandum or a manuscript, we have a right to our privacy and a right to decide if and when to publish.
Besides, I thought the court was right in finding Mr.
Salinger's copyright infringed; it erred only in the Draconian words it used to explain why.
The trickiest problem in crafting legislation was posed by writers of that most arcane language, computer software.
Under copyright law, software is a literary work entitled to the full measure of copyright protection.
The unpublished part of a computer program is its source code: the instructions a computer reads to learn what it is supposed to do; because a competitor can easily use a source code to make copycat programs, software makers rightly favored strict limits on the unauthorized use of such codes -- that is, strict limits on the use of unpublished materials.
After numerous meetings and microscopic analysis of legislative language, we found a formula that would lift the cloud over authors while safeguarding privacy, property rights and computer codes.
The Simon-Leahy fair use bill was introduced in the Senate in May and reported out of the Judiciary Committee last month.
Representative William J. Hughes, Democrat of New Jersey, has introduced a companion bill in the House.
We look forward to swift passage in both houses this summer and a prompt signing by President Bush.
The whole episode suggests that a summertime rereading of "The Catcher in the Rye" is in order.


Yellow Goes to Leblanc and Helmets Just Go
The Tour de France shattered on several planes today as riders undertook their first journey into the mountains: Greg LeMond lost his yellow jersey as the overall leader, and the rest of the top leadership was rearranged, but only after riders staged a 40-minute strike and broke international rules by refusing to wear safety helmets.
That was for openers.


U.S. Weighs Early Release of Experimental AIDS Drug
In a highly unusual meeting, an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration today began deliberating on whether to approve for marketing a drug that has not been completely tested in normal clinical trials.
The drug is an experimental AIDS remedy, and if it is allowed to go on the market it could establish new standards for the approval of drugs for life-threatening illnesses.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.72
5.82
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.60
5.60
7.55
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.76
7.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.14
8.16
8.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.47
8.49
8.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.51
9.52
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.15
7.15
7.42
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Continental Medical Systems Inc., Mechanicsburg, Pa., an operator of medical rehabilitation centers, named Kenneth F. Barber senior executive vice president, Anthony F. Misitano executive vice president for its hospital operations group and Stephen G. Marcus senior vice president for development. *
Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp., New York, appointed Serge Okun senior vice president.
He will also continue as president and chief executive of the company's IMS International subsidiary, which conducts research for the health-care industry. *
Environmental Systems Co., Little Rock, Ark., a provider of waste management services, said Jack W. Forrest had resigned as president and chief executive to pursue other interests. *
Hadco Corp., Salem, N.H., a manufacturer of printed circuits, said John F. Kropper had resigned as president and chief executive.
He was succeeded by Patrick Sweeney.
The company also named Andrew Lietz chief operating officer and Rodney P. DeRego chief financial officer. *
May Department Stores Co., St.
Louis, promoted Gerald A. Sampson to chairman of its May Company California division from chairman of Kaufmann's, the company's division in Pittsburgh, effective Aug. 1.
Mr.
Sampson will be succeeded by Clarence O. Reynolds. *
Snap-On Tools Corp., Kenosha, Wis., a maker of hand and power tools, said Robert A. Cornog, a director, had been elected chairman, president and chief executive.
He replaces Marion F. Gregory, who retired from the posts. *
Watkins-Johnson Co., Palo Alto, Calif., a maker of military electronics equipment, named Scott G. Buchanan chief financial officer.
He will continue as treasurer.


A Flood of Board Memos is Frustrating Fernandez
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez is growing increasingly frustrated with the seven-member Board of Education that oversees him, telling associates that the board's unrelenting stream of memorandums is encroaching upon his day-to-day managerial authority and hampering his work.
He has told those associates that several board members pester him almost daily with time-consuming requests for information, many of them straying beyond the board's broad policy-making prerogatives into picayune operational matters.


Bill on Witnesses Vetoed
Gov.
Michael Castle has vetoed a bill that would have allowed courts to withhold names of crime witnesses.
Mr.
Castle vetoed the bill Wednesday, citing "substantial questions regarding its constitutionality." The Governor said barring media access to the names "would conflict with the important objectives of accurate fact finding, the prevention of abuse of the judicial process and the maintenance of public confidence in the integrity of the system."


Compaq Set To Invade Japan Market
In the decade since it pioneered the portable computer, the Compaq Computer Corporation has always steered clear of one country: Japan, the world's second-largest computer market and home to the companies that have come to dominate the laptop PC business.
But today, Compaq announced that it would finally take the plunge and begin marketing Japanese-language versions of its machines next year.


The Sculpture and the Sculptor Unveiled
To the Editor:
The caption for your June 28 four-column picture of President and Mrs.
Bush at the dedication of a portrait bust of the President at the Capitol does not name the sculptor responsible for the portrait.
The sculptor of the Bush portrait is the distinguished American artist Walker Hancock.
The day after the dedication in the Capitol was Mr.
Hancock's 90th birthday, and in celebration of the event Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts (Mr. Hancock's home state) declared June 28 Walker Hancock Day in his honor.
Mr.
Hancock is the artist who did the monumental statue of James Madison in the Library of Congress, the very fine War Memorial in Pennsylvania Station in Philadelphia, the sculptures at Stone Mountain near Atlanta, the two Eisenhower inaugural medals, portraits of Chief Justices Earl Warren and Warren Burger in the Supreme Court, and many other works.
He was last year a recipient of the Medal of Freedom.
It would seem that his name is worthy of mention.
JOHN MANSHIP  Gloucester, Mass., July 1, 1991


Driver Tests Negative for Drugs and Liquor
The driver whose truck struck and killed two elderly sisters in upper Manhattan on Sunday had no alcohol or drugs in his system that day, a Port Authority spokeswoman said yesterday.
Results of blood and urine tests taken immediately after the driver was arrested in New Jersey were "completely negative," said Terry Benczik, a spokeswoman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey police.


Lafarge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Conflict Over Cyprus: A Long, Defiant History
The Cyprus issue, into which President Bush has now been drawn as the latest mediator, has defied negotiators for years as they have tried to insure peaceful coexistence between the Greek Cypriot majority and the minority Turkish Cypriots.
Behind the two groups lie age-old resentments: Greece has never forgiven Turkey for the four centuries it was occupied by the Ottoman Empire.


Supreme Court Won't Save Us From Ourselves
To the Editor:
One of the reasons lawyers' writings are so dull is that it is hard to be both humorous and precise.
Russell Baker's wonderful columns, which so often get to the underlying truth by allusion, sometimes miss not only the bull's-eye, but also the target.
"Magnus Manus Shakus," his June 29 column (and I admit I laughed and enjoyed it), is one such example.
The Supreme Court's decisions on G-strings (front page, June 22) and other human body matters do not involve a statement of the law on those issues.
Rather, the Supreme Court decisions involve a statement of the law as to what the United States Constitution prohibits.
All that the Court did was to say that on these issues the Constitution is silent, and thus the people through their legislators can do what they wish to do.
If Indiana wishes to pass a silly law on nudity in nightclubs, it is free to do so.
It is also free to permit, as well as prohibit, nude dancing.
In a democracy, the Constitution does not address most things.
The reason the Supreme Court was wrong in "declaring Franklin Roosevelt unconstitutional" is that it tried to make the Constitution carry more water than is desirable.
Recent Supreme Court decisions have essentially confirmed that the Constitution lets us do what we want to do even if it is stupid.
The Constitution does prohibit some stupid things, mainly those things that would inhibit our ability to argue with and convince our fellow citizens as to what are the better public policies.
Those of us who oppose stupidity have to convince our fellow citizens and not rely solely on the wisdom of nine patricians.
LLOYD MC AULAY  New York, July 2, 1991
The writer is a lawyer.


Heinz to Acquire John Labatt Unit
The H. J. Heinz Company said it had agreed to buy JL Foods, a leading food-industry supplier, for $500 million.
The transaction with JL Foods' parent, John Labatt Ltd. of Canada, will make Heinz one of the biggest North American suppliers of processed foods to the restaurant and fast-food business, with an estimated combined total of $1.4 billion in annual sales.
The deal is expected to close shortly, pending regulatory approval in the United States and Canada, Heinz said.
JL Foods, based in Eugene, Ore., has six major subsidiaries that make and market frozen foods.
The company had sales of $500 million last year.


CHRONICLE
A contractor in East Hampton, L.I., is suing PELE, the former Brazilian soccer star, and his brother, JAIR ARANTES DO NASCIMENTO, contending that they owe him $65,000 for renovating their waterfront house.
The contractor, THEODORE J. BOURIE, who owns Alden Homes Inc., said the $300,000 job was completed a year ago, but the final payment never came.
"At the end of the job, Pele began disputing everything," Mr.
Bourie said.
"He said that everything could have been done cheaper by Brazilians."


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the Maine Legislature's approval of a budget for the 1992 and 1993 fiscal years misstated the Senate vote.
It was 30 to 1.An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to a proposed special meeting of the shareholders of NCR about its merger with A.T.&amp; T. No date has been set for the meeting, but NCR set Aug. 13 as the record date, meaning that only those who hold NCR shares on that date will be eligible to vote on the merger.


The Spoken Word
LECTURE AND WALKING TOUR, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Peddler's Pack Walking Tour," focusing on Jewish heritage, Sunday at noon, followed at 2 P.M. by "Are You Game," a lecture on the life style of children during the early 1900's.
Walking tour, $12 ($11 for the elderly; $6 for students).
Lecture, $7 ($6 for the elderly, $5 for students).
Information: (212) 431-0233.
READING, Synchronicity Space, 55 Mercer Street, Manhattan.
Free reading of works by the Russian poets Roman Bar-Or, Vera Zubareva, Inna Bogachinskaya, Dmitri Strizhov, Aleksandr Pushkin, Nina Kossman and Vlad Tolmachyov, in Russian, with English translation, Sunday at 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 925-8645.


Trade Gap Grows Slightly As Exports Remain Strong
The nation's trade deficit widened slightly in May for the second straight month, the Government said today.
But the $4.6 billion imbalance reflected strong exports and was the third-best showing in eight years.
The gap with Japan, long the largest segment of the deficit, narrowed to $2.4 billion for the month.
The figure was the slimmest difference with Japan since a $1.8 billion gap in February 1984.
In May, imports of Japanese cars dropped by $302 million from the previous month.


Problems Rising for Insurers, But No Wide Collapse Is Seen
In the last six months, four large life insurers -- Executive Life, First Capital Life, Monarch Life and Mutual Benefit Life -- were seized by regulators after thousands of nervous policyholders cashed in their policies.
Still other life insurers have reported serious problems from their investments in high-risk "junk bonds" or commercial mortgages.
With many junk bonds still severely depressed and no end in sight to the commercial real estate slump, experts say it is possible that one or more of these companies could face the same fate within the next year.
As a result, Americans have been besieging financial advisers, insurance companies, bond-rating firms and politicians with questions about the industry's health.
Contrast With Savings Industry
So far, the answer they are giving is that the insurance industry is not headed for a broad collapse like the one that decimated the savings and loan industry.
Industry experts note that life insurers' investments are more diversified and generally in less-risky enterprises than those that proved fatal to many savings institutions.


Seagate Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Art in Review
'Explorations II: The New Furniture' American Craft Museum 40 West 53d Street Through Aug. 4
Sometimes a chair is just a chair and sometimes it's a work of art.
In "Explorations II: The New Furniture," a survey of the work of 11 furniture makers, the chair-as-art is at the forefront, along with the table, chaise, lamp, bench and grandfather clock.
The show is chockablock with objects whose overwrought silhouettes and exquistely crafted surfaces seem to have "esthetic" written all over them.
The result does not feel entirely welcoming to those of us who think that form should follow function as directly as possible or that superlative craftsmanship and the savvy quotation of past styles don't necessarily add up to originality.


William R. Connole, 68, Early Champion Of U.S. Consumers
William Roger Connole, a Washington lawyer who was an early consumer advocate when he served on the Federal Power Commission from 1955 to 1960, died on Tuesday at Georgetown University Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.
He died of prostate cancer, said his daughter Mary de Groot.


Review/Film; Love Is Blind And Memory Is Bluffed
Guy Maddin's fascinating, impenetrable film "Archangel" is a tongue-in-cheek homage to the sort of drama produced in Hollywood in the twilight zone between silent and talking pictures, when sound tracks were scratchy, the dialogue minimal and titles between scenes offered portentous commentary.
Set in the city of Archangel in the Russian Arctic at the intersection of World War I and the Bolshevik Revolution, it tells the interlocking stories of Lieut.
John Boles (Kyle McCulloch), a one-legged Canadian soldier, and Philbin (Ari Cohen), a Belgian aviator, both of whom suffer memory disorders brought on by mustard gas.
Boles is still in love with his wife, Iris, who is dead.
When he meets Veronkha (Kathy Marykuca), a Russian nurse who resembles her and who also has amnesiac tendencies, he believes he has found Iris.


Pfizer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


EX-OFFICIAL SAYS CONTRA--AID FIGURE OFTEN MET GATES
The C.I.A. official who last week admitted a role in an Iran-contra cover-up regularly briefed Robert M. Gates in 1986 on the agency's aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, a former agency official familiar with Mr.
Gates's schedule says.
The briefings, which numbered from three to seven over six months, were said to focus on a legal and Congressionally approved program by the Central Intelligence Agency to assist the rebels, not on the separate, secret arms pipeline to the contras that was then being run from the White House by Oliver L. North.


Sounds Around Town
Soul and Blues
Otis Clay and Li'l Ed and the Imperials, Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield in Central Park, at 70th Street, (212) 360-2777.
Chicago comes to New York with two of its most vital performers.
Otis Clay sings gospel-charged 1960's-style soul, shouting and testifying in a voice that goes from velvet to gravel, supported by one of the best soul backup bands now working.
Li'l Ed and the Imperials play raw-boned Chicago blues, basic and irresistible.
Tomorrow at 3 P.M.; admission is free.
At 3 P.M. on Sunday, the reggae toaster (rapper) Sister Carol will perform; admission is free.
Plush Jazz
Kenny Barron, Bradley's, 70 University Place, at 11th Street, in Manhattan, (212) 228-6440.
Kenny Barron's plush, bluesy chords and polished phrasing bring an elegant surface to some of the most inventive playing in mainstream jazz.
He transforms chords, sometimes to the breaking point of tonal harmony, and spins out new melodies that may well improve on the original compositions.
At Bradley's, he is working with Paul West on bass, and with Ben Riley, a drummer whose subtle cross-rhythms give every tune a lift.
Tonight through Sunday night, with sets at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.
There is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.


Review/Performance Art; A Juggler of Machetes, High Up on a Unicycle
Frank Olivier's bungling boy juggler brought Wednesday night's Serious Fun program to a rousing close at Alice Tully Hall.
Mr.
Olivier, who appeared on Broadway in "Sugar Babies," is a superb juggler who gives himself extra challenges by dropping juggling balls and pins and picking them up again in mid-act, and by generally playing the fool.
Dressed in a floppy crinoline and peddling for dear life about the stage on his unicycle, he looked like an aberrant Giselle, tilting into the miasmic winds of the Romantic ballet.
His nervous appraisal of mounting another unicycle that was six feet high was a delight, as was his lurching progress about the stage on it, while juggling three lethal looking machetes.


Dutch Police Arrest 4 In Theft of Van Goghs
Four suspects have been arrested in connection with the botched robbery of 20 van Gogh paintings from the Vincent van Gogh National Museum, the police announced today.
One of those arrested was a security guard at the museum.
The police said two suspects abandoned the paintings in a car a half-hour after the April 14 robbery because another car with which they were to rendezvous did not appear.


CHRONICLE
A French court has ordered the writer JEAN-JACQUES SERVAN-SCHREIBER to pay damages to the heirs of Paul Reynaud and Helene de Portes for breach of privacy.
In his best-selling book "Passions," Mr.
Servan-Schreiber asserts that the Countess de Portes, Reynaud's mistress, was a Nazi spy and that the couple attempted to flee France in June 1940 with a trunk filled with gold bars.
The countess was killed in a car accident during the trip.
Friends say that the couple never intended to flee France, but were heading for his country house.


Death Penalty Speaks Society's Moral Outrage
To the Editor:
"Vengeance Remains Sole Reason to Support the Death Penalty" (letter, July 3) by David C. Leven, executive director of Prisoners' Legal Services of New York, ignores the most compelling reasons to support the death penalty.
Two studies Mr.
Leven cites do not support his view that the death penalty is not a deterrent.
Both concluded that convicted murderers before or during commission of their crimes did not consider a death sentence as a potential result of their actions.
The only inference that may logically be drawn is the foregone conclusion that murderers are compulsive or pathological.
Mr.
Leven's inference that the death penalty is not a deterrent is an exercise in sophistry: he ignores those who choose not to murder because of the possibility that they will be put to death.
Death penalty supporters are also concerned that the convicted criminal must be prevented from murdering again.
The death penalty is the only way to insure this.
The claim by death penalty opponents that life imprisonment without parole accomplishes the same objective is specious.
Prisoners have escaped from jail and committed murder, or in prison have murdered guards or other prisoners.
No innocent person has been executed in the last 48 years.
The 1987 study cited by Mr.
Leven that stated 22 innocent people were executed in the last century cites not one post-1942 execution.
Also, the authors of that study based their determinations of innocence on subjective judgments.
They qualified their results and conceded that their evidence may not convince others because "every conceivable factor tending to establish innocence" was not present.
Mr.
Leven states that the cost of execution exceeds the cost of life imprisonment.
Execution costs more than providing a prisoner with free food, medical care and shelter for the rest of his life because of the myriad appeals, delaying tactics and general abuse of the legal process by death row prisoners and their lawyers.
A substantial portion of death penalty advocates are members of minority groups.
Mr.
Leven's point that a disproportionate number of convicted killers are minority members does not seem to prevent minority members from identifying with the victim, rather than the color of the criminal.
The death penalty is the only appropriate punishment that expresses society's moral outrage at those who commit murder.
Those who oppose the death penalty are guilty of a misplaced sense of mercy that erroneously equates retribution with vengeance.
BEN KASIRER  Brooklyn, July 9, 1991


Schlumberger Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Child's-Eye View of the Zoo
"YOU know what?" Roy asked. "That fish smiled at me."
The 3-year-old with his own jumbo smile and a zillion and one questions was reveling in his first trip to the Bronx Zoo, home of 4,362 animals representing 674 species, the largest urban zoo in America.
In a city where so much so often disappoints, this is a fairy tale of a place, 265 acres where everything from buffalos to lizards with tongues longer than their bodies roam in lushly landscaped splendor.


At the Movies
Robert Klane's 'Folks'
One day, not long after his screenplay for "Weekend at Bernie's" had been transformed into a zany 1989 comedy, Robert Klane went to lunch with its producer, Victor Drai, and its director, Ted Kotcheff.


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Merck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Japan News Chief Resigns After Plagiarism
The Kyodo News Service, Japan's largest news agency, said today that its president would resign to take responsibility for a series of medical articles that the writer plagiarized.
Shinji Sakai, 71 years old, who has served as president since 1985, will formally resign at the next meeting of Kyodo's directors on Sept. 19, company officials said.
He will be succeeded by the managing director, Yasuhiko Inukai.


S.I. Principal Said to Fudge School Scores
The principal of a Staten Island public elementary school that had the third highest reading scores in New York City was accused by Board of Education officials yesterday of tampering with pupil scores on standardized tests for the last five years.
It is the first case of large-scale test tampering in the city schools, the officials said, indicating that the purpose was to raise the performance of pupils in reading and mathematics.


How Senators Voted on Raise
Following is the 53-to-45 roll-call vote by which the Senate approved a measure for salary increase of $23,200 and a ban on accepting speaking fees.
A yes vote was a vote for the measure.
Voting yes were 28 Democrats and 25 Republicans.
Voting no were 27 Democrats and 18 Republicans.
Alabama: Heflin (D) No; Shelby* (D) No.
Alaska: Murkowski* (R) Yes; Stevens (R) Yes.
Arizona: DeConcini (D) No; McCain* (R) No.
Arkansas: Bumpers* (D) No; Pryor (D) Not Voting.
California: Cranston** (D) Yes; Seymour* (R) No.
Colorado: Brown (R) No; Wirth* (D) Yes.
Connecticut: Dodd* (D) No; Lieberman (D) Yes.
Delaware: Biden (D) Yes; Roth (R) Yes.
Florida: Graham* (D) No; Mack (R) No.
Georgia: Fowler* (D) No; Nunn (D) Yes.
Hawaii: Akaka (D) Yes; Inouye* (D) Yes.
Idaho: Craig (R) Yes; Symms* (R) Yes.
Illinois: Dixon* (D) No; Simon (D) Yes.
Indiana: Coats* (R) No; Lugar (R) Yes.
Iowa: Grassley* (R) No; Harkin (D) Yes.
Kansas: Dole* (R) Yes; Kassebaum (R) Yes.
Kentucky: Ford* (D) Not Voting; McConnell (R) No.
Louisiana: Breaux* (D) Yes; Johnston (D) Yes.
Maine: Cohen (R) No; Mitchell (D) Yes.
Maryland: Mikulski* (D) No; Sarbanes (D) Yes.
Massachusetts: Kennedy (D) Yes; Kerry (D) No.
Michigan: Levin (D) No; Riegle (D) No.
Minnesota: Durenberger (R) Yes; Wellstone (D) No.
Mississippi: Cochran (R) Yes; Lott (R) Yes.
Missouri: Bond*(R) No; Danforth (R) Yes.
Montana: Baucus (D) Yes; Burns (R) Yes.
Nebraska: Exon (D) Yes; Kerrey (D) Yes.
Nevada: Bryan (D) No; Reid* (D) No.
New Hampshire: Rudman* (R) Yes; Smith (R) Yes.
New Jersey: Bradley (D) No; Lautenberg (D) No.
New Mexico: Bingaman (D) Yes; Domenici (R) Yes.
New York: D'Amato* (R) No; Moynihan (D) Yes.
North Carolina: Helms (R) No; Sanford* (D) No.
North Dakota: Burdick (D) Yes; Conrad* (D) No.
Ohio: Glenn* (D) No; Metzenbaum (D) Yes.
Oklahoma: Boren (D) Yes; Nickles* (R) No.
Oregon: Hatfield (R) Yes; Packwood* (R) No.
Pennsylvania: Specter* (R) No; Wofford* (D) No.
Rhode Island: Chafee (R) Yes; Pell (D) Yes.
South Carolina: Hollings* (D) No; Thurmond (R) Yes.
South Dakota: Daschle* (D) No; Pressler (R) No.
Tennessee: Gore (D) No; Sasser (D) No.
Texas: Bentsen (D) Yes; Gramm (R) No.
Utah: Garn** (R) Yes; Hatch (R) No.
Vermont: Jeffords (R) Yes; Leahy* (D) Yes.
Virginia: Robb (D) Yes; Warner (R) Yes.
Washington: Adams* (D) No; Gorton (R) Yes.
West Virginia: Byrd (D) Yes; Rockefeller (D) Yes.
Wisconsin: Kasten* (R) No; Kohl (D) No.
Wyoming: Simpson (R) Yes; Wallop (R) Yes.  *
Running for re-election in 1992.  **
Retiring.


Central &amp; South West Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the settlement of a lawsuit against the American Telephone and Telegraph Company over job discrimination during pregnancy referred incorrectly in some copies to the seniority lost by a plaintiff, Mildred Leisure, and misattributed a quotation.
Mrs.
Leisure lost several months of seniority, not five years.
It was another plaintiff, Helen Shadden, not Mrs.
Leisure, who said: "It was either take the maternity leave or be fired for attendance problems. I just couldn't believe a company as big as Western Electric could do something like this."


Caroline Y. Hicks Wed in Wyoming
Caroline Young Hicks and Bert Fingerhut were married in Grand Teton National Park, Wyo., yesterday by the bride's brother, the Rev.
Russell Eidmann Hicks, a Congregational minister.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Hicks of New Britain, Conn.
The bridegroom is the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
David Fingerhut of Mount Vernon, N.Y.
Ms.
Hicks, who is 36 years old and is keeping her name, is an art consultant in Aspen, Colo.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire and received a master's degree in library science from Pratt Institute.


The Condom Battle Stakes: Young Lives
After much heated debate, New York City's Board of Education voted in February to distribute condoms to high school students.
Now a majority of the board has voted to consider adding an "opt-out" amendment, to let parents block their children from participating.


Tektronix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 25


Market Place; Troubled Insurer Borrows Strength
IT was the stock market that made Richard H. Jenrette rich and famous, and it appears to be the stock market that is going to bail out the Equitable Life Assurance Society, the company Mr.
Jenrette has been running for the last year.
Equitable got $1 billion in new capital yesterday from Axa, a French insurance company, but on terms that will require Equitable to give $750 million of it back if it is unable to persuade investors to buy shares when it seeks to go public next year.


Accounts
*
Hong Kong Tourist Association to Bozell Inc., New York.
The agency's Hong Kong office will do the global planning, with the Chicago office coordinating its execution in North America.
The agency said the account, which has billings of about $8 million, had been handled for the last 16 years by Dentsu Young &amp; Rubicam, Hong Kong. *
Novell Inc., Provo, Utah, a software company, has consolidated its advertising accounts at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco.
Novell said the billings are $5 million.
Foote, Cone has been Novell's agency for corporate advertising, while Dahlin, Smith &amp; White, Salt Lake City, had previously handled Novell's product-advertising account. *
Humminbird U.S.A., a marine electronics subsidiary of Techsonic, to Fitzgerald &amp; Company, Atlanta.
Billings are about $2 million.


Weakened Kohl Frustrated by Summit Colleagues
For Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, who only a year ago seemed to be emerging as Europe's most powerful leader, the summit meeting here this week was a rude lesson in how quickly the world balance can change.
At the 1990 summit talks in Houston, Mr.
Kohl was welcomed as the leader of a mighty nation on the brink of unification and superpower status.
This year, he found himself much weakened and unable to win support for his most cherished proposals, chief among them a plan for vast Western aid for the Soviet Union.


Diner's Journal
Budget Dim Sum
Past the throngs of tourists and sidewalk shopkeepers, tucked away along cluttered and colorful Division Street in Chinatown, is a Cantonese restaurant renowned among Chinese residents of the neighborhood for its diverse and budget-priced dim sum.
Eight-year-old Lan Hong Kok Seafood House looks as if the contractors who built the place quit in midstream.
The front room has soot-brown walls, Formica wainscoting and big glass-covered tables; the unfinished-looking back room is stunning in bright red, with a solitary chandelier in the middle.


Senators Call Raise an Issue of Equity
Members of the Senate, many of them openly defensive about their decision to grant themselves a $23,200 raise in a vote on Wednesday night, said today that they had cast their votes in the name of pay equity, ethics reform and fairness in government.
But others appeared torn about the vote and complained that it would be hard to justify it to voters during a recession that has forced several states into budget crises.


Gannett Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Economists See Gorbachev Returning Home a Winner
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is leaving London without the firm commitment to financial aid that he might have liked and that Germany, Italy and France were apparently prepared to offer.
But in the view of a surprisingly broad spectrum of Western analysts, he left the economic summit with his glass one-quarter full, not three-quarters empty.
Those who think loans to Moscow would be a waste of money, or worse, interpret the vaguely worded offer of technical assistance, expanded trade and "special association" with international lending agencies as a very polite and constructive brush-off.
They expect it will force President Gorbachev to face up to economic realities he has, in their view, been ducking since he rose to power.


Thomas A. Crowley; Executive, 70
Thomas A. Crowley, a retired vice president of Johnson &amp; Johnson, died on Wednesday at his home in Spring Lake, N.J.
He was 70 years old.
He died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


Cyanamid Net Up 18.9%; Caterpillar Posts a Loss
American Cyanamid reported record second-quarter earnings and sales yesterday, but two other industrial companies, Dow Chemical and PPG Industries, announced sharp earnings declines, and Caterpillar Inc. reported a loss.


MCA Studies Hanna-Barbera
Hanna-Barbera Productions and MCA Inc. are said to be in the early stages of negotiations for MCA to buy the maker of television cartoons.
Hanna-Barbera, which created the Jetsons and Flintstones among other characters, is owned by the Great American Communications Company of Cincinnati, a troubled radio and television organization controlled by the financier Carl H. Lindner.


Texas Lawmakers Confront School Financing Issue Anew
After two decades of courtroom skirmishes over the financing of public schools, the Texas Legislature last spring finally produced a new formula intended to end the disparity in wealth between school districts.
But now the Legislature has been called into special session to confront more problems with the plan.
This time, it is at odds with itself over how best to raise the money.


Raymond F. Shaffer; Executive, 79
Raymond F. Shaffer, a retired president of the Greyhound Corporation, died Tuesday at Scottsdale Memorial Hospital.
He was 79 years old.
Mr.
Shaffer was with Greyhound for 31 years.
He became president and chief executive of Greyhound Lines in 1967 and served as president of the Greyhound Corporation from 1970 until he retired in 1977.


Blacks Spar Over Endorsing Thomas
The discord among black groups over Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court escalated today as black conservatives accused his opponents of holding him to an unfair political standard because of his race.
Buster Soaries, a New Jersey pastor who leads a coalition of black conservatives that declared its support for Judge Thomas here today, said, "Black organizations and individuals in positions of leadership do a tremendous disservice to our community when they use their offices to condemn Clarence Thomas for his philosophy and essentially, for departing from liberal orthodoxy."


On Stage, and Off
But Will the Shubert Be Renamed?
The Shubert Organization and the Nederlander Organization, the two largest theater owners in the country, and the Hatfields and McCoys of the industry, find themselves at an interesting juncture.
The Nederlanders have bought the lease to the Shubert Theater in Chicago, which means that starting on Aug. 1, they will book and manage it.
The theater, originally built as an opera house and the first stop on the national tours of both "South Pacific" and "My Fair Lady," is owned by the Chicago Board of Education.
The 99-year lease that the Shuberts held expires in 2001.


Sounds Around Town
Benny Golson, Performing
Benny Golson Quartet, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, in Manhattan, (212) 533-7902.
When the tenor saxophonist Benny Golson was coming up in the jazz world in the 1950's and 60's, his work as a composer was a sideline to his performances in Dizzy Gillespie's big band along with Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers and the Jazztet, which he formed with Art Farmer in 1959.
By the time he settled in California in 1967 to compose for films and television, Mr.
Golson was known primarily for such compositions as "I Remember Clifford," "Whisper Not," "Blues March," "Stablemates" and "Along Came Betty." But in the late 1980's, he renewed his playing career while continuing to compose, and he has re-established himself as an unusually creative saxophonist with roots in both Ben Webster and Lester Young.
His quartet, with Kevin Hays, pianist; Buster Williams, bassist, and Tony Reedus, drummer, will perform tonight and tomorrow night at 8, 10 and midnight, and on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a $12.50 cover charge and a $7.50 minimum.
Musical Moonlighting
Lew Anderson's All-America Big Band, Red Blazer Too, 349 West 46th Street, in Manhattan, (212) 262-3112.
For the last 20 years, the saxophonist and arranger Lew Anderson has been leading a big band made up of musicians moonlighting from steady jobs in recording studios and in the pit bands of Broadway musicals.
For more than a year, Mr.
Anderson and his band have played on Friday nights at a restaurant in the heart of the theater district, the Red Blazer Too.
Their session is advertised as lasting from 6 to 8 P.M., but they actually start 15 minutes early so the musicians who have to get to a theater can leave at 7:45 P.M. to make an 8 o'clock curtain.
The band is a mixture of veterans who are active in swing bands along with younger musicians finding a foothold in New York, all of whom have the versatility and polish required to hold down some of the most demanding musical jobs in New York.
There is no cover charge and no minimum. &lt;&gt;HB&gt;A Pianist Returns
Danny Apoliner, Danny's Grand Sea Palace, 346 West 46th Street, in Manhattan, (212) 265-8130.
Danny Apoliner, the resident singer and pianist in the piano bar at the Grand Sea Palace since 1987, recently returned to his little elevated stage there after a six-month illness, and if anything he seems refreshed and revitalized.
He has a solid repertory of his own material, starting with his songs for the long-running Off Broadway musical "Your Own Thing," a rock treatment of "Twelfth Night," which opened in 1968.
He is still adding to his show scores with a 90-minute television special now in preproduction, "Cinderita," the Cinderella story told in New York barrio terms.
Whether he plays and sings his own compositions or a variety of pop songs from the heyday of musical theater, he gives all of them a buoyant vocal lift that is a reflection of his rhythmic piano style.
He is to perform tonight and tomorrow night from 8:30 to 12:30 A.M.
There is no cover charge and no minimum.


Everything Comes Up Roses for Carter
There were flowers in Gary Carter's locker.
Roses.
It was opening night all over again in New York City for the Dodger catcher, and he had been a smash hit off the Grand Central Parkway.
"I don't know about deja vu, but this is very gratifying," Carter said after the 10-5 Los Angeles victory last night over the Mets.
"Not just because it's against an old team."


For Gorbachev, a Little Help From New-Found Friends
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, his foot in the door of the club of industrial democracies, continued lobbying Western leaders today and was rewarded with a smidgen of technical and economic assistance.
Mr.
Gorbachev called his session with the heads of the seven most powerful industrial democracies on Wednesday "the first step toward a new type of economic relationship." He then met separately today with the leaders of Italy and Canada in the morning and spent the rest of the day with his British hosts.


Memo Maze: Questions, and Then Some
The shortest, on a testing manual, was three lines.
The longest, on affirmative action and the replacement of supervisors, was five pages and had 35 questions.
In between were memorandums about everything from a footbridge at the new Stuyvesant High School (one page, five questions) to an early-retirement bill before the State Legislature (one page, five questions) to a request for "specifics surrounding the alleged elimination" of the Manhattan High School Committee on Special Education (one page, one question).


Soviet Economist Who Urged Change Calls Gorbachev and West 'Foggy'
Grigory A. Yavlinsky, the economist who originally put Mikhail S. Gorbachev's voyage to London in motion, said today that he welcomed the beginnings achieved at the summit, but that he believed an opportunity was missed to make far greater progress.
Mr.
Yavlinsky himself had declined to accompany Mr.
Gorbachev to London, evidently because the program the President compiled for presentation in London fell far short of the radical plan of change and cooperation that Mr.
Yavlinsky had worked out with a group of government specialists at Harvard.


Death Penalty Speaks Society's Moral Outrage; To Murder Again
To the Editor:
What David C. Leven (letter, July 3) overlooks is that released murderers murder again.
Witness Jack Henry Abbott, the murderer who was freed from prison largely through the efforts of Norman Mailer.
Shortly thereafter he killed again.
Whatever inner drive causes this behavior, nobody knows.
But one convict, aware of his tendency, said on television, "I know that if I am let out of prison, I will kill again."
Let's forget costs of executions, and give some thought to the cost in human welfare.
JUNE L. AULICK  New York, July 4, 1991


CHRONICLE
MARYAM BABANGIDA, the wife of President IBRAHIM BABANGIDA of Nigeria, and WANGARI MAATHAI, a Kenyan environmentalist, shared the fifth Africa Prize for Leadership, announced yesterday at the United Nations by CHESTER A. CROCKER, a former Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs.
The $100,000 prize is awarded by the Hunger Project, a nonprofit international aid organization, to African leaders who work to fight starvation.
Mrs.
Babangida founded the Better Life Program, a development project that has enabled women in rural Nigeria to form thousands of cooperatives, farms and markets.


INSIDE
Frustration for Chancellor
Joseph A. Fernandez believes that the New York Board of Education is encroaching on his managerial authority with memos even detailing footbridges.
Page B1.
Accused of Fudging Scores


Valmont Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Texas Instruments Loses; Fujitsu Refuses
Texas Instruments Inc. reported the largest quarterly loss in its history today, only moments after disclosing that it faced a legal battle in Japan to protect valuable computer chip patents.
The loss of $157 million contrasted with net income of $11 million, or 2 cents a share, a year earlier.
The electronics manufacturer attributed the loss mostly to charges involved in programs to cut an additional 3,200 jobs in its global operations.
Sales rose 6.3 percent, to $1.69 billion.


Ryan Signs Pact Worth $4 Million For 1992 Season
Nolan Ryan, who in 1979 became the first million-dollar-a-year baseball player, signed a new contract yesterday that would put him on the $4 million plateau next year.
The Texas Rangers have to exercise the option Ryan agreed to, but once they do -- a development that is a foregone conclusion barring a disastrous injury -- the 44-year-old pitcher would have $4.2 million guaranteed for 1992: $300,000 for agreeing to the option, $2.7 million in 1992 salary, $900,000 deferred at 8 percent interest and a $300,000 payment if the Rangers chose not to exercise their option for 1993.


Review/Television; Presenting the Issues For Viewers' Decisions
Can a half-hour television program touch the heart and stir the brain cells at the same time?
Before you burst out laughing at the idea, tune into Channel 2 at 8:30 tonight for "Whose Side Are You On?"
This first of three CBS News specials digs into the issues involved in a husband's killing of his terminally ill wife.
Next Friday brings the question, lately raised by the rape charges against William Kennedy Smith, of whether the name of a woman who says she has been raped should be made public.
The final program, on Aug. 2, deals with public opinion and the right to parole.


Good News for Lebow
FRED LEBOW, president of the New York Road Runners Club and meet director for tomorrow's New York Games at Wien Stadium in upper Manhattan, received some welcome news about his physical condition on Wednesday.
Lebow, who underwent surgery to have a cancerous tumor removed from his thyroid gland on March 22, was reported in excellent health after a series of tests at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.


Robert Sansone Dies; Toy Executive Was 49
Robert Sansone, former president of Mattel USA, a toy company based in El Segundo, Calif., died Monday at his home in Marina del Rey, Calif.
He was 49 years old.
Mr. Sansone died of cancer, said a spokesman for the family.


Economic Scene; The Hidden Costs Of Mexico Plants
TO supporters of the proposed free-trade agreement between the United States and Mexico, one of the primary benefits to American companies would be greater access to Mexico's low-wage work force.
By moving some or all of their manufacturing and assembly operations to Mexico, the argument goes, companies could reduce their costs and become more competitive on a global basis, ultimately helping the economy in the United States.
To opponents of the proposal, any benefits would come at the cost of American jobs.
They envision companies closing up in this country and rushing south of the border in search of inexpensive labor.
To George Baker, both sides are missing a key point.
Mr.
Baker, an economist who is a visiting scholar for the Program on Mexico at the University of California at Los Angeles, believes manufacturing in Mexico is not nearly so inexpensive or cost-efficient as the relatively low wage rate might make it seem.
Mr.
Baker argues that looking only at direct labor costs -- the wages paid to workers by employers -- does not take into account many hidden costs of doing business in Mexico.
By his accounting, actual labor rates in Mexico could exceed $15 an hour when ancillary costs are factored in, rather than the $1.50 an hour or less that opponents and supporters of the proposed accord presume.
"Companies are reacting prematurely in thinking they're going to cut labor costs by three-quarters," Mr.
Baker said.
Officials of both countries began formal negotiations last month on the proposed agreement, which would eliminate almost all tariffs and other trade and investment barriers between the two nations.
The talks also include Canada, which already has a free-trade agreement with the United States and would become part of a three-way agreement if a deal between Mexico and the United States is concluded.
The proposed agreement is strongly supported by the Bush Administration and by President Carlos Salinas de ortari of Mexico.
Mexico is the United States' third-largest trading partner, after Canada and Japan.
Many American companies, ranging from auto makers to electronics producers, are considering plants in Mexico if the agreement is completed.
They are interested both in getting better access to the Mexican market and in lowering their costs on products to be exported back to the United States or elsewhere.
They would join nearly 1,800 American-owned maquiladora plants already operating in Mexico, employing half a million workers.
Maquiladora plants are those owned by foreign companies.
They enjoy lower trade barriers.
Gabriel Szekely, an economist at the Center for United States-Mexico Studies at the University of California at San Diego, said the problem of hidden costs in Mexico had long been of concern to American and other foreign companies considering opening plants there.
"The question is whether those hidden costs keep companies from moving to Mexico," he said.
"The evidence is that they do not," Mr.
Szekely said, noting the rapid growth in the number of maquiladora and other foreign operations in Mexico.
Still, Mr.
Baker said, American companies need to understand that doing business in Mexico may be far more expensive than they expect.
Mr.
Baker, who worked for two years for the NCR Corporation in Mexico during the mid-1980's and still consults for American companies with operations there, said moving an operation to Mexico involved considerable financial risk and costs that would be borne directly by the company and that should be considered part of the labor-cost equation, Mr.
Baker said.
They range from the costs of high employee turnover to inefficient mail service and a substandard telephone system, both of which decrease productivity, he said.
"Is it still cheaper to move to Mexico when you factor out social costs and include a risk factor?" Mr.
Baker asked.
"I'm trying to get U.S. manufacturing management to ask themselves that question."
Mr.
Baker cites the example of a maquiladora plant in Chihuahua City, south of Texas.
The plant, Mr.
Baker said, claimed an employee turnover rate of 3 percent a month, relatively low at maquiladora plants.
But even at that rate, nearly 800 of the company's 2,200 workers leave each year.
It costs $333 to recruit and train a new worker, meaning the annual cost of employee turnover is $264,000.
Mr.
Baker said there were other hidden costs at the maquiladora plant.
The company pays the city for bus service for the workers and provides a subsidized cafeteria and on-site medical and dental care.
But those costs, Mr.
Baker said, are only part of the story.
"When you go into an area like this you have to apply a risk factor to reflect the fragility and inadequacy of the infrastructure," he said.
"There are always unexpected delays and costs. Your budgets always have a shadow over them. You believe it will cost $100, but it could cost $300."


Dow Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Arkansas Congressman Struggles With Debt
Representative Bill Alexander of Arkansas was meeting with constituents a few days ago when several of them praised him for bringing Federal aid to the state.
"I guess I'm better at doing it for myself," he replied.
The 57-year-old Mr.
Alexander, a Democrat who has served 12 terms in the House of Representatives and is a member of the House Appropriations Committee, is deeply in debt.
He invested in a 10-acre condominium project that went sour in Boulder, Colo.
Two Arkansas banks are seeking to foreclose on his condominium at an Arkansas lake resort and on undeveloped commercial property in his hometown, Osceola.
Mr.
Alexander is selling his house in Washington to meet his bills.


Training Officer Faulted In Police Diver's Death
A New York City Police Department inquiry into the drowning of an officer during a training exercise off the Battery last month has failed to determine why he was not wearing a life vest, but it recommended that the lieutenant in charge of the drill face departmental charges.
Officer Kenneth Hansen, 26 years old, a highly decorated member of the department's Harbor Unit, drowned 250 yards off Battery Park at about 12:30 P.M. on June 11, eight minutes after diving off a police launch to act as the "man overboard" during the training exercise.


Critic's Choice/Dance; The Royal Ballet Unstiffens Its Upper Lip
New York audiences have discovered over the last two weeks that the Royal Ballet they loved to think of as ever so carefully schooled, polite and British has grown a good deal less so.
In fact, the revered old English company might be said to be kicking up its heels with new spirit these days, with a special warmth and verve that does not at all counteract that precise placement and those good manners.


Corrections
An article yesterday about California's new state budget misstated the size of the tax increase.
It is $7.3 billion.


Attack on Staten Island Is Called Racial


UST Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Use Lottery Revenues for Local Schools of the Ticket Buyers
To the Editor:
New Yorkers are misled into thinking that an increase in lottery purchases translates into more funds for school districts, as this year's state budget process makes clear.
For years we have been told by our state legislators that revenue from the lottery goes directly to our schools.
We have been advised that if we purchase more lottery tickets, our schools will receive more state aid.
This promise has not been kept.
A call to the New York State Division of the Lottery showed that the lottery raised over $4 million more in ticket purchases than last year.
Yet, school districts in Westchester County and elsewhere in New York State are receiving substantially less from the state than they received last year.
The Central 7 School District in Greenburgh, for example, will have a 31.4 percent decrease from 1990-91.
School districts in Putnam and Westchester counties alone will lose $52 million in state aid.
The reduction in state aid for education has nothing to do with lottery revenues.
It is obvious that lottery purchases do not have an impact on the amount the state gives our school districts.
State legislators should not continue to mislead lottery purchasers into thinking that every ticket purchased is helping local schools.
One solution to this consumer misrepresentation would be for state lawmakers to give local school districts a certain percentage from lottery tickets purchased at stores in their districts.
This suggestion would help school districts from all over the state.
And encourage people to purchase lottery tickets in their hometowns.
PAUL FEINER  Westchester County Legislator Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., July 9, 1991


Raytheon Wins Missile Contract
The Raytheon Company has beaten out the Hughes Aircraft Company in a battle for a $265 million Defense Department contract for 5,300 Maverick air-to-surface missiles, Raytheon said.
The contract, which calls for Raytheon to deliver 5,255 missiles to the Air Force and 36 to the Navy, runs through April 1994.
The missiles will replace ones used in the Persian Gulf war.
A Raytheon spokesman, Dick Sherman, said the award returned the contract to the company from Hughes, which had it last year.
Raytheon was the Maverick contractor in 1989.
Most of the work on the Maverick will be done in Raytheon's Bristol, Tenn., plant, Mr.
Sherman said.
The contract has no bearing on a recent Raytheon layoff of 700 workers in its missile systems division, Mr.
Sherman said.


Lotus Development reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BellSouth Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BRIEFS
*
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., New York, has received a $42.6 million contract from Hewlett-Packard Co., Palo Alto, Calif., to provide voice- and data-network services. *
Chiquita Brands International, Cincinnati, a producer of fresh and prepared foods, said it had presented a new takeover proposal for Doskocil Cos., Hutchinson, Kan., a meat producer.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Exxon Corp., New York, said it had received British approval for a $2 billion development of an oil and gas field in the North Sea.
Exxon owns 23.2 percent of the field. *
Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co., St.
Paul, said it would form a venture with a Soviet telecommunications organization and the Soviet Ministry of Communications to produce 3M products for use in that country. *
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co., London, said it had bought much of Trafalgar House P.L.C.'s Ellerman Group container-shipping interests in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.
The price was $69.7 million. *
Reebok International Ltd., Stoughton, Mass., has sued Spalding Sports Worldwide, accusing it of using the shoemaker's successful air-pump technology in Spalding's new Airflex baseball mitt. *
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Co., New York, said a unit had acquired 47 percent of a company formed to buy the assets and business of Cross Country Healthcare Personnel, Inc., Boca Raton, Fla., and its affiliates.


In Indonesia, New Human Rights Abuses
To the Editor:
"Strong Quake Kills 21 on Indonesia Islands" merits a prominent place in your July 6 pages.
But you have given no coverage over the last two years to the more than 1,000 Indonesians killed in the course of a counterinsurgency campaign waged since mid-1989 by the Indonesian army in Aceh, a region of almost four million people on the northern tip of the island of Sumatra.
That campaign, against a small number of Libyan-trained guerrillas fighting for independence from Indonesia as part of the Free Aceh movement, has been marked by summary executions, the dumping of bodies along roads and rivers, and widespread disappearances.
When I was there last month to investigate human rights abuses, banners were strung up along roads throughout the region urging the public to "exterminate" members of the movement, and the local press reported lynchings by villagers of suspected guerrillas as security forces stood by.
Trials were under way in six district courts of suspected members of Free Aceh.
Some of those on trial had been involved in violent crimes; others had only been present at meetings where the goals of Free Aceh were discussed.
But all had been held incommunicado in military detention more than six months, and most had been severely tortured.
Troops were transferred last year from East Timor to Aceh to quell the rebellion.
Tensions have increased between Indonesia and Malaysia, where the operational command of the movement is based and where villagers fearing military reprisals have fled.
One would think that the situation in Aceh, resulting in the worst human rights violations by the Indonesian army in almost a decade, would be newsworthy.
SIDNEY JONES  Executive Director, Asia Watch New York, July 8, 1991


41 Airport Guards Seized in Bribe Scheme
Forty-one security guards at Kennedy International and La Guardia Airports were arrested yesterday on charges that they took bribes from limousine operators in exchange for the use of preferred parking spaces in front of airline terminals.
The arrests were announced by District Attorney Richard A. Brown of Queens and the director of public safety for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, Charles Knox, at a news conference at Kennedy Airport.


Corrections
An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to a proposed special meeting of the shareholders of NCR about its merger with A.T.&amp;T.
No date has been set for the meeting, but NCR set Aug. 13 as the record date, meaning that only those who hold NCR shares on that date will be eligible to vote on the merger.


People
*
Philip Carlson has been named senior vice president and chief financial officer at Biederman, Kelly &amp; Shaffer, New York.
He had previously been chief financial officer at Ad Hoc Marketing Resources, New York. *
Robert G. Gouterman has been appointed president of Medi-Promotions Inc., Lyndhurst, N.J., which provides promotional services to pharmaceutical companies.
He had previously been an executive vice president-communication services at Sudler &amp; Hennessey Inc., New York. *
Fred Ciporen has been promoted to vice president and group publisher of the Cahners Publishing Industry Group of the Cahners Magazine Company, Newton, Mass., from vice president and publisher of Library Journal and School Library Journal.


Tokyo Stocks Off a Bit
Stock prices fell slightly today in Tokyo.
The 225-issue Nikkei index ended the week at 22,866.36 for a loss of 42.35 points, or 0.18 percent.
A week ago, the index closed at 23,137.78.


Lockheed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Black &amp; Decker reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Storage Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Ruddick Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Study Finds a Vitamin Reduces Birth Defects
Pregnant women who take the vitamin folic acid from the time of conception vastly reduce the risk of having babies with a serious and common type of neurological defect, a new international study has found.
An earlier study found that women who took multivitamins containing folic acid reduced the risk of having babies with the neurological problem, which includes a wide range of birth defects.
One is a potentially paralyzing condition, spina bifida, or open spine, and another is anencephaly, a lethal condition in which most of the brain is missing.


Burke Has His Mind Elsewhere
Tim Burke dressed yesterday afternoon in uniform No. 44, borrowed Sid Fernandez's black bat and dashed into the equipment room to grab a bag of sunflower seeds.
He took some dreadfully silly batting practice on the field, and that was that.
Burke was now a Met.


Dibble Backs Off
Reliever ROB DIBBLE of the Cincinnati Reds withdrew his appeal yesterday of a three-game suspension and fine for throwing at ERIC YELDING of the Houston Astros on April 11.
Dibble will begin serving the suspension tonight when the Reds play at Pittsburgh.


About That Flag on the Judge's Desk
Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah, said today that Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee, had told him he had not displayed a Confederate flag in his office in Jefferson City, Mo., but had instead kept the flag of Georgia, his home state, on his desk.
The right two-thirds of the Georgia flag is identical to the Confederate battle flag.
That could explain why two Missouri friends of the nominee, Richard Wieler and Poldine Otto, have told reporters that he kept a Confederate flag on his desk as a quirky display of his individuality.


Death Penalty Speaks Society's Moral Outrage; Burden on Indians
To the Editor:
Close to 80 percent of the people who will be affected by a Federal death penalty are Indians convicted of crimes occurring on Indian reservations.
While you note this statistic in "Crime Bill Conferees Agree on Death Penalty" (news article, June 25), about the Biden-Thurmond compromise, you do not indicate why the public should be concerned about the impact of a Federal death penalty on Indian people.
Most murder cases in the United States are prosecuted in state courts, and the decision to impose the death penalty is left to the states.
Fourteen states do not impose the death penalty.
Many states that do, impose it only in very narrow circumstances, such as the murder of a police officer.
Although there are Federal laws against assassination and other forms of terrorism, there is no general Federal murder law, because murder is not a crime normally having national importance.
Consequently, very few murder cases are prosecuted in Federal courts, and most of them involve murders committed by Indians against Indians on Indian reservations (the result of an 1885 Federal law that gave Federal courts jurisdiction over major crimes occurring on reservations).
For example, in 1988, 39 of 64 cases of first-degree murder prosecuted in Federal court involved Indians committing crime on Indian land.
The other murders affected by the crime bill are those taking place on military reservations, Federal parks, and other Federal installations, such as Federal prisons.
If the members of Congress want to make a symbolic point about the death penalty, let them do it, but not by using Indians as their vehicle.
That Senators Daniel K. Inouye and Pete V. Domenici recognized the great need to ameliorate the effect of the Federal death penalty on Indian tribes is to be applauded, not labeled, as it is in your report, an attempt "to derail the death penalty compromise."  NELL JESSUP NEWTON  ALEX TALLCHIEF SKIBINE  Washington, June 28, 1991
The writers are, respectively, professor of law at Catholic University and associate professor of law, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.


Ted and Joe? Give Me Mickey and Roger.
"YOU KNOW, 1961 was an easy season. It was fun. It was exciting -- how could it not be?" said Roger Maris in 1984, a year before he died.
"But what happened afterward, well, it still bitters me up to talk about it."
What happened afterward made Roger Maris the Accidental Hero and obscured baseball's most intense character-as-plot season.
Forget Joe and Ted's Excellent Adventure of 1941, a statistical abstract compared to the Ghostbuster Summer of 1961 when Mickey Mantle and Roger Maris chased Babe Ruth across the field of dreams.


Group Planning SoHo Hotel Brings In Ex-Spy Publisher
THE owners of the Chateau Marmont, the chic and trendy hotel in Los Angeles, are seeking to create an equivalent in Manhattan's SoHo neighborhood.
And to help aim their advertising and marketing efforts at the hip, affluent, well-traveled guests they are seeking, they have brought in Tom Phillips, the former publisher of Spy magazine.
Mr.
Phillips, who left Spy last month following the irreverent magazine's change of ownership, joined Andre Balazs, president of the Chateau Marmont, for an interview earlier this week at the construction site of the Mercer, the hotel they hope to open next spring at the corner of Mercer and Prince Streets.


SCEcorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corn and Soybeans Plunge As Midwest Rain Is Forecast
The prospect of rain and cooler temperatures in the Middle West next week sent prices of corn and soybean futures plunging yesterday at the Chicago Board of Trade.
Corn was the hardest hit, with losses approaching the dime-a-bushel daily limit.
Wheat settled 2 1/2 cents to 4 1/2 cents lower, with the contract for delivery in July at $2.68 1/2 a bushel; corn was 3 cents to 7 1/2 cents lower, with July at $2.36 3/4 a bushel; oats were 2 1/2 cents to 3 cents lower, with July at $1.19 1/2 a bushel, and soybeans were 8 1/4 cents to 16 1/2 cents lower, with July at $5.27 a bushel.


Let Buyer Beware? Indeed!
A state appeals court ruled yesterday that as a matter of law a house could be haunted and that a buyer who wanted to pull out of his $650,000 purchase of a large Victorian home in Nyack, N.Y., because of its "ghoulish reputation" could sue to recover his $32,000 down payment.
The Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan said that since the former owner of the house told many people in town that her house was possessed by ghosts, she was legally obligated to tell the buyer, too.


Next Target for Bush: Accord on Cyprus
As the United States Administration works on the problems in the Middle East, President Bush took on another unyielding area today: Cyprus.
"In the new world I have discussed, none of us should accept the status quo in Cyprus," Mr.
Bush said in a speech to the Greek Parliament.
"And today I pledge that the United States will do whatever it can to help Greece, Turkey and the Cypriots settle the Cyprus problem, and do so this year."


Sports of The Times; The Return Of Seles, And Dog
ONE of the most famous, and currently one of the most mysterious, women in the world made her approach to the blue-and-white press tent here yesterday morning, and it beggar'd all description, so to speak.
Monica Seles's entrance, at the news conference before her first match last evening in the Pathmark Classic, was achieved not by sitting on a burnished barge with perfumed, purple sails, like Cleopatra, but on foot.
Nor did she wear a nifty headpiece, like Nefertiti, or even a brown wig, as she had done only a week ago while trying to shop incognito in a Florida supermarket.


Review/Philharmonic; Prokofiev And Planes Compete In Bronx
The New York Philharmonic in Central Park is a familiar commodity, as much mob scene and spectacle these days as concert, with the audience a significant part of the show.
So it is easy enough to imagine what the scene was like last Monday evening when, by official police estimate, some 90,000 people turned out in ideal weather for the first program in the Philharmonic's 27th season of free outdoor concerts.
But this listener decided to see how such events fare elsewhere, and followed the orchestra to the Bronx on Wednesday evening for a performance of the same program at Pelham Bay Park.
It was a different world.


Diamond Shamrock Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Brands' Net
American Brands Inc. said today that its second-quarter earnings jumped nearly 15 percent on the strength of its liquor, hardware and specialty business divisions.
The company earned a record $181.6 million, or 88 cents a share, in the period, compared with $158.4 million, or 81 cents a share, in the comparable period of 1990.
Sales were flat at $2.94 billion, compared with $2.95 billion in the period last year.


Mattel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Biggest Tip for Policyholders: Check Insurer Before Buying
Policyholders concerned about the health of their insurers can take several steps to protect themselves.
First, be sure the company that issued a policy is licensed to do business in the policyholder's state.
In nearly every state, licensed insurers must contribute to a state-run life insurance guarantee fund, which is intended to protect policyholders if an insurer fails.
And licensed insurers must undergo annual audits by state insurance regulators.
Some experts recommend that no matter where a policyholder lives, he or she should buy a policy from a company that is licensed in New York because its regulators are considered the toughest and most vigilant.


Search Is Long and Grim for Canada's Jobless
The lines start forming on the sidewalk well before the Danforth Toronto East unemployment center opens.
Bill Goller, who arrived in Canada three months ago from Lima, Peru, with his wife and two children, is one of the early risers.
He has taken the train, bus and subway from the industrial suburb of Scarborough.


Corrections
A report in some copies of the Sports People column on July 11 about possible steroid use misstated the connection among three former Syracuse University football players.
Turnell Sims and Tim Green said they shared Rob Moore's suspicion that some teammates might have used such drugs.


Track Invitation For South Africa
Invited today to attend the world track and field championships in Tokyo next month, South Africa is uncertain whether it will send a team.
The invitation was extended by the International Amateur Athletic Federation, the world governing body for the sport.


Minneapolis Youth 2d Victim of Violence at Film Showing
A teen-ager who was shot at the debut of "Boyz N the Hood" has died, becoming the second person in the nation to be killed in violence at theaters showing the film.
The youth, 17-year-old Jitu Jones of Minneapolis, died Wednesday evening at Hennepin County Medical Center of injuries he suffered when he was shot in the neck, a nursing supervisor said.
He had been in critical condition after the shooting early Saturday.


Keep Nudging on Cyprus
Cyprus, an angry battleground between Greece and Turkey, has long been relegated to Washington's neglected roster of seemingly insoluble regional conflicts.
It's high time for the fresh effort to heal a "deep wound" that President Bush promised yesterday during his visit to Athens.
Since Mr.
Bush's next stop is Turkey, he indeed has a "unique opportunity" to coax estranged neighbors toward a settlement.
Once a British possession, Cyprus gained independence in 1960 under an intricate Constitution meant to protect its Turkish Cypriot minority.
The system collapsed in 1974, when Greek Cypriot extremists seized power to attempt a shotgun union with Greece.
Turkey invaded to protect its ethnic compatriots.
The result was forcible displacement of about 160,000 Greek Cypriots and 65,000 Turkish Cypriots.
Ever since, Cyprus has been divided into distinct sectors, separated by a "green line" policed by United Nations peacekeepers.
Around 30,000 Turkish troops still occupy the northern two-fifths of Cyprus, the seat since 1983 of a self-proclaimed Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which only Ankara has recognized.
The division has diminished citizenship rights and hurt the purses of all Cypriots; it has burdened the world with peacekeeping costs and embittered relations between Turkey and Greece, joint guardians of NATO's southern flank.
Communal differences have been narrowed, however, thanks to years of patient U.N. mediation initiated by Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar.
What's unresolved is how much land should belong to Greek Cypriots, who make up 80 percent of the population, and whether the two communities would have equal rights in a federal system, as Turkish Cypriots demand.
The argument is unlikely to be settled until Greece and Turkey use their undoubted influence on their respective Cypriot allies.
What gives Mr.
Bush some leverage as a go-between is the moderation of conservative leaders in Athens and Ankara, each eager for American favor.
The door to a Cyprus settlement is at least ajar; the President is right to give it a nudge.


Protest Tangles Airport Traffic For Rush Hour
Using more than 30 tractors and other pieces of heavy construction equipment, about 60 demonstrators -- demanding contracts and jobs for blacks -- brought traffic to a halt yesterday afternoon at the height of the rush hour on the road leading to Kennedy International Airport.
Beginning at 4:30 P.M. and blocking all three lanes on the Van Wyck Expressway, the protest tied up traffic for 2 1/2 hours, forcing some passengers to leave their cars in the 99-degree heat and lug their baggage on foot for a mile to try to make flights.
Fourteen demonstrators were arrested on disorderly conduct charges by the Port Authority police, which confiscated four tractor-trailers, a front-end loader and two vans.


I.B.M.'s Big Gamble on X-Rays
In an audacious, billion-dollar technological gamble, I.B.M. plans to switch on an experimental X-ray machine next week, beginning an effort to keep the company and the nation from becoming dependent on Japanese computer chips.
The world's largest computer maker is betting that this venture will solve its most pressing technical challenge, vaulting it past Japanese competitors in the race to build a memory chip the size of a fingernail that can store the equivalent of four thick novels.


Shanghai Journal; China Slipping Into a More Comfortable Sex Life
The largest population in the world is proof that it must go on, but sex in China is still laced in secrecy more than sensuousness.
Only recently have social scientists shed light on what happens in the Chinese bedroom -- or, given the acute housing shortage, the living rooms, kitchens, closets and fields to which couples must sometimes resort.


Cray Decides: No Partner For Computer
The Cray Research Corporation has decided against taking a partner in its effort to develop a new type of supercomputer that would be based on a process known as massively parallel computing, its chairman, John A. Rollwagen, told employees yesterday in a memo.
Cray, based in the Minneapolis suburb of Egan, has been considering a variety of strategies to stay abreast of a new generation of companies that use massively parallel processing.
In this process, problems are broken into many small parts and assigned to sets of microprocessors that can be chained together by the hundreds or thousands.


9 A.M. Trading Vote Expected
A revolt against plans for earlier trading on the New York Stock Exchange gathered steam today.
Montgomery Securities, a San Francisco brokerage firm, said it had gathered enough signatures from exchange members to force a special vote on the proposed new opening time.
The stock exchange had announced earlier this month that it would move its opening bell up a half hour, to 9 A.M., beginning Sept. 9.


Arco Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Looking Back and Ahead, Austrian Wins 2 Points
Chancellor Franz Vranitzky won two major points for Austria's international standing in a parliamentary debate this month.
In the debate, Mr.
Vranitzky, a Socialist, was able to block an effort to recognize the independence of the Yugoslav republic of Slovenia, a move that would have put Austria outside the Western consensus on the issue.
In doing so, he persuaded his conservative coalition partners and some in his party that this would be premature.


A.T.&amp; T. Expects Big Write-Off
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company announced better-than-expected second-quarter earnings yesterday, but at the same time it issued a stunning warning that it would take pretax charges of as much as $4 billion against earnings before the end of the year.
The charges will cover expenses related to its takeover of the NCR Corporation and a number of cost-cutting programs.


Cut the Saudis Down to Size
The gulf war isn't over.
The U.S. is making noises about bombing, not elusive nuclear targets but command centers if Baghdad doesn't disclose all nuclear facilities.
And, leaving Iraq, Americans will join a force in Turkey to ward off another Baghdad offensive against the Kurds.
The reason for continued confrontation is that Saddam Hussein remains in power.
What is murky is waffling U.S. policy and ambivalence about him.
Having returned Kuwait to its rulers, the U.S. leaves them to behave as arrogantly as they please, as though the war was fought to save the gulf for autocracy.
The Administration wouldn't put it like that, but it has ceded to Saudi Arabia an influence on American policy that blocks the pursuit of American purpose.


Ballesteros Rides Wind to a First-Round Lead
Seeking the crowning glory to his recent comeback, Seve Ballesteros expertly weaved his way through the windswept sand dunes of Royal Birkdale until a finishing surge carried him into the first-round lead today at the 120th British Open.
With a steady 25-mile-an-hour wind blowing off the adjacent Irish Sea, the 34-year-old Spaniard played with a consummate control that has never been the hallmark of his game, particularly in recent years.
But on the final two holes, the swashbuckler in Ballesteros took over as he eagled the par-5 17th and sank a 45-foot birdie putt on the 18th for a round of four-under-par 66.


Quotation of the Day
"It is apparent to me that Syria has made a very important decision."
-- Secretary of State -- James A. Baker 3d.  [ A1:6. ]


Jobless Claims Rise
The number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment insurance rose slightly in the latest week, the Government said today, but economists said the overall employment picture continued to brighten.
The Labor Department reported that first-time applications for state unemployment benefits rose to 395,000 for the week that ended July 6, from 388,000 the previous week, when the number of claims was at a nine-month low.


French Insurer Invests in Equitable
Equitable Life, which plans to sell stock to the public next year, got a big lift yesterday when a leading French insurance company, Groupe Axa S.A., invested $1 billion in it.
The Axa investment will be converted into common stock in Equitable after it converts to a shareholder company next year.
Axa could wind up with as much as 49 percent of Equitable's stock.


Books of The Times; A Lawyer Whose Client Was Racial Justice
A Season for Justice The Life and Times of Civil Rights Lawyer Morris Dees By Morris Dees with Steve Fiffer Illustrated. 355 pages.
Charles Scribner's Sons. $24.95.
Morris Dees, a white lawyer who grew up in Mount Meigs, Ala., population 400, became a millionaire in 1967 by publishing and selling cookbooks to schools, churches and women's groups.
He was named one of the "Outstanding Young Men in America" by the Jaycees, on a notable list that included Ralph Nader.
The next year, he was on his way to Chicago, where he intended to start a trade-book publishing house, when a snowstorm diverted his flight and he found himself spending the night on a hard bench in the Cincinnati airport.
There, he picked up a paperback copy of "The Story of My Life," by Clarence Darrow, a reprint of the original 1934 autobiography of the famous American defense lawyer.
In "A Season for Justice," Mr.
Dees says that Darrow's book changed the course of his own life.


Don't Stop With Start
It took nine years, but Washington and Moscow have finally produced a landmark accord to cut strategic arms -- by roughly a third.
Start, the strategic arms reduction treaty, should make America more secure.
Its deepest cuts are imposed on the Soviet forces of greatest concern -- the multi-warhead SS-18 missiles that threaten U.S. missiles in their silos.
And it provides for elaborate verification to detect cheating.


Dodgers End Slump and Mets Are the Victims
The 2-0 pitch struck Darryl Strawberry's bat, and the next object the baseball hit was the scoreboard in right field.
Result: Dodgers 3, Mets 0.


TV Weekend; The Art and the Passion of O'Keeffe and Stieglitz
One of this century's more unorthodox relationships, providing a lavish feast for gossips, is skillfully -- and sometimes discreetly -- recalled in "A Marriage: Georgia O'Keeffe and Alfred Stieglitz," tonight's "American Playhouse" presentation at 9 on Channel 13.
There are other characters in the drama but the focus is kept so tightly on the two principals, wonderfully portrayed by Jane Alexander and Christopher Plummer, that the production lingers in memory as a play for two actors.
Around the time of World War I, which is barely mentioned, O'Keeffe arrives in New York from a teaching job in Texas to reclaim some paintings she doesn't think good enough to be seen.
Stieglitz, already famed as a photographer and a fervent supporter of modern artists, thinks otherwise.
Twenty-four years older than O'Keeffe, who is in her 30's, he is also immediately charmed by the blunt woman who is partial to a thick rare steak and a glass of beer with a good head on it.
She becomes the model for an acclaimed series of his photographs.
It is only a matter of time before he leaves his rather sour wife.


At the Bar; After a woman accuses her lawyer of sexual harassment, others tell their own horror stories.
The California Supreme Court is considering a disciplinary rule, mandated by the State Legislature and drafted by the state Bar Association, that would prohibit lawyers from coercing sex from clients.
But Patricia Durham of Rancho Cucamonga can't wait.
Convinced that her divorce lawyer, James McDaniel of Ontario, had neglected her case after she spurned his sexual advances, Ms.
Durham sued him for malpractice and intentional infliction of emotional distress.


John P. Spiegel, 80, Expert on Violence And Combat Stress
John P. Spiegel, an expert on combat fatigue and urban violence, died on Wednesday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 80 years old.
His family declined to give the cause of death.


Suit Over Novel's Use of Real Name Is Dismissed
A Federal District Court in Brooklyn has dismissed a $15 million libel suit brought by a professional musician against the author Oscar Hijuelos over his depiction of her in his Pulitzer prize-winning novel "The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love."
The suit, which was unusual in that it concerned a fictional work, was filed last year by Gloria Parker.
She said in her suit that her reputation had been destroyed by Mr.
Hijuelos's portrayal of her as the racy leader of a 1950's band called "Glorious Gloria Parker and Her All-Girl Rumba Orchestra."


Textron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Dollar Falls Against Mark But Gains in Yen Trading
The dollar closed lower against the German mark yesterday, still recoiling from last week's concerted central bank intervention.
The dollar ended at 1.7745 German marks, down from Wednesday's close of 1.7910 marks.
It closed at 137.65 Japanese yen, up from Wednesday's finish of 136.95 yen.


Pro-Iran Group Issues Photo of U.S. Hostage
Pro-Iranian kidnappers released a photograph of an American hostage, Terry Anderson, here today to back up a threat to German authorities over the treatment of two convicted Lebanese Shiite Muslims in German prisons.
The statement, by the Islamic Holy War organization, made no mention of Mr.
Anderson, the longest held of 12 Western hostages in Lebanon.


Texas Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dow Gains 37.56; Closes At 3,016.32
Stock prices rose sharply yesterday amid spirited trading as investors apparently came to the conclusion that forecasts of disappointing earnings -- with the possible exception of I.B.M.'s -- seemed to have been exaggerated.
"They're not good but they're not horror stories," one trader said of the flood of earnings reports coming in, particularly from the smaller computer companies, in the last few days.


Council Map Makers Argue It Mirrors New York 'Mosaic'
New York City officials appealed today to the Justice Department to approve their City Council redistricting plan, arguing that it "fairly reflects the mosaic of New York City's diverse populations."
With a decision imminent, John R. Dunne, the Assistant Attorney General for civil rights, met here today with members of the New York City Districting Commission, including the chairman, Frank J. Macchiarola.
On Wednesday, Mr.
Dunne had expressed concern that the plan might not adequately protect the voting rights of the city's Hispanic residents.


In Happy Land Trial, Little Mystery
The trial of one of the largest mass-murder cases in the nation opened in the Bronx yesterday, more than a year after 87 people died in a fire in an illegal social club whose very name now seems a mockery: Happy Land.
But while most criminal trials turn on disputed accounts of what happened and who is responsible, the trial in Room 711 of the Bronx County Courthouse has no such mystery.


In an Age of Bland Politics, Eccentricity Lives On in Louisiana
For years, people have been predicting that Louisiana's political culture would one day become as bland and predictable as the sound-bite politics practiced everywhere else.
But for better or worse, this is shaping up as yet another vintage year for Louisiana's reputation as a place where politics and theater seamlessly blend and where the past is never quite gone.
There has been talk of exhuming the remains of Huey P. Long's assassin.
The Legislature is studying the idea of allowing New Orleans to secede from Louisiana.
For months the political system, and now the legal system, have been convulsed by debate over the nation's most restrictive abortion law.


Auctions
The Mantle Magic
Mickey Mantle showed up this week at the New York restaurant on Central Park South that bears his name, to authenticate and autograph a gray baseball shirt he had worn in 1967.
The shirt is the most important of the 279 items to be auctioned at 7 P.M. on Wednesday at the Southgate Tower Hotel, Seventh Avenue at 31st Street in Manhattan.
The sale is the first public auction in New York by Leland's, a Manhattan-based sports memorabilia auction house that has conducted auctions by mail since 1983.


Miscellany
*
The Publishers Information Bureau, New York, reported yesterday that advertising revenue for magazines for the first six months of 1991 totaled $3.1 billion, down 5.4 percent from the corresponding period last year.
The total number of ad pages fell 10.8 percent, to 76,209.


Oil Service's Profit Rises
Schlumberger Ltd., the oilfield services company, said yesterday that its profits were up 25 percent in the second quarter on the strength of new products and services.
The company said its business recovered from a first-quarter slump that resulted partly from the gulf war.
Schlumberger, based in New York, said it earned $180.8 million in the quarter, or 76 cents a share, up from $144.8 million, or 61 cents a share, in the comparable period a year ago.
Revenues rose 20 percent, to $1.55 billion from $1.29 billion.
Euan Baird, Schlumberger's chairman, said new products and services raised the company's performance despite a 7 percent decline in the number of oil rigs.
Schlumberger said its earnings were 36 percent higher than in the first quarter, as oilfields recovered from seasonal dips and the war.
On the Big Board yesterday, Schlumberger's share price gained $2.75, to $67.


Results Plus
TENNIS McEnroe Is Upset Luis Herrera of Mexico upset second-seeded John McEnroe last night in the third round of the Sovran Bank Classic in Washington.
Herrera, 19, is ranked 110th in the world, while McEnroe entered the tournament ranked 18th.
Herrera will meet another unseeded player in the quarterfinals, Markus Zoecke of Germany.
Zoecke advanced with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Jimmy Arias. (AP)


Walnut Creek Journal; For a Night, A Cook Can Feast On Fantasy
On a recent evening, Dr.
Don ald Palmer finished his last operation at Kaiser Permanente Hospital, changed out of his surgeon's green scrub suit, drove to the nearby restaurant Calda!
Calda! and put on his chef's whites.
There, like any efficient chef, he prepared the ingredients for his specialty, Thai pizza, and awaited the orders.
It was not economic necessity that put Dr.
Palmer on kitchen duty at the end of a long day.
Rather, it was the thrill of experiencing professionally what had long been a hobby for the 45-year-old gourmet.
Since May, the restaurant has designated one night a week, usually Wednesday, as guest-amateur-pizza-chef night, and Dr.
Palmer could not pass up the chance.


Delta Weighs Investment In Pan Am
Delta Air Lines said yesterday that it was considering investing in Pan American World Airways if it receives court approval for its offer made last week to buy Pan Am's foreign routes for $260 million.
The investment, which would include investors in addition to Delta, is part of the plan of reorganization for Pan Am, which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in January.


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Children
Boating in New York City can run the gamut from sitting idly, but rapturously, from paddle wheels to watching model-yacht races in Central Park.
The hardier can test their pedaling and rowing capabilities (and their captainlike mettle) on shady park lakes.
Here is a sampling of the boating available throughout the city.
Seaport Line Harbor Cruise South Street Seaport Pier 16 (212) 233-4800 or (212) 385-0791 Recommended ages: 4 and up Year-round
This line, one of three boat tours departing regularly from the South Street Seaport, offers a "cocktail cruise" that is actually ideal for children: it is just an hour long and offers harbor views of the Brooklyn boat yards, Governors Island and the Statue of Liberty.
This weekend's tours also bring you a close-up of the sunset, too, as the sky turns a pinkish gray.
The daytime cruises do have guides, but when you're sweeping by Liberty's feet, who needs narration?
Refreshments and alcoholic beverages are served below deck, and movable chairs are on the outdoor deck upstairs.
Children might prefer, however, sitting on the steps to the bow.
The tours this weekend are today and Sunday at 7, 8:30 and 10 P.M.; the schedule varies week to week.
The tour, notwithstanding a sound system that blares pop music, is not a party cruise, especially on a Sunday evening.
This ride is ideal for contemplaters, the curious and children.
Tickets, purchased at the Pier 16 ticket booth, are $12 for adults and $6 for children 12 and under.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A.T.&amp;T. announced better-than-expected earnings but at the same time it issued a stunning warning that it would take pretax charges of as much as $4 billion against earnings before the end of the year.
Net income rose 26 percent, to $828 million.  [ Page D1. ]
Equitable Life got a big lift when a major French insurance company, Groupe Axa S.A., invested $1 billion in Equitable.  [ D1. ]
Fujitsu has refused to pay royalties to Texas Instruments for a patent granted in Japan for the first integrated circuit.
Later Texas Instruments reported the largest quarterly loss in its history.  [ D1. ]
Compaq Computer has always steered clear of one country: Japan.
But now it is taking the plunge.  [ D1. ]
Cray Research has decided against taking a partner in its effort to develop a new type of supercomputer.  [ D5. ]
Delta Air Lines is considering investing in Pan American World Airways.  [ D5. ]  Continental has abandoned a plan to raise domestic fares 5 percent.  [ D5. ]
American Barrick Resources and Newmont Mining have broken off merger discussions.  [ D5. ]
Lotus Development's earnings fell 61 percent.  [ D2. ]  Nynex and BellSouth said their profits were lower.  [ D6. ]
The New York Times Company reported that net income in the second quarter fell 79.9 percent, to $5.4 million.  [ D6. ]
BankAmerica reported a 2 percent rise in quarterly earnings, to $272 million.  [ D8. ]
In November, Coca-Cola will open a store on Fifth Avenue that sells items that bear its famous red-and-white logos.  [ D16. ] The Economy
Americans have been besieging financial advisers, insurance companies, bond-rating firms and politicians with questions about the health of the life insurance industry.  [ A1. ]  Policyholders concerned about the health of their insurers can take several steps to protect themselves.  [ A12. ]
The nation's trade deficit widened slightly in May for the second straight month, the Government said.
But the $4.6 billion imbalwas the third-best showing in eight years.  [ D1. ]
More Americans filed new claims for unemployment insurance in the first week of July, the Government said.  [ D7. ] International
President Mikhail Gorbachev is leaving London without the firm commitment to financial aid that he might have liked.
But in the view of a surprisingly broad spectrum of Western analysts, he left with his glass one-quarter full, not three-quarters empty.  [ A1. ]
The president of Japan's largest news agency will resign to take responsibility for articles that he plagiarized.  [ A9. ] Markets
Stock prices rose sharply amid spirited trading.
The Dow surged 37.56, or 1.3 percent, to 3,016.32.  [ D8. ]
Prices of Treasury securities inched higher in dull, thin trading as traders ignored other economic activities.  [ D7. ]
The dollar ended the day mixed amid active trading.  [ D14. ]  The prospect of rain and cooler temperatures in the Middle West sent prices of corn and soybean futures plunging.  [ D14. ] Today's Columns
Manufacturing in Mexico is not as inexpensive or cost-efficient as the relatively low wage rate might make it seem, says George Baker, an economist.
Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
The stock market made Richard H. Jenrette rich and famous, and it appears to be the stock market that is going to bail out his company, Equitable Life.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D8. ]
The former publisher of Spy magazine will help create a campaign for a new hotel in SoHo.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D6. ]


Yugoslav Federal Army to Pull Out of Slovenia
Yugoslavia's federal presidency decided tonight to order the withdrawal of all Yugoslav National Army units from the breakaway republic of Slovenia, an official statement said.
The order was the clearest sign yet that Yugoslav Federal officials have given up hopes of preventing Slovenia from seceding from this crumbling federation of six republics.


American Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Herbicide Spill Shrinks After Entering Lake
A herbicide spill that has killed thousands of fish along a 45-mile stretch of the Sacramento River was shrinking dramatically today after entering Lake Shasta, state officials said.
The officials also said tests of the water in a segment of the river through which the chemical had passed showed it was safe for human consumption.


Albert A. Cuneo; Building Contractor, 89
Albert A. Cuneo, a building contractor in New York for several decades and a past president of the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen, died yesterday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 89 years old.
Mr.
Cuneo was born in Genoa, Italy, and came to the United States as an infant.
He attended the Chicago Technical College.


Coke Plans 5th Avenue Retail Store
The Coca-Cola Company is hoping consumers consider shopping as refreshing as a cold soft drink.
In November, Coca-Cola will open a store on Fifth Avenue between 55th and 56th Streets that sells clothing, toys, memorabilia and other items that bear its famous red-and-white logos.


BAKER SEEKS ISRAELI ASSENT
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced today that Syria had accepted the United States proposal for a peace conference that would open direct talks between Israel and its Arab neighbors.
After nearly three hours of talks with President Hafez al-Assad, Mr.
Baker said at a news conference that he now hoped that Israel, Jordan and the Palestinians would follow the Syrian lead and agree to the conference plan.


Louis Hay; Educator, 87
Louis Hay, a teacher and psychologist in the New York City school system for 44 years, died on Tuesday at Tisch University Hospital.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications after surgery, his family said.


2d-Quarter Earnings Down At Nynex and BellSouth
Two of the nation's seven regional phone companies, Nynex and BellSouth, said today that their profits declined in the second quarter.
Nynex earnings fell 3.3 percent from the comparable quarter last year and BellSouth net income dropped 17.9 percent.


Merck's Net Climbs 20%
Merck &amp; Company said today that its earnings rose 20 percent in the second quarter because of strong growth in sales of its newer products.
The pharmaceutical giant said it earned $556 million, or $1.44 a share, on sales of $2.1 billion in the April to June period.
This compared with profits of $470 million, or $1.20 a share, on $1.9 billion in sales in the 1990 quarter.


On My Mind; Tax Cows of New York
The good news for New Yorkers is that real estate prices are collapsing and that the President does not give a damn about the city.
If the prices of one-family homes in Queens and co-op apartments on Park Avenue were holding up, a lot more taxpayers would cash them in and leave than already have.


Review/Film; Bill and Ted Go About Co-opting Father Death
Some of us were wrong in mistaking Bill (Alex Winter) and Ted (Keanu Reeves) for mere idiots the first time around.
They are
happy
idiots, and it's the happy part that matters.
Bill and Ted inhabit a hip, friendly universe where the lowliest and shaggiest of teen-agers -- that would be Bill and Ted -- are on an equal footing with Napoleon and Albert Einstein.
This seems perfectly natural to them, as do their meetings, in "Bill and Ted's Bogus Journey," with God and the Devil.
"We got totally lied to by our album covers!" complains Ted, upon catching a glimpse of the latter in hell.
It's hard not to appreciate two guys who can invest a cry of "Whoa!" with such pure ecstasy and who think that Joan of Arc is Noah's wife.
It's also hard to see why the makers of the amusing but sloppy and overcomplicated "Bill and Ted's Bogus Journey" weren't content to leave well enough alone.
These two unflappable teen-age heroes, played with such loose-jointed aplomb by Mr.
Reeves and Mr.
Winter, are most comfortable when doing little more than faking air guitar and devastating the English language.
They're at their comic best when simply playing dumb and being themselves.


Poor Americans, Still Discounted
It cannot be said flatly that Secretary of Commerce Robert Mosbacher was wrong to reject the Census Bureau's judgment and refuse to adjust the 1990 Census.
The statistical methods now available for correcting the undercount of five million Americans, mostly minority members, remain controversial; in the absence of census correction consensus, the refusal could be defensible.


Review/Film; A Good Guy Shows a Brat What's What
There's a John Candy-sized hole at the center of "Dutch," no doubt because the screenplay by John Hughes is reminiscent of his earlier "Uncle Buck," in which Mr.
Candy starred.
Both these films are about spoiled, affluent brats who are set straight by a no-nonsense father surrogate from the other side of the tracks.
This guy is simple, direct and decent, with a habit of speaking his mind.
Neither Mr.
Candy's Uncle Buck nor Ed O'Neill's Dutch Dooley can be described without the use of the phrase "salt of the earth."
As is often the case in Mr.
Hughes's stories, economic differences guide the plot even though the whole film (directed by Peter Faiman) has an air of economic unreality.
"Dutch" has the title character taking a trip with the rich, arrogant son of his fiancee, Natalie (JoBeth Williams), engineering things so that they must travel without money, and teaching young Doyle (Ethan Randall) a few lessons in manners along the way.


Union Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Goodyear in Talks On Sale of Assets
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company is conducting talks with potential buyers of the company's non-tire assets.
Goodyear's new chairman, Stanley C. Gault, the former head of Rubbermaid Inc., has said he wants to sell assets to help bring the debt-laden Goodyear back to profitability.
Walt McClenny, a spokesman, said an asset sale was "something that everyone was considering" under the former chairman, Tom H. Barrett, but "there's no question it's accelerated now." He declined to be more specific.


Burlington Northern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bishop Harold R. Perry, 74, Dies; First Black Prelate in the Century
Harold R. Perry, one of the first black American Roman Catholic bishops, died on Wednesday.
He was 74 years old.
Bishop Perry, the auxiliary bishop of New Orleans since 1965, died of complications of Alzheimer's disease at a health care center, the church said.


The Return Of Seles: An Attempt To Explain
Generally composed, seldom revealing and never contrite, Monica Seles insisted today that her sudden withdrawal from Wimbledon and subsequent disappearance from public view were the result of conflicting diagnoses of leg injuries, and nothing more.
"I don't think I made a mistake," Seles said during a rambling 30-minute interview with a large gathering of reporters and photographers hours before her 44-minute steamrolling of Andrea Leand, 6-0, 6-2, at the Pathmark Classic.
"I was in a lot of pain and doctors were telling us different things. I was thinking about all those players who people have mentioned to me about burning out.


For Ryan, Loss Follows Profit
Nolan Ryan's contract celebration was spoiled tonight when Joe Carter and Greg Myers reached him for home runs to lead the Toronto Blue Jays past the Texas Rangers, 4-0.
Ryan agreed to terms on contract options for 1992 and 1993 before the game but the Blue Jays, who were no-hit by Ryan on May 1 in Arlington, were in no mood to let him enjoy it.
Tonight, Ryan pitched seven innings, allowing five hits, four walks and three runs while striking out five.


Fruit of the Loom reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Restaurants
Twelve-year-old Chanterelle, like a jester in a Mardi Gras parade, wears two different faces.
The TriBeCa restaurant's stark setting, serious prices and sophisticated food all contribute to a climate of formality.
But there is a flip side: servers wear casual outfits befitting a bistro; the menu cover looks like something from an upstate diner, with "EAT" glaring in giant letters across the cover, and the liberal dress code results in a dining room where patrons wear everything from dark suits and elegant dresses to loud summer sports shirts and loafers with no socks.
There is nothing ambiguous, however, about the cooking of David Waltuck, the chef and owner. (His wife, Karen, tends the front of the house.) Since Chanterelle was reviewed in 1989, the kitchen has become more focused and increasingly inventive.


Yanks Junk the Jinx: Beat A's in Coliseum
To put things into their correct historical light, consider this: The last time the Yankees won a game in the Oakland Coliseum, their manager was Bucky Dent.
It was Sept. 8, 1989, the same day Dent was signed to a one-year contract extension.
Times have changed.
The Yankees, managed now by Stump Merrill, bolted somewhat from their lethargic mode tonight, getting two home runs from Matt Nokes and ending a 10-game losing streak here with a 3-2 decision over the Oakland Athletics.


Jersey City Aide To Study Ticket In Slaying Case
Jersey City's chief lawyer said today that he would examine why two plainclothes police officers issued a summons for repairing a car on a street -- an act that set off a dispute, an assault on the officers and the fatal shooting of the man given the ticket.
Corporation Counsel Harold J. Ruvoldt said his inquiry would focus on the "wisdom" of the two officers' decision to stop to write the ticket as they were driving a prisoner to the Hudson County jail here on Tuesday night.


Inland Steel Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trump Castle Bid by Hilton
The Hilton Hotels Corporation made a $165 million bid yesterday to buy back the heavily indebted Trump Castle Casino in Atlantic City, which it had sold to Donald J. Trump for about $320 million in 1985.
The offer, which was made to Trump Castle Associates with notification to principal creditors, was roundly rejected by Mr.
Trump.
"It's not for sale and it won't be for sale, because we think it's got a great future," Mr.
Trump said.
Mr.
Trump and his top executives are negotiating a restructuring of the high-yield "junk bond" debt of the Castle.
The plan must be presented to New Jersey's gaming regulators by July 31.
The casino failed to make a $41.1 million bond payment due last month.


Iraq Says All Arms Have Been Disclosed
Iraq gave the United Nations a formal pledge today that it has no more clandestine nuclear plants and that it has revealed all its nuclear secrets.
The pledge was given to the chief United Nations nuclear inspector, Demitri Perricos, by Jaafar Dhia Jaafar, the deputy chairman of Iraq's Atomic Energy Commission and deputy minister for industry.


Nynex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Cyanamid Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lotus Net Falls 61% in Quarter
The Lotus Development Corporation said today that its earnings fell 61 percent in the second quarter, as the computer software company was making a transition to new products.
Profit totaled $9.1 million, or 21 cents a share, for the three months ended June 30, compared with $23.5 million, or 54 cents a share, a year earlier.


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jersey Agrees to Bonuses For Mutual Benefit Officers
The chief executive of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company has retired in an arrangement that would bring him nearly $1.3 million, officials of the New Jersey Insurance Department said.
The retirement of Henry E. Kates comes after a State Superior Court judge accepted on Tuesday a state takeover plan designed to prevent the failure of Mutual Benefit.
With assets of more than $13 billion, Mutual Benefit is the nation's 18th-largest health and life insurer.


Caterpillar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


3 Shows Tie in Emmy Race
"Cheers" and "L.A. Law," both on NBC , and "Murphy Brown" on CBS each received 13 nominations for Emmys, the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences announced today at its new headquarters in North Hollywood.
Home Box Office's epic movie for television, "The Josephine Baker Story," was second with 12 nominations, followed by the syndicated series "Star Trek: The Next Generation" with 10.
"Sarah, Plain and Tall" and the live broadcast of the "63d Annual Academy Awards," both on CBS, were next with nine nominations each.
In the mini-series or special categories, "Separate but Equal" (ABC) received seven nominations, including best actor for Sidney Poitier's depiction of Thurgood Marshall.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with a review of the Serious Fun arts festival misidentified the performance shown.
It was "B-4-Sin," with Johanna Went, not the Dancenoise production of "It's a Girl."


On a Hot Day, Their Own Place in the Shade


Valero Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Delay of Hearing Angers State Department
The State Department expressed anger today over a move by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to delay a hearing at which April C. Glaspie, the former Ambassador to Iraq, was prepared to defend herself against accusations that she misled Congress.
The department's deputy spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, said that the committee's decision to postpone the hearing was "censorship, pure and simple." The hearing was originally set for Friday.


New York City Bets Millions on Preserving Families
Hoping to reduce the number of children entering foster care, New York City is about to embark on a multimillion-dollar prevention effort aimed at keeping troubled families together.
By the end of the program's first year, the city plans to have 240 caseworkers who -- working intensively with only two families at a time -- will have helped about 3,000 children in danger of being placed in foster care.


Judge Says Police Provoked Clash That Killed 17 Arabs in Jerusalem
An Israeli judge completing a nine-month investigation concluded today that the police, not the Palestinians, initially provoked the violence at Al Aksa Mosque in Jerusalem's Old City in October, in which at least 17 Palestinians were shot and killed.
Judge Ezra Kama ruled that some of the shooting deaths were clearly unjustified, and in those cases he called the police explanation that they had opened fire out of fear for their lives "exaggerated and strange."


Metropolitan Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Terence U. Beirn, 39, AIDS Fund Executive
Terence U. Beirn, an executive of the American Foundation for AIDS Research, died on Tuesday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 39 years old and lived in Washington and Manhattan.
He died of AIDS-related brain cancer, said Paul Corser, his companion and a colleague at the foundation.


Washington at Work; From Yale Days to Bank Lobbyist, a Friend and Adviser to the Bushes
At Yale, when George Bush was "Poppy" and Thomas William Ludlow Ashley was "Lud," they began their lifelong friendship.
When Mr.
Bush began his first oil exploration company, Mr.
Ashley was an investor.
When the Bush children arrived, Mr.
Ashley bounced them on his knees.
And after George Bush became President and his son son Neil ran afoul of Federal regulatory agencies, Mr.
Ashley was there with advice.


Reeves Gets Job To Lead Columbia
Dr.
JOHN A. REEVES, the director of physical education and athletics at Stony Brook since 1987, was appointed the successor to AL PAUL yesterday and will fill the same role at Columbia University.
Paul retired on July 1 after 18 years as Columbia's athletic director.
Changing jobs is nothing new for the 52-year-old Reeves, a graduate of Montclair State College who earned a master's degree in physical education from Penn State.
He has also been athletic director at Drew University and the director of sports and recreation at the University of Rochester.
He coached soccer at Drew University and Bloomfield (N.J.) College for 20 years, leading the Drew men's team to a third-place national finish in 1969.


American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Agency's Rules Faulted On Research Overseas
The National Institutes of Health has failed to protect human research subjects adequately in collaborations between its scientists and foreign researchers, an internal investigation at the health agency concluded.
The agency's Office for Protection from Research Risks said in an interim report made available today that its program for insuring that human subjects are protected and treated ethically is a disjointed system that makes it hard for researchers' work to be properly supervised.


Southern New England Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Our Towns
New Rochelle has had a favorable spot in the limelight for a century.
It was the budding suburb whose convenient location was extolled in George M. Cohan's 1906 musical, "Forty-Five Minutes From Broadway." A decade later, it was where Norman Rockwell began painting idealized pictures of small-town life.
And in the 1960's, it was Rob and Laura Petrie's home in the "Dick Van Dyke Show."


S.E.C. Case Is Settled
The television producer and financier Burton R. Sugarman settled charges brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission today that accused him of failing to disclose plans to take control of a fast-food chain, even as it was going public.
Without admitting or denying wrongdoing, Mr.
Sugarman, of Beverly Hills, Calif., consented to a court order barring him from further securities laws violations and agreed to pay more than $619,000 in penalties plus interest.
The commission accused Mr.
Sugarman of failing to disclose that a partnership he led was buying shares of the fast-food chain Rally's Inc. in a bid to take control of it.
At the time, Mr.
Sugarman sat on the board of the company.


Tandem Computers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Art; Conceptualism From California
FOR people who eat and sleep contemporary art, as well as for those who rarely touch the stuff, the retrospective of the work of John Baldessari that opens at the Whitney Museum of American Art today will be both a pleasure and a surprise.
It is a terrific show, well paced and handsomely installed, with illuminating quotations from the artist printed directly on the wall.
It provides New York with its most extensive look at the achievement of this influential Californian, now 60 years old, a Conceptual artist par excellence whose interweavings of language and appropriated photographs made him a major precursor to the art of the 1980's.
To walk through this exhibition is to see premonitions of the 80's efforts of David Salle and Eric Fischl (both of whom were students of Mr. Baldessari's when he taught at the California Institute of the Arts in Valencia), as well as Barbara Kruger, Jenny Holzer and Cindy Sherman.
The work on view dates from the late 1960's to the present and covers almost the entirety of Mr.
Baldessari's art, which started out strong and has gotten consistently better, more accessible and also more profound.
In this regard, the show as a whole has a traditional and eminently satisfying shape, despite Mr.
Baldessari's penchant for eccentric materials and processes that some may find unconventional or even "anti-art."


Coppola to Produce Live Television Dramas
The film director Francis Ford Coppola will revive the tradition of live drama on television next year in special productions for CBS , to play under the banner "Playhouse 90's."
The title is an homage to the CBS series of the 1950's that brought such dramas as "Marty" and "Requiem for a Heavyweight" to television.


Death Penalty Speaks Society's Moral Outrage; The Door Slammed
To the Editor:
The Michigan law calling for mandatory life imprisonment without parole for first-time possession of 1.5 pounds or more of cocaine, held constitutional by the Supreme Court in Harmelin v.
Michigan (news article, June 28), seriously undermines the rehabilitative potential of the United States penal system by insisting that the offender could never again be a productive citizen, though no criminal tendency has been demonstrated.
The hope of Michigan legislators must be that this law will deter people from possessing and dealing in narcotics.
But that isn't likely. (It certainly didn't deter Ronald A. Harmelin.) It is likely, however, that many perpetrators will be caught and condemned for life.
And, as they fester in jail, swallowing up taxpayers' dollars, they will be living testaments to a society that no longer has the energy or creativity to re-educate citizens who have gone astray.
Essentially, this law is saying: "There are no second chances in Michigan. You mess up, and you go away forever." HUGH SIEGEL  Jersey City, July 3, 1991


Santos Suspended
Jockey JOSE SANTOS, who returned from an unsuccessful stay in California to resume riding in New York, was suspended for 10 calendar days on Thursday for what Belmont stewards termed careless riding during the seventh race on Wednesday.
Santos's mount, Alywar, finished first but was disqualified and placed third for bearing out through the stretch and making repeated contact with third-place Uptown Gala.
The disqualification followed a stewards' inquiry and a claim of foul by ART MADRID JR., Uptown Gala's rider.


Black Judge's Success Story Begins in Cold Attic
As with most people who achieve great prominence in the law, Judge A. Leon Higginbotham Jr. can remember clearly who inspired him to choose that field.
In a speech last year at Yale Law School, which he expanded on in a recent interview, Judge Higginbotham, of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia, credited the late Edward Charles Elliott, president of Purdue University from 1922 to 1945, with making him abandon his aspirations to become an engineer and turn his attention to law.


Records on Reagan Reveal No Dealings With Iran, Staff Says
Archivists at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library said they saw no evidence in files from 1980 to indicate that officials of the Reagan-Bush campaign conspired to delay the release of American hostages from Iran until after the Presidential election.
Ralph Bledsoe, the library director, said Wednesday that he and his staff had reviewed more than 100,000 pages of a collection of campaign records that consisted of a million pages.


Leading Belgian Politician Slain
Andre Cools, a leading politician in the French-speaking eastern part of Belgium, was shot dead today on a street in Liege.
Mr.
Cools, 64 years old, had been a Deputy Prime Minister of Belgium and chairman of the French-language part of the Socialist Party.
He was a leader in the group of politicians who emerged in Wallonia, the French-speaking part of Belgium, after World War II.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 19


Union Camp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Senate Approval and Sharp Debate Seen
The treaty reducing long-range nuclear arms is likely to gain Senate approval, but not without spirited debate over some specific provisions and the Bush Administration's overall strategic blueprint, lawmakers and their aides said today.
The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, which the United States and the Soviet Union concluded on Wednesday, probably faces token, albeit vocal, opposition from a handful of conservative Republicans who fear Soviet cheating.


CNN Says It Will Open 3 New Foreign Bureaus
The Cable News Network announced today that it will open new bureaus in Amman, Jordan; New Delhi, and Rio de Janeiro.
The new offices will raise the total number of CNN bureaus to 27, Tom Johnson, the network's president, said.


Kroll Associates
Kroll Associates Inc., the corporate security group best known for searching out the overseas assets of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, said it was buying Business Risks International Inc. in a deal worth about $70 million.
The companies, leaders in security checks, investigations and risk analysis for corporations, have combined revenues of about $70 million a year, said Robert McGuire, Kroll's president.
Business Risks, based in Nashville, will be run as a separate unit of Kroll, Mr.
McGuire said, and Don Walker will remain its president.


Money Fund Assets Up
Assets of the nation's 552 money market mutual funds rose $2.39 billion, to $459.99 billion, during the seven-day period that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 203 institutional funds increased by $2.10 billion, to $132.09 billion.
Assets of the 259 general-purpose funds were up by $293.4 million, to $178.14 billion.
And the 90 broker-dealer funds increased by $1.7 million, to $149.77 billion, the institute said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9
Syria accepted the American plan for a peace conference that would open direct talks between Israel and its Arab neighbors, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said after meetings in Damascus.
Page A1


The New York Times Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Europeans Continue to Favor More Generous Financial Help to Soviets
France, Germany and Italy continued to make clear today that they were willing to go further than their allies in providing direct Western involvement in rescuing the Soviet economy.
At this week's London summit meeting, these three European countries went along with the the joint statement agreed to by the United States, Britain, Canada and Japan, which offerred Moscow new association with international financial institutions, technical assistance and greater market access, but fell short of what President Mikhail S, Gorbachev had wanted.
But the three Continental powers also have stressed they wanted to do more than their their partners in the Group of Seven industrial powers.


Net Falls 79.9% at Times Co.
The New York Times Company reported yesterday that net income in the second quarter fell 79.9 percent, to $5.4 million, or 6 cents a share, compared with $26.8 million, or 35 cents a share, for the second quarter of 1990.
Revenue for the quarter dropped 6.5 percent, to $440.4 million from $468.9 million.


Public Can See Nuclear Reports, Panel Says
The New York Public Service Commission has decided that confidential industry reports it holds on the safety and management of the state's nuclear power plants are subject to release under the state's Freedom of Information laws.
The reports are prepared by the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations, a utility organization based in Atlanta that sends delegations of nuclear experts to plants across the country to assess personnel and procedures.
The reports are almost always kept secret.


MCI Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Council District 21 Creates Angry Hispanic Majority
At the heart of the Justice Department's concerns about the fairness to Hispanic residents of New York's new City Council map are areas like Jackson Heights, Queens.
And in the middle of the political tug-of-war that created District 21 in Jackson Heights is an expansive red-brick apartment complex called Lefrak City.


Scramble Is Expected For an Auto Account
It looks increasingly likely that another scramble to land a large automotive advertising account is about to get under way.
Ad and auto industry executives interviewed this week said that Mazda Motor of America Inc., Irvine, Calif., will announce, perhaps next month, that it will proceed with its long-anticipated new luxury-car division.
The division, to be called Pegasus, would be similar in image and pricing to the upper-bracket lines introduced by Mazda's Japanese rivals: Acura from Honda, Lexus from Toyota and Infiniti from Nissan.
The arrival of Pegasus, expected in the 1994 model year, has been eagerly awaited by agencies across the country: it would set off a battle for a new account with estimated annual billings of $50 million to $60 million.
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Los Angeles, is the agency for Mazda's existing model line.
Advertising trade publications have reported that Foote, Cone is a likely contender for the Pegasus account, along with agencies like Bloom/FCA, Dallas; Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, New York; TBWA Advertising, New York, and Tatham/RSCG, Chicago.


Philharmonic Concerts
The New York Philharmonic is to present two free concerts this weekend, at Heckscher State Park in East Islip, L.I., at 8 o'clock tonight and at 8 P.M. tomorrow at Cunningham Park in Hollis, Queens.
Samuel Wong is to conduct excerpts from Prokofiev's "Romeo and Juliet" and Tchaikovsky's Fifth Symphony tonight.
Tomorrow Zdenek Macal is to lead the orchestra in Mozart's "Prague" Symphony and Mahler's First Symphony.
Information: (212) 875-5709.


A Chronology of Shoreham's 25-Year Political Meltdown
The Long Island Lighting Company's efforts to build a nuclear power plant at Shoreham have covered more than 25 years and cost more than $5.5 billion.
April 1966: Lilco announces plans to build a 500-megawatt nuclear power plant in Shoreham on the North Shore, about 60 miles east of Manhattan.


Browning-Ferris Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Feds Rush in to Treat Effects, Not Their Causes
To the Editor:
If the population of the inner city is as devastated by drug and alcohol problems as you state in "The Threat of Power Master" (editorial, July 1), surely the reason is not that these commodities are easily available there.
Drugs and alcohol are available wherever there is a market for them; that is, the demand causes the supply.
Limiting the availability of Power Master, a high-octane malt liquor, is a superficial approach at best: it's patronizing and vaguely racist.
If the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms is asking the brewer to remove the word "power" from the brand name, it suggests that inner-city dwellers are more susceptible to being taken in than the rest of the population.


RESULTS PLUS
OLYMPIC FESTIVAL She Walks Away With Record


Boston Acoustics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Eastern Europe Looks at New York as a Model; Our Bureaucratic Mire
To the Editor:
James Rouen hits the mark when he equates bureaucratic evils in Eastern Europe with those in New York City government (Op-Ed, June 26).


Barrister Information System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
Chicagoans may be blase about seeing OPRAH WINFREY in Marshall Field's or JOHN CUSACK at the Old Town Ale House, but now their heads are swiveling because so many movies are being made in the city.
News that MADONNA and TOM HANKS, who are co-starring in "A League of Their Own," showed up at a White Sox game was carried on all three local television stations.
Meals eaten by GEENA DAVIS (she is also in "A League of Their Own)," KELLY McGILLIS of "The Babe" and MEG RYAN and ALEC BALDWIN, who co-star in "Prelude to a Kiss," are chronicled by Chicago columnists.
Film crews on a North Side street were delayed by the crowd around the set of "The Babe," which stars JOHN GOODMAN as Babe Ruth.


Basque Hero Rides High as LeMond Falters
The Basques got it right.
Spanish and French, they turned out in the tens of thousands here today in hopes of celebrating a great Tour de France victory by one of their own.
Miguel Indurain responded with a magnificent ride over five mountain peaks in the Pyrenees under a searing sun, easily taking over the yellow jersey of the race's overall leader.


EXECUTIVES
*
Bell &amp; Howell Co., Skokie, Ill., appointed Dieter E. A. Tannenberg president and chief executive of its Bell &amp; Howell Document Management Products Co. unit. *
Crystal Brands Inc., Southport, Conn., a jewelry and apparel manufacturer, has restructured senior management in three men's clothing units.
C.
William Crain has been named executive vice president of the men's sportswear group.
Brian J. Tart, an executive vice president, will add men's tailored clothing to his other responsibilities.
And Charles J. Smith, who had been acting president of the Izod/LaCoste men's division, has been appointed that division's president.


Commonwealth Edison reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Ensign Offices to Chemical
The Chemical Banking Corporation has acquired 11 branches and $646 million of deposits from the failed Ensign Federal Savings Bank of New York, a significant expansion of Chemical's consumer business.
The announcement was made late yesterday.
On Monday, Chemical announced plans to merge with the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation.


Sports Leisure; Road Racing Finds Bumps Along the Way
Real estate prices in Fairfield County, Conn., may have retreated, but not the costs of running road races.
Entry fees have climbed here -- as they have in other communities in the metropolitan area -- from $7 and $10 a decade ago to $12 and $14.
Race organizers in the county say entry costs have increased because expenses have gone up, the number of sponsors has gone down and runners are more demanding.
The number of informal, grass-roots races has diminished and, while no one counts, the perception is that the number of runners has stayed about the same compared with five years ago.
These kinds of road-running events are found in every corner of the United States, three- and five-mile distances being most common, with an occasional 10-kilometer for variety.


News Summary
International 2-5
South Africa admitted giving money to the black political organization Inkatha in its often violent rivalry with the more popular African National Congress.
President de Klerk said the aid was cut off in 1990.
Page 1


Fight Is Off
Undefeated heavyweights RAY MERCER and TOMMY MORRISON won't be fighting on Aug. 9 in Atlantic City, as scheduled.
Morrison withdrew after suffering a cut over his right eye while sparring on Thursday night, which needed 12 stitches to close.
Mercer is expected to fight a substitute opponent on Aug. 9.


Centex Chairman Retires; President Will Assume Post
The Centex Corporation, the Dallas-based home-building company, announced yesterday that its chairman, Paul R. Seegers, retired from the post at the annual stockholders meeting on Thursday.
Laurence E. Hirsch, who has been president and chief executive officer, will replace Mr.
Seegers as chairman and retain the title of chief executive.


Redistricting Decision Puts Elections in Doubt
New York City's political leaders scrambled last night to salvage this fall's City Council elections in the face of a Justice Department decision that Hispanic residents were unfairly represented in 3 of 51 new districts.
But with the city up against a back-to-the-wall deadline, the director of the city's Board of Elections said the decision made it "extremely unlikely" that the elections could be held as scheduled.
And the city's highest-ranking elected Hispanic officials and representatives of the Hispanic groups that challenged the plan before the Justice Department vowed to seek a postponement of the election and to send the entire redistricting plan back to the drawing board.


Sports of The Times; A Sense Of Love And Values
Walter Lawrence and his wife, Llewellyn, will attend the New York Games this afternoon at Wien Stadium, no if's or maybe's.
The temperature is expected to soar to about 100.
Lawrence said it doesn't matter.
"If it goes to 200 degrees, if Meredith is running, we're going to be there," he said.


When the Doctor Has AIDS
One top Federal AIDS expert calls it the most difficult issue he has ever tried to resolve.
On a rational level, he says, he knows that the risk of contracting the AIDS virus from an infected doctor or dentist is very small.
But on an emotional level, if he had to choose between two equally competent surgeons, one infected and one not, he'd pick the one who wasn't infected.
The expert would prefer to keep his emotions at bay.
But surely this is a case where gut-level feelings deserve respect.
Patients are right to believe there is some risk in undergoing invasive surgery by an infected doctor or dentist.
And they have a right to be protected from that risk.
The only real issue is how best to protect them.


Stricter Action by Hospitals Predicted After AIDS Votes
Health officials predicted today that hospitals would take stronger action to insure that health practitioners infected with the AIDS virus did not perform invasive procedures.
Their predictions were prompted by the Senate's overwhelming approval on Thursday of two tough measures intended to prevent health professionals from infecting patients with the AIDS virus.


Your Money; Customer Issues In Bank Mergers
David S. Rhine, a tax partner in the New York office of BDO Seidman, takes issue with some of the advice Manufacturers Hanover and Chemical Bank gave customers this week as the two banks prepared for the largest merger in American banking history.
The banks put together a question-and-answer sheet in anticipation of the biggest consumer concerns so that employees could advise customers who called their hot lines.
One issue was what depositors who had accounts in both institutions should do if they would have more than $100,000 in the combined bank, thus exceeding the limit for Federal deposit insurance.


Review/Pop; A Little Anarchic Thrash Never Hurts
For committed fans, the best speed-metal or thrash bands may not be the major headliners, like Metallica or Anthrax, who perform in arenas.
Down in the next echelon are bands that play in clubs so that fans can enact the quintessential thrash ritual: slam-dancing, the anarchic surge of flailing bodies that sends some fans up onto their fellows' shoulders, others to dive from the stage and most into joyful collisions on the floor.
Six bands -- Sepultura, Sacred Reich, Napalm Death, Biohazard, White Zombie and Type O Negative -- performed at the Ritz on Thursday for five hours' worth of slam-dancing.
Thrash is a purist's genre, its rage stylized to an extreme.
Most of the songs are in the same key, pounding against the unchanging key of E minor (every guitarist's first chord) like someone banging his or her head against a wall.
The songs move at midtempo, fast and hyperfast, disdaining melody for jackhammer impact; the style's most heroic performers are its drummers, who play long, explosive stretches with perfect timing behind the other musicians' stop-start power chords.
The singers growl about adult hypocrisy, violent death and all kinds of apocalypse, hurling imprecations and sometimes inviting the audience to shout along.


Artel Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Abitibi-Price reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On the Sound, It's Lobster Pots vs. Nets
In the past, the sight of a dozen healthy lobsters in a net of just-caught fish would have made Lauren Ridge ecstatic.
But today Mrs.
Ridge, one of the few trawler fishermen left on the Long Island Sound, has decidedly mixed emotions, because she has to throw the lobsters back.
As her husband, Duncan, steers the Danielle Marie, a 40-foot boat he built himself, Mrs.
Ridge separates the lobsters from the mass of gasping, flopping seafood and counts them off.
"Eight dollars." Splash.
"Twelve. Sixteen. Twenty dollars."


Editors' Note
A photographic essay on this page on July 6 included a crucifix in a staged photo that reflected anger at the imposition of private morality on other citizens.
The image offended many readers (see Letters).
The Times offers contributors to the Op-Ed page wide latitude in expressing their opinions.
Even so, the editors regret giving the impression of insensitivity, and any offense, to readers in carrying out this policy.


A Chance for Cypriot Peace
Tuesday's car-bombings in Athens that wounded the Turkish Ambassador to Greece violently illustrated the continuing strife between the two nations.
Two days later, President Bush told the Greek Parliament that "None of us should accept the status quo in Cyprus." To reach a settlement, he must live by his words, and risk fraying his excellent relationship with Turkish President Turgut Ozal.
Mr.
Bush has several reasons to get involved in the 17 year-old occupation.
The most dramatic is to avert the possibily of full-scale hostilities between two NATO allies.
Greece and Turkey almost went to war in 1974 and 1987.
The eruption of the Cyprus conflict could destabilize a region that sits uneasily between the middle east and the baltics.


Bert Lance to Pay $2.6 Million to F.D.I.C.
Bert Lance, who was budget director under President Jimmy Carter, has agreed to pay the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation more than $2.6 million on four unpaid loans he received from a Tennessee bank that is now defunct.
Under an out-of-court settlement reached this week, Mr.
Lance will pay the F.D.I.C. $2.6 million, which includes the loan amounts plus interest, and $63,300 in attorney's fees.


Consolidated-Tomoka Land reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gillette Net Up 24%
The Gillette Company, benefiting from higher international sales, said its second-quarter net income rose 24 percent.
Gillette reported earnings of $101.8 million, or 46 cents a share, for the three months ended June 30, compared with $82.1 million, or 34 cents a share, during the similar 1990 period.
Its sales rose 6 percent, to $1.09 billion from $1.03 billion.
Gillette's stock fell 50 cents today on the New York Stock Exchange to close at $37.50.


Prices of Treasury Securities Firmer
Prices of Treasury securities firmed yesterday, helped in large part by signs of a slowing in the growth of the nation's money supply.
This factor and the ample supply of funds that banks have available to lend to each other indicate weak credit demand by industry and consumers.
Normally the fixed-income market thrives on negative economic news because it lessens inflationary pressures and reduces interest rates, thus making yields on outstanding debt more attractive.


Baldor Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Colgate's Profit Up 14%
The Colgate-Palmolive Company said this week that it posted a 14 percent rise in second-quarter earnings, as profitable products and lower worldwide tax rates helped to counter the recession's impact.
The consumer products company said it earned $93.3 million, or 66 cents a share, for the quarter, compared with $81.9 million, or 58 cents a share, in the 1990 period.
Sales rose 4.8 percent, to $1.52 billion from $1.45 billion.
The company attributed its earnings rise to new products, an expanding oral-care business in the Pacific Rim and strong pet product profits worldwide.
Its stock rose 75 cents, to $39.50, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.


Pan Am May Yet Survive With Investment From Delta
People have been dusting off the obituary of Pan American World Airways for a long time.
But Pan Am may yet again prove that reports of its death are greatly exaggerated, as Delta Air Lines now considers investing in it under a plan that would give the carrier a new lease on life.
Details have not been disclosed, except that as a condition of the Delta investment, Pan Am must keep operating its profitable Miami hub, from which it flies its extensive and profitable Latin American routes.
But even knowing only that much, airline industry analysts say that if the plan is executed -- something they are not certain will happen -- the strategy holds the prospect of insuring Pan Am's survival as a niche carrier.


Corn Continues to Decline As Soybean Prices Stabilize
Prices of corn futures slipped lower again yesterday as weather forecasts continued to promise at least some rain for the parched Middle West.
Wheat settled 1/2 cent to 2 1/2 cents higher, with the contract for delivery in July at $2.69 a bushel; corn was 1/2 cent to 3 3/4 cents lower, with July at $2.33 a bushel; oats were 2 cents to 2 1/2 cents higher, with July at $1.21 1/2 a bushel, and soybeans were 2 cents lower to 1 1/4 cents higher, with July at $5.27 a bushel.


Corrections
A sports picture caption in some editions yesterday with an article about the New York Jets misidentified a member of the football team's coaching staff.
He was Bob Wylie, an aide who coaches the tight ends.


Foley Calls for Extension of Jobless Benefits
Speaker Thomas S. Foley pushed today for Congressional action to extend unemployment benefits, saying he wanted the House Ways and Means Committee to address the problem.
His statement came three days after a proposal by Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the Texas Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, to declare an emergency, as provided by last year's budget law, and to lengthen the benefit period, relying on the $8 billion Federal unemployment trust fund.
The benefits now exceed 26 weeks in Alaska, Maine, Rhode Island and Puerto Rico.


PRETORIA ADMITS MAKING PAYMENTS TO MANDELA FOES
The South African Government admitted today for the first time that it secretly gave money to the black political organization Inkatha in its often violent rivalry with the more popular African National Congress.
The admission, following disclosures in a weekly newspaper, was one of the strongest confirmations of repeated charges leveled by the congress and others that the white-dominated Government of South Africa had been using its resources to bolster the congress's principal black opponent.
President F. W. de Klerk said today that such covert aid had been cut off by his Government in March 1990.


A New Tack on Gates
The White House has quietly made a major change in its explanation of Robert M. Gates's role in the Iran-contra scandal, tacitly acknowledging for the first time that he played a central role in 1986 in overseeing C.I.A. aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.
The Administration maintains that this aid had been approved by Congress.
But even so, the new explanation marks a departure from the previous official position that Mr.
Gates, Mr.
Bush's choice to head the Central Intelligence Agency, had only peripheral involvement with the contras.


U.S. Backs Taiwan on Trade Agency
In a reversal likely to win votes in Congress for trade preferences for China, the Bush Administration said today that Taiwan should join the main international organization that oversees world trade.
The policy shift comes after weeks of sometimes strenuous interagency debate, and despite China's warning that such a move would be "totally unacceptable," leading to concerns among some that China would retaliate against United States imports.


Hanna-Barbera Sale Is Weighed
The Great American Communications Company confirmed that it was considering the sale of Hanna-Barbera Productions Inc., the Hollywood cartoon company that created the Flintstones and Jetsons, among other characters.
Great American, a troubled radio and television company owned by Carl H. Lindner, the Cincinnati financier, said it was exploring its options, including selling the company.
As part of the process, it said several parties it did not identify had been given information about a sale.
One company said to be considering the purchase of Hanna-Barbera is MCA Inc., the subsidiary of the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company of Japan.
Hollywood trade publications had identified the Walt Disney Company as another possible suitor.
A Disney spokesman said the company would not comment on the report, calling it speculation.


Patents; Following the Ball at a Driving Range
Three inventors in North Carolina have patented a system that tells golfers on a driving range where their balls have landed.
The purpose, they said, is to give players a more precise idea of how changes in grip and swing affect their performance.
The system uses 26 vibration sensors, linked together and arranged in hexagonal formations on the driving range.
When a ball lands, sensors closest "hear" it more quickly than the others.
To calculate the ball's precise location, a computer processor compares the time that the nearest three sensors receive the signals and uses that basic trigonometry to determine the position.


Hannibal of Carthage Was No More Black Than King David
To the Editor:
Russell Baker, in "Scipio, to Hannibal" (column June 25), a satirical discourse on history, instructs a "dear relative" about Hannibal and the "nutty" Chinese Gordon.
He gets most of his facts more or less correct until the final paragraph.


Corrections
An article on Monday about a biography of the poet Anne Sexton misidentified the author of a biography of John Cheever.
He is Scott Donaldson.


Traffic Alert
East Side Rezoning Alliance Third Avenue Summer Festival: Third Avenue will be closed tomorrow from 42d to 57th Street from 10 A.M to 6 P.M.


Banks in a Shadow
The proposed alliance between Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover puts other full-service New York banks under increased pressure to improve their operations, either by finding partners or cutting expenses, or both.
The new Chemical, which will be the second- largest American bank, after Citibank, will threaten nearly every business line of the other large New York banks.
In consumer banking, Chemical's new size will give it the muscle to spend more to advertise and develop new products and the larger scale to deliver its services inexpensively.
A bigger Chemical will also be able to cut prices to take market share from its rivals.
Mergers May Help Profits
William T. Gregor, a consultant at the MAC Group, a Boston consulting firm, noted that because banks were suffering from sluggish loan demand and too much competition, "mergers, and the savings they produce, are perhaps the best way for a large bank to show good earnings growth."


King Regains Her Cool and Takes Lead
Betsy King is gaining back her tranquillity and steady golf game after the tremendous pressure she endured last week in her attempt to become the first woman to capture three consecutive United States Open titles.
King barely qualified for the last two rounds of the 46th edition of the Women's Open, but after two rounds, she is the leader in her attempt to defend her title this week here in the $500,000 JAL Big Apple Classic at Wykagyl Country Club.


Cyberoptics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M.'s earnings plunged 91.9 percent and revenue declined by 10.7 percent in the second quarter.
At the same time, however, the company raised hopes that it might be able to ride a sluggish United States economic recovery during the second half of the year, saying it saw some new strength in domestic markets.  [ Page 31. ]


Executive Search
The New York Racing Association, reaching into the Meadowlands for help, named ALLEN GUTTERMAN vice president of marketing for its tracks at Belmont, Aqueduct and Saratoga yesterday.
Gutterman, who has been director of marketing and public relations at the Meadowlands since 1985, replaces RICHARD P. BROWN.
GERALD LAWRENCE, who directs New York racing operations, said that the change had been discussed for six weeks and was not related to recent small crowds of 18,664 on July 4 and of 17,472 on July 6, for the return match between the fillies Meadow Star and Lite Light.


Colonial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Youths in Glen Ridge Assault May Be Charged as Adults
After court proceedings spanning 20 months, a New Jersey prosecutor has won the legal right to try as adults three of the youths arrested on charges of sexually assaulting a mildly retarded teen-ager in March 1989 in Glen Ridge.
At the time of the incident, the three were 17 and considered juveniles under state law.
As such, they fell under jurisdiction of the state's Family Court system and faced considerably more lenient charges and potential penalties than four of their friends who were indicted on nine charges in May 1990.


Nightmare on Wall St.: The Video
In the scare-epic tradition of the anti-drug film "Reefer Madness" and the driver's education classic "Red Asphalt," Wall Street will soon be proudly presenting a cautionary tale of its own.
"Think Twice!" will be part instructional tool and part human drama, its producers say.
The videotape's aim will be to dissuade corporate employees from insider trading.


Spivey Has Become United States' Man on the Run
Jim Spivey has been searching the deepest recesses of his newspapers, reading the fine print on all the track meets around the world.
So far, so good.
He feels a lot better than he did on June 15.
That was the date, Spivey remembers, when he sat forever on Joe Falcon's shoulder, ran one of his dumbest races and finished fourth in the 1,500 meters at the national track and field championships in New York City.
Generally, the top three finishers would qualify for the world championships next month in Tokyo.


Eastern Europe Looks at New York as a Model
To the Editor:
In "The New York Bloc" (Op-Ed, June 26), James Rouen suggests that New York City is much like the former Eastern Bloc in the aftermath of Communist rule: laden with a swollen, inefficient and outdated bureaucracy unresponsive to reform.
While there is a measure of truth to this characterization, Mr.
Rouen is wrong to suggest that New York's local government is no different from those of Prague, Budapest or Warsaw.


McCaw Cellular
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. said it would buy cellular telephone systems in Florida and Texas for $105.3 million.
McCaw, the nation's leading cellular telephone company, said the systems included non-wireline cellular operations in Daytona Beach, Fla., and Waco, Tex.
The seller is Crowley Cellular Telecommunications, a Maryland limited partnership.
The transaction, which is payable in cash or McCaw class A common stock, will add about 600,000 potential customers to McCaw's current 73.5 million.
The company's stock fell 25 cents, to $23.75, in over-the-counter trading today.


CHRONICLE
After spending most of his career performing life-saving spinal operations on children, often free, Dr.
FRED J. EPSTEIN plans to write a book about pediatric neurosurgery for the layman.
"I want to support families who are going through crises, to help them access the system," said Dr.
Epstein, who is the founder of the Division of Pediatric Neurosurgey of the New York University Medical Center.
"The book will cover fundamental information about the questions families should ask, how to find the appropriate physician for an uncommon problem."
The book, "Gifts of Time," is to be written with ELAINE SHIMBURG for William Morrow &amp; Company, and is to be published in 1993.
"We do a very mechanical thing easily explained to the most unsophisticated people," Dr.
Epstein said.
"Hey, we're not rocket scientists and it doesn't take one to understand what we do."


Pirates Bury Reds Again, 7-2
The Pittsburgh Pirates extended the Cincinnati Reds' losing streak to 10 games tonight, getting a pair of homers and a run-scoring triple from Bobby Bonilla in a 7-2 victory.
Winning for the eighth time in nine games, the Pirates rocked Tom Browning for four runs in the first inning.


CHRONICLE
The curtain rose last night on the Persian Gulf war according to HAROLD PINTER.
"The New World Order," which is to run through Aug. 3 at the Royal Court Theater in London, is billed as "a short, satirical response to the gulf war."
In a way, the play resembles the war.
It is eight minutes long.
The title is taken from one of President Bush's phrases.
The three characters include a blindfolded torture victim who is silent throughout, and his two captors; none has a particular nationality..
The play was originally scheduled for to benefit a campaign against the war, but the war stopped.


This Isn't So Hard: Another Yank Hurler Shuts Down the A's
Another night, another Yankee rookie steps forward.
Thursday, it was Scott Kamieniecki.
Tonight, Jeff Johnson -- just six days after taking a two-hitter into the ninth inning against the California Angels -- sent the Yankees to a 3-0 victory over the Oakland Athletics.
He was equally superb.


Big Loss Faced By General Tire
General Tire, a unit of Continental A.G., the German tire maker, is facing a $100 million loss and is exploring cooperation with the Pirelli Armstrong Tire Company, an Ohio newspaper reported today.
Like other tire companies, General Tire has had slumping sales because of the recession, and the company has said that it expects to lay off 600 salaried employees this year, as well as about 175 of the 1,000 workers in its Akron offices.
Alan Ockene, General Tire's president, told The Beacon Journal in Akron that his company and Pirelli Armstrong, a unit of the Italian tire maker, were discussing possible cooperation agreements between certain operations.
"Without a merger, if we can save $20 million, why don't we do it?" Mr.
Ockene was quoted as saying.
He said the negotiations were limited to those concerns.
General Tire's losses could reach $100 million this year, Mr.
Ockene said.


Former I.B.M. Scientist To Head Mitsubishi Lab
Laszlo A. Belady, a 30-year veteran of computer science, is not afraid of controversy.
That was evident earlier this week when he accepted the post of chairman and director of Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories Inc., a new basic research lab in Cambridge, Mass., set up by the Mitsubishi Electric Corporation of Japan.
Mr.
Belady, who worked for the International Business Machines Corporation's research division for 23 years, has spent the last six years as vice president in charge of the software technology project at the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation in Austin, Tex.


Chancellor Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Music in Review
'La Boheme"
New York Grand Opera  Rumsey Playfield, Central Park
Presenting fully staged operas in Central Park is an ambitous and perhaps slightly foolhardy undertaking, given the primitive facilities the park's stages offer.
Without a turntable or large backstage areas, changing scenes means striking sets and assembling new ones.
And the sets, singers and musicians are at the mercy of the elements.
Even the Metropolitan Opera, which presumably can afford some kind of traveling staging, avoids these pitfalls by offering its parks performances in concert form.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about the painter Robert Motherwell quoted a critic's description of him incompletely.
The critic, Clement Greenberg, called Motherwell "one of the very best of the Abstract Expressionist painters," not "the very best."


Patents; New Electrical System for Heating Clothing
Inspired in part by winters in which temperatures routinely drop to 20 degrees below zero, a small company in Fargo, N.D., has developed a new form of electrically heated clothing.
The idea of running electrical heating wires through clothing is not new.
Battery-powered electric socks and mittens have been marketed periodically over the years, and electric blankets have been common for decades.


We Haven't Seen Any Evolution Since the Pleistocene Epoch
To the Editor:
B.
Holly Smith, a research scientist at the University of Michigan, writes (letter, June 28) to rebut a biologist who said we human beings are not evolving now.
But no evolution can be observed anywhere on the earth at present.
Evolution means the origin of a new species of being out of other species, not merely the changing of white moths to black moths, usually cited as evidence.
No species are changing to other species; indeed, everything we know of genetics (of which Charles Darwin was ignorant) tells us that the laws keeping a species itself are very strong.


Legal Service Workers Settle 15-Week Strike in New York
A strike by New York City's Legal Service workers, who represent the city's poorest people in Housing Court and in their battles with bureaucracy, was settled early yesterday, ending a dispute that had grown increasingly bitter as it stretched past 15 weeks.
The agency's 100 lawyers will receive raises of 18 percent in the first year and 6.5 percent in the second year, said Scott Sommer, the union's strike coordinator.
Its paralegals and clerical workers will receive 12 percent in the first year and 5 percent in the second year.
Salaries in the public-interest law field have traditionally been low.


FINDS HISPANIC VOTERS HURT
The Justice Department today blocked use of a new districting plan for the New York City Council, saying that it "consistently disfavored" Hispanic voters in violation of Federal law.
The redistricting plan for an expanded and more powerful City Council was a central element of New York's historic effort to make its government more reflective of the city's racial and ethnic diversity.
Today's decision threw that process into at least temporary disarray, casting doubt on whether the city could hold elections for the new Council on schedule in September and November.


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Dollar Down in Slow Day; Gold Prices Edge Higher
The dollar tumbled yesterday against most major currencies in light dealings that traders said were driven mostly by internal influences in the foreign exchange markets.
Gold prices edged higher.
In New York, gold for current delivery edged up 40 cents an ounce, to $370.60, on the Commodity Exchange.
The Republic National Bank quoted a bid for an ounce of gold at $370.40 as of 4 P.M., up 70 cents from late Thursday.


G.M. to Close Two Plants, Cut 6,000 Jobs
The General Motors Corporation said today that it would close two North American assembly plants, one in Van Nuys, Calif., and one in Scarborough, Ontario, putting almost 6,000 people out of work.
G.M.'s move is in line with the pledge by Robert C. Stempel, the chairman, to balance the productive capacity of the No. 1 auto maker with demand for its vehicles by 1992.
Despite several plant closings since 1986, dwindling G.M. vehicle sales in the United States and Canada have resulted in more plant space and output than the company needs.


U.N. Embarrassed by Report Dismissing Iraqi Nuclear Sites
What kind of nuclear weapons program did Iraq have before the Persian Gulf war, and how much of it remains in place?
An unexpected report from United Nations inspectors in the field has embarrassed the special United Nations commission charged with finding and insuring the elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.


Beliefs
This week, around midpoint in the Episcopal Church's General Convention here, Bishop William Frey could be found sitting among fellow prelates in his church's House of Bishops dressed in a red T-shirt and black running shorts.
The former bishop of Colorado, now president of Trinity Episcopal School for Ministry outside of Pittsburgh, is not known as a model of traditional decorum.
Nor can he resist irreverent quips at his church's expense, once suggesting to a reporter that God had invented the Episcopal Church to provide comic relief for the rest of Christianity.
Last Sunday, speaking at an open hearing on sexuality, the topic that so preoccupied this meeting, Bishop Frey made an emotional appeal for a church that is "absolutely inclusive of all sorts and conditions of people." He further accused the church of sinning by "silent acceptance of homophobia and gay bashing."


Hanoi Shipped Animal Bones
The Defense Department said today that Vietnam had sent back animal bones, not human remains, in the case of a man purportedly in a snapshot showing American servicemen missing since the Vietnam War.
But the department said it had concluded that the man in question, Col.
John L. Robertson of the Air Force, is dead.
Colonel Robertson is one of three pilots shot down over Southeast Asia who is said by relatives to be in the photo, which was made public this week.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said today that efforts to authenticate the picture had been inconclusive.


Israelis Expand Force In Southern Lebanon
The Israeli Army expanded its presence in southern Lebanon today by deploying troops and tanks in the Christian town of Jezzin, creating a confrontation line with Muslim fundamentalists of the pro-Iranian Party of God, according to Lebanese and Israeli security officials.
Israeli tanks and soldiers took up positions at the northeastern edges of Jezzin, about 10 miles east of the port of Sidon.
The positions are less than a mile from Party of God guerrillas entrenched in the village of Jabaa in an area known as Jebel Safi, said the Lebanese security officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Ashland Coal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Sees New Famine in Africa
The combination of drought and the mass movement of people fleeing civil war in Ethiopia, Somalia and the Sudan have created famine conditions in the Horn of Africa as severe as those in the mid-1980's, when more than a million people died of starvation, members of a special United Nations mission say.
The civil war that brought a new Government to power in Ethiopia in May has forced more than 100,000 refugees into Djibouti, Kenya and the Sudan and left another 300,000, many of them soldiers loyal to the former Government, "virtually without any means of subsistence," according to a report prepared by the mission and made public this week.


Widow Wins Share in Feud Over a Real-Estate Empire
Ruling in a bitter family feud that has been watched closely by New York City's real-estate industry, a judge said yesterday that the widow of Sol Goldman, who amassed a $1 billion real-estate empire before he died in 1987, was entitled to one-third of his estate, as specified in an unusual agreement the couple made three years before his death.
The widow, Lillian, 69 years old, thus won a battle with her children, who had challenged the validity of the agreement and impugned their mother's psychological health.
The children could still appeal.


Zenith Posts Wider Loss in Quarter
The Zenith Electronics Corporation reported today that it had a $26.9 million loss for the second quarter, blaming the recession and continued planned reductions in inventory for its sixth straight quarterly loss.
The latest loss compares with a loss of $11.2 million for the second quarter of 1990.
Sales dropped 17.7 percent, to $275 million, from $334 million a year earlier.


Automobile Protection reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


ACC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Insider-Trading Indictment
A former executive of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, now a fugitive, has been indicted by a Federal grand jury in Manhattan on insider-trading charges stemming from company takeovers in which the investment firm advised one of the parties.
According to the 44-count indictment made public on Thursday, Nahum Vaskevitch, who had been the head of mergers and acquisitions for Merrill's London office, shared secret information about pending takeovers with other people.


I.R.S. Intensifies Mobil Tax Demand
The Mobil Corporation said today that the Internal Revenue Service was seeking to increase the company's payment of back taxes in a decade-old dispute over the pricing of oil from Saudi Arabia.
Mobil, which is based in New York, said the agency was seeking to increase its taxable income for several years after the Iranian revolution by about $2 billion.
The amount of increased tax liability would depend on tax rates and credits.


Review/Dance; Royal Ballet Sharpens Up 'Manon'
With its performance of Sir Kenneth MacMillan's "Manon" on Thursday night at the Metropolitan Opera House, the first of this engagement, the Royal Ballet triumphantly demonstrated that it remains one of the world's great companies.
The dancers not only moved harmoniously together but also proved capable of sharp characterizations.
What made their achievement astonishing is the fact that "Manon" is a flawed work.
Choreographed in 1974, it was previously presented in New York City during the Royal Ballet's season of 1976.
Like Massenet's opera "Manon" and Puccini's opera "Manon Lescaut," the ballet is inspired by "Manon Lescaut," the short novel by the Abbe Antoine-Francois Prevost, which was first published in 1731 and remains a popular French classic.


Public &amp; Private; Getting In the Door
Almost everyone has known a grandfather who was a bootstrapper.
The stories of hard work and personal achievement have a certain sameness: how he delivered newspapers to buy school shoes, how he worked his way through college driving an ice truck, how he started a business even though no one wanted to rent to someone of his ilk. (Pick an ilk. Many ilks. I have heard this story from grandfathers Irish, Polish, German, Italian.)
These are inspiring stories that reinforce the notion that the United States is a place where perseverance and hard work can turn a poor person into a rich one.
But there is sometimes something mean-spirited at the core of these simple parables.
They do not allow for lucky breaks or for the differences between the past and the present.
They assume that adversity is somehow ennobling.
The stories contain an accusatory moral, a rhetorical question: If I did it, why can't you?


American Study Center in London
When the new British Library adjacent to St.
Pancras Station in north London is completed in 1996, it will include a center for American studies.
The library's chairman, Comdr.
Michael Saunders Watson of the Royal Navy, retired, announced at a news conference on Thursday that the center would be created with $1.65 million donated by Viscount and Viscountess Eccles to the American Trust for the British Library.
The trust was founded in 1979 to purchase 1880-1950 materials missing from the library's American collections.
Named for its benefactors, the David and Mary Eccles Center for American Studies will begin to take shape in October and, said Commander Saunders Watson, will "undoubtedly make London the focus of American studies in Europe."


Armatron International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, An article on June 22 about a new organization of Chinese-Americans gave an incorrect name in some editions for a Chinese-born candidate for mayor in San Francisco.
He is Tom Hsieh.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the opening of the trial in the Happy Land social club fire misidentified the women shown.
They were Lydia Rodriguez, left, and Rosario Alvarez.


Revealing The Grain, Protecting The Wood
Wood that is exposed a great deal of the time to dampness or direct sunlight is susceptible to weathering, molds, pests and decay.
These in turn lead to discoloration, warping, cracking and even soft, crumbling wood that may also be riddled with holes or tunnels.
Dry summer days are a fine time to repair these kinds of problems or for maintenance that can prevent them.


Secret Gotti Recordings Admitted as Evidence
A major part of the case against John Gotti -- secret tape recordings of his conversations with associates and lawyers -- can be used as prosecution evidence in his racketeering trial, a Federal judge ruled yesterday.
At a pretrial hearing in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the judge, I. Leo Glasser, rejected a defense motion to suppress the taped conversations.
The trial of Mr.
Gotti and three co-defendants -- Salvatore Gravano, Frank Locascio and Thomas Gambino -- is to begin Sept. 23.


America West Cutting Flights
American West Airlines Inc., which filed bakruptcy protection under Chapter 11 last month, said it would scale back operations and would cancel several flights including its one daily round-trip to LaGuardia Airport in New York.
Service to John F. Kennedy Airport will continue.
In all, America West said it was ending operations Aug. 1 in Bakersfield, Calif.; Grand Junction, Colo.; Palmdale/Lancaster, Calif.; San Antonio, and at LaGuardia.
Operations will cease Sept.7 in Fresno, Calif., and Calgary, Alberta.
The move, which will include some job eliminations, comes as America West, the Phoenix-based carrier, cuts back service to a core that it hopes will return the company to profitability.
More cutbacks may be needed, the company said.


U.S. Appeals Court Clears Way To Dismantle Shoreham A-Plant
Rejecting a last-ditch effort by the Bush Administration to keep the $5.5 billion Shoreham Nuclear Power Station alive, a Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that the plant's owner could begin dismantling it without conducting an environmental impact study.
The decision, by the United States Court of Appeals in the District of Columbia circuit, grants Shoreham's owner a new license that allows it to begin taking apart the fully operational, 809-megawatt plant.
The owner, the Long Island Lighting Company, said that it would quickly move forward to decommission the plant, making the chance that it will ever operate as a nuclear plant decidedly remote.


Board Fight Over Schools Intensifying
The public bickering between New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and the seven members of the Board of Education rose in pitch yesterday, with some board members accusing him of choking off their access to his staff to minimize any appearance of dissent.
Some board members, including H. Carl McCall, the board's president, and Michael J. Petrides, its Staten Island representative, also complained that communications between the Chancellor and the board had become so disordered that 20 highly paid executives on the Chancellor's staff are tied up for a full day each week attending board meetings to answer questions.


6 Insurers Have Cut In Ratings
Moody's Investors Service, a leading Wall Street rating agency, said yesterday that it was lowering its ratings of six of the country's largest life insurers: John Hancock, Massachusetts Mutual, Mutual Life of New York, New England Mutual, the Travelers and Principal Mutual.
What links the insurers downgraded yesterday is that they all have large exposures to commercial real estate, either to the actual properties or to mortgages backed by those properties.
Moody's declared that real estate was a "deteriorating" asset and that it expected property values to continue to fall.
Adjustments Were Small
The changes in Moody's ratings, which are the firm's assessment of the insurers' ability to pay the claims of policyholders, were very small.
The insurers downgraded yesterday ranked high in Moody's 17-notch rating system, and they fell only a notch or two.
But the move could have a big effect on all six companies because many policyholders, as well as brokers and agents, want to do business only with insurers rated at the top, or just a notch below.


Albert E. Parr, Museum Director and Oceanographer, Dies at 90
Albert E. Parr, the director of the American Museum of Natural History from 1942 to 1959, died on Tuesday at his home in Wilder, Vt.
He was 90 years old.
Dr.
Parr, a marine biologist by training, a professor of oceanography at Yale and the director of its Peabody Museum before assuming the top post at the Museum of Natural History, was a leader in efforts to stress the interpretive function of museums as opposed to what he called the "dead circus" approach.


Patents; Dealing With An Annoying Sales Call
The scene is as familiar as it is annoying.
A person has just come home from work and is busy preparing dinner when the phone rings.
Sure enough, the caller is neither a friend nor a relative but a salesman pushing anything from stocks to vinyl replacement windows.
Now an insurance agent in Melville, L.I., has invented a device to politely deflect such calls with the push of a button.
The person receiving the call can simply hang up and activate a recorded message that explains that he or she does not accept such calls.
Since people may want to dismiss a stockbroker more rudely than the Sisters of Charity looking for a donation, the device allows people to prepare alternate messages.


No Headline
Bulat Okudzhava's adventure was supposed to have a happy ending.
For a month, his story has been playing in newspapers from Los Angeles to Moscow along these lines: "Soviet bard diagnosed with life-threatening heart condition while on tour in Los Angeles. Bypass operation urgently needed. Admirers dip into their pockets. Operation successful."
But that was before the bill collector appeared.


2 Baby Bells' Profits Drop; Third Is Flat
Three regional phone companies yesterday reported second quarter earnings, with Southwestern Bell and Bell Atlantic posting drops and U S West reporting flat results.
Following are the details of the results:  Southwestern Bell
The Southwestern Bell Corporation said its second-quarter profit fell 34.2 percent, largely because of a one-time charge.


Woman at Center of Fight on Feedings Dies
A brain-damaged woman whose feedings were stopped at her family's request and then resumed while a Christian group appealed the decision has died, her family said today.
The 42-year-old woman, Sue Ann Lawrance, died Thursday night at St.
Vincent Hospital, with her family at her bedside, said her brother, Mark.


BRIEFS
*
American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co., New York, said First Chicago Trust Co., New York, a subsidiary of First Chicago Corp., will become its shareholder services agent starting next June.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Bayer A.G., Frankfurt, the drug maker, said its Agfa-Gevaert division would open a $100 million plant in South Carolina in 1983 to make film and photographic papers.


Coors (Adolph) Co. (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 16


Workers Back G.M. Plan
Workers at the General Motors Corporation's huge car-making complex in Lordstown, Ohio, overwhelmingly endorsed a new production plan that G.M. hopes will make the factory more efficient, a union official said.
In voting on Wednesday and Thursday, about 5,000 members of the United Automobile Workers union Local 1112 approved the local agreement by a 2-to-1 margin, said Al Alli, a union shop chairman.
Specific vote totals were not available.


40 Cattle Die From Anthrax, And a Higher Toll Is Feared
Anthrax has killed about 40 cattle in the Mississippi Delta, state officials say, and the disease could spread because the infections occurred in many places.
The disease, a soil-bound bacteria, broke out in recent weeks as spring floodwaters receded.
And since flooding can cause the bacteria to proliferate from spores in the soil, grazing animals may ingest them.


Higher Profit at Pacific Gas
The Pacific Gas and Electric Company, the nation's largest investor-owned utility, reported higher earnings for the second quarter, a performance it said was generally in line with expectations.
The company said this week that it had earned $305.5 million, or 67 cents a share, up 84 percent from $166.2 million, or 33 cents a share, a year earlier.


Cruise America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


76ers Sign Wiggins
The Philadelphia 76ers have signed free-agent guard MITCHELL WIGGINS, who was barred from the National Basketball Association for two years over cocaine use, to a one-year contract.
Wiggins has played for the Bulls and the Rockets.
He missed half the 1986-87 season and all of the next two seasons after testing positive for cocaine use.
During the 1989-90 season, Wiggins averaged 15.5 points a game for the Rockets.
Meanwhile, RICK MAHORN, released by Philadelphia earlier this month, has signed a two-year, $3.6 million deal to play for Rome's Il Messaggero in the Italian Professional League.(AP)


DMI Furniture Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Review/Music; A Violin Concerto Played on the Piano
Beethoven's own piano and orchestra version of the Violin Concerto is a curiosity, but it may harbor a strand or two of revelation.
The piece, known formally as the Piano Concerto in D (Op. 61a), was resuscitated by Gerard Schwarz and the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestrar on Thursday and played with grace and simplicity by Vladimir Feltsman.
Beethoven's little money-making venture -- part of a package deal with his English publishers that included the violin original, three quartets, a symphony, a bona fide piano concerto and an overture -- came across as a strange creature indeed.
With no apparent pangs of conscience, Beethoven chose to overlook the unworkability of the premise.
He did, however, follow the thought to its odd conclusion with reasonable care and thoughtfulness.
The problems in this transcription lie not necessarily in the transfer of the violin's legato properties to the keyboard -- these survive with a minimal loss of communication -- but in the geology of the original, whose D Major terrain is calculated to the needs of the violin but not necessarily to those of the piano.


American City Business Journals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Acme-Cleveland reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Omaha: Talk, Talk, Talk of Telemarketing
If Detroit is the Motor City, then Omaha must be the Motor Mouth City.
This low-key community of 350,000 people on the western bank of the Missouri River would never embrace such a saucy slogan, but the fact is that Omaha sets the pace for the world when it comes to making a living on the telephone.
And that's just how the city's leaders planned it.
"They put together an exceedingly effective economic development program to attract telecommunications companies at a time when everyone else was concentrating on industry," said Robert Ady, president of the PHH Fantus Corporation, a Chicago-based corporate relocation consulting concern.


Mac Attack
Kevin McReynolds got off to a slow start this season, but in the last month he has delivered five key hits late in the game that have led to Met victories.
June 18: Provides an 8th-inning r.b.i. single off Rob Dibble in 7-5 victory over the Reds.


Robert McKean, 86, A Furniture Designer
Robert McKean, a New York industrial designer known for his elegant, spare furniture designs, died July 13 at the Community Hospital in Troy, Pa.
He was 86 years old and lived in Troy.
Mr. McKean died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Torture in Turkey
President Bush has ample reason to praise his Turkish hosts as he arrives in Ankara today.
When Saddam Hussein grabbed Kuwait last August, Turkey cut Iraq's oil pipeline and gave allied forces full use of Turkish bases.
In the war's wake, Turkey collaborated in creating a safe haven for Iraqi Kurds, now within the protective reach of an allied mobile force in Turkey, whose value may be tested if reported skirmishes in northern Iraq develop into something more serious.
For this, applause is in order for Turkey and its risk-taking President, Turgut Ozal.
Yet American recognition of Turkey's importance as an ally does not lessen the need for candor about a shameful human rights record.
It does no favor to Turkish democracy to ignore torture and denial of rights to Turkey's own Kurdish minority.


De Havilland Sale Delayed
The Canadian Government said today that it had postponed to Sept. 9 a decision on a bid by a European consortium to buy the de Havilland aircraft plant in Toronto from the Boeing Company.
The extension was granted by the agency, Investment Canada, because progress had been made by the consortium in meeting conditions for approval of the sale set by the Canadian Trade Minister, Michael Wilson, said Investment Canada's spokesman, Charles Byron.


William Rawls, 93, a Retired Internist In New York City
William Bryant Rawls, a retired New York internist who was active in many medical organizations, including the forerunner of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, died on Wednesday at St.
Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 93 years old and lived in Pleasant Valley, N.Y.
He died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Guidepost; Keeping a Bike Rolling
Don't let a small bicycle repair ruin a summer outing.
A yearly tune up can help prevent some problems; it can cost $20 to $50 and take a few days.
When problems do occur, most can be repaired at a local shop in less than an hour.
Tires are rarely patched because of the likelihood of another leak or damage.
Broken spokes cost about $5 a spoke to repair or replace.
Here are some other typical problems, how to repair them and the approximate costs.
Trouble
Repair
Cost
Flat tire
New tube
$9
New tire
$8 to $30
Loose or squeaky brakes
Adjustment
$4 a brake
Derailed chain
Adjust gears
$4-$8
Bent wheel
Trueing a wheel
$10 a wheel
New wheel
$24-$45
Broken brake or gear cable
Replace cable
$5.95 a cable
Source: Metro Bicycles, New York City


Roland A. Gsell, Jeweler, 95
Roland A. Gsell , a retired jeweler and watch importer, died on Thursday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 95 years old.
Mr. Gsell died in his sleep of natural causes, said his son, Cyril.


MNC Financial Names New Chief Executive
MNC Financial Inc., a Baltimore-based banking company that has been hurt by commercial real estate loans, yesterday named Frank P. Bramble chief executive officer.
He has been an executive vice president at the company.
He fills a post that has been vacant since the retirement last September of the chairman and chief executive, Alan P. Hoblitzell Jr., who was replaced as chairman by MNC's largest shareholder, Alfred Lerner.


Cardinals, Throngs and Carnations Put End to Rizzo Era in Philadelphia
They were young and old, but mostly over 50.
They were black and white, but mostly white working people from ethnic neighborhoods.
They were Republicans and Democrats, but nearly all were Rizzocrats, the name given to tens of thousands of Philadelphians who religiously voted for the former Mayor, Frank L. Rizzo, no matter where the Democrat-turned-Republican was on the ballot.
Yesterday and today Rizzocrats and others came to pay respects to the cop-turned-mayor who became a legend in Philadelphia politics.
Mr.
Rizzo, who was 70 years old, died of a heart attack on Tuesday in the midst of his fifth campaign for mayor.


Lovers Are Videotaped And Charges Brought
A man and a woman were arrested here earlier this week after a child saw them having sex in the man's condominium and a neighbor videotaped the act.
The man, Alfred Stephens, 36 years old, and the woman, Janet Paddock, 32, were both charged Tuesday night with a lewd and lascivious act in the presence of a child under 12, the Hillsborough County sheriff's office said.
They were released from jail the next day on $15,000 bail each.


Observer; With Forked Tongue
Why is it called a "heat wave"?
Obviously it is not a wave.
A wave moves.
The so-called heat wave does not move.
It sits.
It sits, and it sits, and it sits, and then it sits some more, the way unemployed relatives used to sit during the Great Depression after they'd wedged a foot inside the door by saying they were just passing through town and thought they'd drop in and say hello.
I once lived in a house where unemployed uncles just passing through town had no trouble at all in sitting for six or seven months.
Heat waves are just like Depression uncles, yet nobody ever referred to those uncles as "uncle waves."


Bridge
There are very few absolute rules in defensive play that are not totally trivial.
One candidate might be this: If you have Q x x in the trump suit, never play the queen unless doing so will win the trick or help your partner.
But "never" is a dangerous word in cardplay theory.
Consider the diagramed deal played in the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams in March.
North's opening one no-trump bid showed 14-16 points, and East's two-spade overcall showed spades together with a minor suit.
South's final jump to six clubs was therefore aggressive, since he could expect a bad diamond split.


Hot New Scandal in Tokyo: A Case of Industrial Spying
Just when Japan thought that its string of business scandals had finally ended, another burst open today.
More than a dozen of the country's biggest industrial manufacturers -- including Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and members of the Hitachi and Toyota empires -- have been accused of industrial espionage.
In the last two days, the police in Tokyo and Osaka have confiscated records that according to news reports here suggest that several of the companies paid an industrial spy for information about Komatsu Ltd., one of the world's biggest manufacturers of construction equipment.
There are suspicions that other documents may have been stolen from Shin Caterpillar Mitsubishi, a joint venture of Mitsubishi and Caterpillar Inc., an American company.


Obesity Isn't a Joke When It Threatens Life
To the Editor:
As someone who watches a family member struggle to maintain a 100-pound weight loss, I was dismayed by "Pain, but No Gain" (editorial, June 30), giving "fatties" news about obesity.
Here is the basic contradiction in viewing the obesity problem: life and death matters are treated as a big joke.
Would you call out to "druggies" or "drunks"?
One is just as dead from an obesity-related heart attack as from a cocaine overdose.


Roadside Tire Inflaters Can Be a Risk at Garage
Although aerosol inflaters are helpful for quickly repairing flat tires, many brands contain gases that are flammable or can damage the earth's ozone layer.
An inflater contains a puncture-sealing latex or rubber resin, to seal a puncture, and compressed gas, which starts to inflate the tire.
Once the car is in motion again, heat generated by the friction of the tire's rotation causes the gas to expand and further inflate the tire.
The repair is only temporary; the driver should take the car to the nearest gas station.


Rowe Journal; Near Old Nuclear Plant, Town Keeps the Faith
Tucked discreetly into the northern Berkshires, Yankee Rowe is the oldest and perhaps the most picturesque nuclear power plant in America.
The trout waters of the Deerfield River cut a glistening path around the containment dome.
Bright orange butterflies flutter in and out of the barbed wire fencing.
For three decades, the residents of Rowe have treated their atomic neighbor with the best sort of Yankee hospitality.
They have built houses nearby, taken their children on tours and used the plant's taxes to buy services most small towns cannot even dream of.


Bell Atlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sanctions Tied to AIDS Are Assailed
In adopting disciplinary measures, including jail, for AIDS-infected health care workers who perform invasive procedures without informing patients that they are infected, the Senate is taking the wrong approach, health experts in and out of Government say.
In the first place, they say, testing health care workers would mean spending an enormous amount of money and uncover a small number of infected people.


Jets Suffer First Loss
It's only the second full day of practice and already the Jets know how it feels to win one and lose one.
No sooner had they signed their last player who didn't have a contract, linebacker Morris (Mo) Lewis, a third-round choice out of Georgia, and got him into pads, than they lost their 10th-round pick, Al Baker, a running back from Kentucky.


Music in Review
Salomon String Quartet  Frick Collection
The Salomon String Quartet's late afternoon of Haydn on Wednesday offered refreshment from the Mozart performances that threaten to engulf us all.
The Salomon's players are principals in English early-music orchestras and add their quartet playing to what must already be frantically busy careers.
Their choice of old Italian originals and copies to play on creates a chain of consequences that go far beyond just the sound and malleability of instruments.


Gorbachev Warns of Need To Prevent Nuclear Spread
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union headed home today to prepare for his next summit appointment, the signing of a strategic arms treaty, with a strong caution that efforts must be intensified to see that the nuclear nations do not grow to include Iraq and other smaller countries.
"Quite a few countries are capable of developing nuclear weapons," the Soviet leader warned in an interview after his three-day mission of seeking economic help at the summit meeting of the leading industrial nations.


Dwight Weist, a Radio Actor, 81, Known as 'Man of 1,000 Voices'
Dwight Weist, an actor and announcer who was known as "the man of 1,000 voices" for his impersonations on radio's "March of Time" in the 1930's and 40's, died on Tuesday while vacationing on Block Island, R.I.
He was 81 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Southold, L.I.
He died of a heart attack, said a friend, Doris Davis.


INSIDE
Israelis Express Skepticism About Syrian Intentions
Officials in Jerusalem said they were skeptical about the assertion by Secretary of State Baker, who arrives there tomorrow, that Syria was ready to negotiate peace with Israel at an international conference.
Page 4.
U.S.
Backs Taiwan on Trade
To win support for trade breaks for China, the Bush Administration now supports Taiwan's attempt to join a world trade organization.
Page 5.
Bug-Repellent Ban Sought
New York State officials say repellents with more than 30 percent of the chemical DEET are health risks.
Consumer's World, page 46.


Action Staffing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Dow Unchanged for Day, Up 35.55 in Week
Stocks turned in a mixed performance yesterday in heavy trading.
The day's big news -- as far as Wall Street was concerned -- was that I.B.M. stayed in the black, if only by a little bit.
The Dow Jones industrial average ended unchanged on the day at 3,016.32 but ahead 35.55 points, or 1.2 percent, for the week.
The Nasdaq composite, more representative of the smaller stocks, edged ahead for the day and close to 1 percent for the week.
Amex stocks lost some ground.


French Protest New Taxes on Art
Having long cossetted the world of culture with subsidies and privileges, the Socialist Government of France has suddenly become the target of furious protests from art dealers and painters over an increase in the sales taxes on art and antiques.
With auction houses and art galleries already feeling the squeeze of economic recession, the dealers have charged that the new taxes will further discourage sales and dash any hopes that Paris may have of joining London and New York as a major international art market.


KURDS IN CLASHES WITH IRAQ TROOPS
Kurdish leaders said today that more than 100 people had been killed or wounded in fighting between Kurdish guerrillas and Government soldiers in northern Iraq.
At a news conference here, Massoud Barzani, leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, said the fighting started with a misunderstanding between the guerrillas and Iraqi commanders at a checkpoint in Sulaimaniya.


Senna Hospitalized
AYRTON SENNA of Brazil, twice a Formula One world champion and winner of the first four Grand Prix races this year, was spending the night in a hospital in Mannheim, Germany, after being badly bruised in a crash yesterday during a practice run at Hockenheim Ring.
The 31-year-old Senna, who never lost consciousness, told his driving colleague MAURICIO GUGELMIN that a defective tire apparently caused the accident.(AP)


Betrayed: The Poet and the Public
Anne Sexton, who ended a tormented life in 1974, was a very public poet -- in that she made the reader privy to her every obsession.
So one doubts she'd have agreed with her contemporary, W. H. Auden, that a writer's "private life is, or should be, of no concern to anybody but himself, his family and his friends." Still, even she might have drawn the line at what her psychiatrist, Dr.
Martin T. Orne, did: He gave more than 300 audio tapes of their private therapy sessions to her biographer, Diane Wood Middlebrook.
Dr.
Orne contends that " [ Anne Sexton ]  would have jumped at the opportunity to share what we did." Her daughter and literary executor, Linda Gray Sexton, says: "I sometimes wonder if Mother is angry with me. She might have preferred to be seen as a tragic victim." Dr.
Orne and Ms.
Sexton are, of course, only guessing.


Richard Horovitz, 44, Foundation Executive
Richard Allen Horovitz, former executive director of the Panos Institute, a nonprofit organization that finances international information projects on environmental issues in Washington, died on Wednesday at his summer home in Provincetown, Mass.
He was 44 years old and lived in Washington.
Mr. Horovitz died of complications from AIDS, said a spokesman for the family.


Affiliated Publications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Inquiry in Bank Case
In the face of rising public and political criticism in Britain that regulators around the world were too slow to close the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the British Government announced today that it would conduct an inquiry into the case.
In the last two weeks, American and British newspapers have reported that Price Waterhouse, the bank's auditor, found evidence of irregularities and questionable lending practices at the bank more than a year ago.
In addition, the British Government acknowledged Thursday that in June 1990, it had received two letters from bank employees in Britain that contained accusations of mismanagement, irregularities and corruption at the bank.


Europe in Pact With Japan
Japan and the European Community have agreed on an accord to strengthen political and trade cooperation, France having dropped objections to its wording.
The declaration, calling for closer consultations on issues ranging from foreign relations and trade to science, culture, energy and the environment, was issued on Thursday after a meeting of Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan and leaders of the 12-nation community.


Malcolm S. Mackay Jr., Airline Executive, 82
Malcolm S. Mackay Jr., a former executive with Northwest Airlines, died in Red Lodge on Wednesday after a series of strokes.
He was 82 years old.
Mr.
Mackay lived in Long Lake, Minn.
His family had maintained a ranch in Montana for many years.


Episcopal Resolution on Homosexuality Offers an Uncertain View
After debates that dominated a 10-day meeting here, the Episcopal Church's governing body today approved a compromise statement leaving the church's official stance on homosexual relationships ambiguous for at least another three years.
But the resolution, combined with other actions by the church's General Convention, virtually assured that although it is technically still against church policy, ordination of homosexuals who are not pledged to celibacy will continue and probably become more frequent.
Since the 1970's, it has been church policy to allow ordination of homosexuals if they are not known publicly to be sexually active.


Finish the Phrase, New York: Is It (Blank) Enough for You?
Would Henry James have described "summer afternoon" as the two most beautiful words in the English language if he had been in these parts yesterday?
Ha!
Not if he had been among the thousands of people who filed sullenly past the intersection of Broadway and 46th Street at 8 A.M.
It was hazy, already sweltering and the billowing emission from a steampipe swirled depressingly.


Computer Telephone Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 20


I.B.M. Net Fell 91.9% In Quarter
I.B.M. reported yesterday that earnings dived 91.9 percent and revenue declined by 10.7 percent in the second quarter.
At the same time, however, the company raised hopes that it might be able to ride a sluggish United States economic recovery during the second half of the year, saying it saw some new strength in domestic markets.
But the company also sounded a bleak note about the international economy, saying it had seen further deterioration in its Asian and European markets.
Over all, I.B.M. said it was still grappling with a difficult global economy and competitive pressures in many of its product lines, as well as trying to manage a difficult transition to new products in several of its major businesses.


NASA Delays Shuttle Liftoff
The space agency decided today to delay Tuesday's planned launching of the space shuttle Atlantis because of a malfunction in a circuit that is used to separate the orbiter from the external fuel tank after liftoff.
Workers traced the problem to damaged cable and began replacing it, said Lisa Malone, a spokeswoman for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
"If things go well, we could launch on Wednesday," Ms.
Malone said.
A Wednesday liftoff would be at 10:55 A.M. for the shuttle, which is to deploy a satellite on nine-day flight, she said.


Egypt Calls for End to Israeli Boycott
President Hosni Mubarak called on the Arab nations today to suspend their economic boycott of Israel in return for a suspension of all Israeli settlement building in the occupied West Bank, Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem.
The Egyptian leader made the appeal apparently at the behest of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, as part of Mr.
Baker's strategy of bombarding Israel with what he considers to be positive Arab signals before he arrives in Jerusalem Sunday to try to convince the Israeli Government to drop its opposition to an American-designed peace conference.


Iben Browning, 73; Researcher Studied Climate and Quakes
Iben Browning, a climatologist who created a stir last year when he predicted a major earthquake that never occurred along the New Madrid fault, which stretches from Arkansas through Missouri to Illinois, died on Thursday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Albuquerque, N.M.
He was 73 years old and lived in Albuquerque.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Sri Lanka Combat Kills Hundreds
More than 600 rebels of the Tamil ethnic group and 78 soldiers have died in nine days of the most intense combat since the guerrillas began fighting for an independent homeland eight years ago, the Government said today.
Officials said today that Government troops killed at least 100 Tamil rebels on Thursday in the latest drive to rescue a besieged army camp, one of the few bases in the embattled north still under military control.


BUSH PLEDGES AID TO GREEK MILITARY
With concern heightened over security for President Bush and his entourage as they travel through Greece and Turkey, Mr.
Bush toured the Acropolis today and announced some initiatives to strengthen the Greek military.
"Basic Parthenon shot?" the President asked the photographers who wanted to capture him standing in front of the ruins.


Peddlers to Be Offered Jobs on Fifth Avenue
With the State Legislature moving to sweep sidewalk peddlers off Fifth Avenue, businesses there have agreed to offer the vendors who are disabled wa veterans full-time jobs at twice the minimum wage.
That was the agreement announced yesterday between New York City officials and Fifth Avenue business leaders, who have been at odds with the peddlers for years.
Merchants have complained that the peddlers clog the sidewalks and detract from the allure and cachet of one of the most famous shopping streets in the world.


Corrections
An article last Saturday about the Long Island Pet Cemetery referred incorrectly in some copies to the cost of burying an English sheepdog there.
It was $1,800.


In Battle of the Bugs, Is Stronger Better?
At the height of the bug season, New York State officials are warning consumers not to use insect repellents with high levels of the chemical DEET because of health risks.
They are also proposing that such products be banned.
DEET-related health problems include skin rashes and scarring in adults and, in a few cases, reports of neurological problems in children.
A ban would affect products that are more than 30 percent DEET.


5 Security Council Members Tell Iraq to Evacuate Region
The five permanent members of the Security Council told Iraq today that it should withdraw its forces from the marshes in the south and allow United Nations representatives to reach Shiite Muslims trapped there, diplomats said.
The United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France and China told the Iraqi chief delegate, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, that Iraq was violating an April Security Council resolution requiring that humanitarian organizations have access to the civilian population.


Quotation of the Day
"You've got to take it slow." -- Paul Klare of Brooklyn, as the temperature reached 96.  [ 24:2. ]


Mutual Benefit Job Declined
Nicholas deB.
Katzenbach, a former United States Attorney General, has declined the post of deputy rehabilitator of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, a state insurance department spokeswoman said.
The spokeswoman, Jo Astrid Gladding, said on Thursday that Mr.
Katzenbach cited professional conflicts as the reason for his decision.
The state said earlier this week when it seized Mutual Benefit that Mr.
Katzenbach would be the deputy rehabilitator.


Music in Review
Mostly Mozart Festival Avery Fisher Hall
At its inception, the Mostly Mozart Festival could seldom afford big-name soloists.
Now, in its 25th season, it juxtaposes them regularly.


West's Aid to Moscow: Advice First and Then Cash
With the London summit meeting over, the economic spotlight shifts to Moscow, where the prime responsibility now rests for moving the Soviet Union to a more market-based, and more prosperous, economy.
The main supporting role, however, will be in Washington.
Any aid the West provides in the coming months will center largely on the efforts of two major international economic institutions, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.


McReynolds Strikes Again as Mets Beat Dodgers
There is at Shea Stadium no taste for the past, no thirst for nostalgia.
Darryl Strawberry homers and the crowd boos.
The hunger is for the moment, for 1991, for the Pirates and first place in the National League East.
Kevin McReynolds has become the man of and for the moment, and he can't seem to stop himself from satisfying that hunger.
One checks one's log of significant dates in the season for the Mets, and McReynolds's name invariably appears.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.83
5.73
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.60
7.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.73
7.46
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.13
8.14
8.42
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.47
8.47
8.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.52
9.51
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.14
7.15
7.41
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Excerpts From U.S. Letter Rejecting Redistricting Plan
Following are excerpts from Assistant Attorney General John R. Dunne's letter to the New York City Districting Commission:


After Second Round, Birkdale Has the Edge
The wind off the Irish Sea has not been excessively punishing; the rough is thin, and the greens have a manageable speed.
But Royal Birkdale asserted its subtle strength anyway today in the second round of the British Open.
Although the course allowed almost everyone in the field a survivable trip down its sand dune-bordered green corridors, no player has been able to dominate the 6,940-yard links over the first 36 holes.


Offensive Photo
To the Editor:
The staged, sacrilegious photograph depicting a priest aiming a crucifix as if it were a pistol at the temple of another man ("Four Frames on America," Op-Ed, July 6) is despicable.
It's particularly offensive because you invited Duane Michals to submit this obscenity, which is an insult to all decent people.
MARTIN L. DUGGAN St.
Louis, July 8, 1991
The writer is a St. Louis Globe-Democrat retired editorial page editor.


Summer Cover-Ups for the Skin
Scant summer clothes can be painfully revealing for those who have something to hide.
One solution is camouflage, and two brands of full coverage body makeup on the market do a good job of concealing a variety of body blemishes -- everything from visible capillaries and veins to scars, blemishes, bruises and even tattoos.
Leg and Body Cover by Flori Roberts of Lakewood, N.J., is a waterproof, smear-proof cream.
For the best staying power, it should be allowed to dry for 15 minutes after it is applied.
Then a setting powder is dusted over it.
While the product does not contain any active sunscreen, it acts as a physical block that keeps out 50 to 70 percent of the sun's harmful rays because it contains titanium dioxide and iron oxides, Ms.
Roberts said.
It comes in six shades and costs $12 for a 2.2-ounce tube.
It is sold at Macy's, Nordstrom and Lord &amp; Taylor.


Bell &amp; Howell Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Panel Backs Sale of Experimental AIDS Drug
In a decision that sets new standards for drug approval, an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration recommended today that an AIDS drug be approved for marketing even though it has not been thoroughly tested in clinical trials.
The drug, didanosine or dideoxyinosine, also known as DDI, is still being tested in clinical studies that would establish whether it is truly safe and effective.
But because the need for new drugs to treat people with AIDS is so great, the committee decided that it could approve the drug on the basis of preliminary data that would ordinarily be considered indequate.


Social Seismology
First came the alarming news that New Jersey was taking over the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company.
The man understood that the takeover was in the public interest and that he wouldn't lose any money.
Still, he was shaken.
This was no fly-by-night, high-rolling outfit.
His parents had gone out of their way, years ago, to find a solid company in which to start him on his first life insurance policy.
How could such a big, stable company get into so much trouble?


Mayes Calls It Quits
Two-time Pro Bowl running back RUEBEN MAYES of the New Orleans Saints retired abruptly last night, saying football wasn't fun anymore.
After being in 1989 because of an Achilles tendon injury, Mayes never regained the form of his Pro Bowl years.(AP)


Cincinnati Milacron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


Net Off 13.6% At Lockheed
Despite higher pretax earnings, the quarterly profit of the Lockheed Corporation fell 13.6 percent, as its tax rate increased sharply, the military contractor said.
Lockheed, which built the Stealth fighter and recently led a team that won the contract for the next-generation advanced tactical fighter, said this week that its second-quarter earnings fell to $70 million, or $1.11 a share, from $81 million, or $1.28 a share, in the comparable period in 1990.
Sales rose fractionally, to $2.43 billion from $2.42 billion.


Uncovered Short Sales Are Off 0.4% on Big Board
The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short and not yet covered for the monthly period ended July 15 fell by 3.1 million, or four-tenths of a percent, to 709.7 million, from 712.8 million on June 14.
The new figure is equal to seven-tenths of a percent of the total shares listed on the Big Board.


3 ROBB AIDES QUIT OVER WILDER TAPE
Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia announced today that he had accepted the resignations of three aides because of their involvement with the tape-recording of the telephone conversations of Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder.
Mr.
Robb also publicly apologized for not immediately disclosing his staff's involvement and said that he would appear on Aug. 7 before a Federal grand jury investigating the case.


CSX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


St. Ann's Bay Journal; Sing, O Jamaican Silt, of Columbus's Leaky Ships
Nearly 500 years after Columbus set out from a Spanish port on his first great voyage, debate rages over questions ranging from his birthplace to the location of the Caribbean island where he first made landfall and the site of his burial.
But more than two months into a painstaking search of the mucky bottom of this luminous turquoise bay, archeologists from the Institute of Nautical Archaeology at Texas A &amp; M University, following up on one of the few sure clues of Columbus's career -- that it ended in humiliation here -- think they might be zeroing in on the remains of the last two ships the admiral would ever command.


ISRAEL SUSPICIOUS OF SYRIA'S INTENT
In advance of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's arrival here on Sunday, several Israeli Government officials said today that they were skeptical about his assertion that Syria has suddenly shown a change of heart and is now ready to negotiate peace with Israel at an international conference.
The officials spent the day conferring, and though none of them said exactly what they would tell Mr.
Baker, their comments suggested they were suspicious, anxious and in some cases angry about his agreement with Syria.


Other Side Of Net Is Other Side Of Life
Jessica Emmons didn't bring her dog.
The golden retriever was left home in Phoenix with her parents, who do not travel with her.
Her coach, Bob Bridgeford, remained in Los Angeles.
Emmons paid her way to the Pathmark Classic with money she saved by giving tennis lessons for $35 an hour in a park near her home.


About New York
"They're inquisitive, bright, honest and open," Dr.
Barbara A. Barlow said.
"People should stay children forever and we'd be a better society."
Dr.
Barlow's respect and love for children are a shining spot in a city whose shame is that so many are caught in the crossfire of hurt, neglect and bullets.
Her calling is the mending of children's wounds.


It's No Exit For Many In Moscow
Alone in his apartment, Mikhail Fridman says he feels like a "forgotten man." For three years he has been trying to leave the Soviet Union and move to the United States to escape what he describes as years of subtle and overt harassment for being Jewish.
For three years the Soviet authorities have refused his request to emigrate.
He hears that the Soviet legislature passed a law guaranteeing the right to travel and emigrate freely, and that President Bush has accepted an invitation to meet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at a summit meeting this month in Moscow.
He says he wonders whether anyone knows that he and thousands of others across the Soviet Union are still being denied permission to leave the country.


Anne Bristol Satterthwaite Is to Wed
September wedding plans for Anne Bristol Satterthwaite and Rohan James Hoare, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gavin F. Hoare of Churchill, Victoria, Australia, have been announced by Miss Satterthwaite's father and stepmother, Mr. and Mrs.
Henry B. Satterthwaite of Darien, Conn.
The prospective bride is also a daughter of Ellen Dannford of New Canaan, Conn.
Miss Satterthwaite, 25 years old, and her fiance, 26, are doctoral students at Harvard University, she in biology and he in physics.
She is a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father is the director of international sales and marketing at Andersen Consulting in New York.
Her mother is a manager at Micro Warehouse Inc., a software distributor in South Norwalk, Conn.
The prospective bride's stepmother, Anne Satterthwaite, is an owner of Henri-Burton French Antiques Ltd. in Greenwich, Conn.


Rockefeller's Assets
IN THE BLOOD SPORT OF POLITICAL TALK shows, John McLaughlin's "One on One" can be one of the bloodiest, but Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th was holding his own.
McLaughlin was pummeling Rockefeller on his health-care proposals, raising the prospect of another big-spending Democratic program driving under a nation of virtuous small businesses.
Rockefeller was countering with a barrage of eye-glazing detail on cost shifting, first-dollar coverage and the per capita cost of health care in Canada.
The West Virginia Democrat had that special glow of a fledgling Presidential contender, that adrenaline rush of "Hey, I can do this," skimming along from health care to civil rights legislation to indexing capital gains.
He was dropping in a cocky "Well, John" here and a chummy "No, John" there.
His press secretary, watching from the control booth, began to uncoil and settle back in her chair just a little.
Then McLaughlin turned the questioning to money.
And Rockefeller's smile, that well-bred but earnest smile forged in a lifetime of campaign picnics and town meetings, that smile that says, "Yes, I'm a Rockefeller, but I understand," suddenly got very tight.


Chess
Despite the fragile political situation in Yugoslavia, the Milan Vidmar Memorial International Tournament in Bled and Rogaska Slatina, in Slovenia, played to a finish in late June just before this republic and neighboring Croatia declared their independence from the Federal Government.
This was one more sign of the prominence of chess in Yugoslavia, the country with the highest density of chessplayers in the world.
An anecdote going back more than 40 years reinforces the point.
When Moshe Czerniak, an international master then of Palestine, arrived at the railroad station of a Yugoslav town of 2,500 inhabitants to give a simultaneous exhibition, he asked how to find his way to the local chess club.
The dumbfounding counterquestion came back, "Which one?"


Julie Parker Wed to Michael Baughan
Julie Ellen Parker, a regional advertising sales manager for a Boston magazine, and Michael Bartlett Baughan, the president of a manufacturing concern in Norwell, Mass., were married yesterday at the Trinitarian Congregational Church in Wayland, Mass.
The Rev.
Allan Baldwin officiated.
Mrs.
Baughan, 30 years old, graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University and is the New England advertising sales manager for CFO Magazine.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Brooks Parker 3d of Weston, Mass.
Her father is the president of Parker Capital Management in Boston.
Her mother, Gale Parker, is a portrait photographer.


American Women on Parade: Pat Answers, Few Revelations
If someone asked you to take a picture that would answer the question "What does the American woman look like?" who would be your choice?
Julia Roberts?
Sandra Day O'Connor?
A 36-year-old computer programmer in Kansas City with 1.2 children?
Someone -- Esquire magazine, to be exact -- did ask a number of fashion, editorial, reportage and art photographers to take just such a picture, and the answers can be seen in an exhibition called "How She Looks" at the Staley-Wise Gallery (560 Broadway, through July 31) and in the August issue of Esquire.
Fifty photographers, later edited down to 26, and ranging from Matthew Rolston at the glamour end of the spectrum to Larry Fink at the gallery end, were asked by the magazine's editors to "surprise us." Unfortunately, most did not, so revelations are in short supply, but in the predictability of their answers lies a social lesson, and the maverick pictures in the show make up for the dull ones en route.


Talking: Amenity Lots; Resolving Separate Taxation
SOME 5,000 residents of 10 homeowner associations on Staten Island have been debating whether to accept an offer from the city that will effectively reduce their real estate taxes.
Nine associations have so far accepted and one is still considering the terms.
The reductions are in taxes currently being levied on one or more of the separate lots attached to these developments and used exclusively by the residents for for recreation, open space or parking.


Blankets and Baskets For a Summer Night
"NEARLY every summer evening" said Michele Orris, managing director of the Levitt Pavilion for the Performing Arts in Westport, "people from throughout Fairfield County and beyond tote picnic baskets, blankets and lawn chairs to our open-air theater and settle down to enjoyable, high-quality, free-of-charge entertainment."
Most weeks, Tuesday nights alternate between band concerts and dance programs; Wednesdays are set aside for children's and family shows; the classics arrive on Thursdays; Fridays bring pop, folk or comedy attractions; Saturdays are mostly for rock or blues, and big band jazz usually rounds out the week on Sundays.
This week's classical offering, at 8:30 P.M. on Thursday is a recital of operatic love songs.
On Aug. 1 David Korevaar, a pianist, will perform.


Sports of The Times; The Straw That Stirs A Rivalry
IN baseball, a real rivalry needs heat, if not hate.
Through the years the Mets have been in National League East races with the Chicago Cubs, the St.
Louis Cardinals and the Pittsburgh Pirates.
But the test of a real rivalry is permanence, if not perpetuity.
Unless the Cubs, the Cardinals or the Pirates are battling the Mets for the divisional title in September, each of those three teams has been an opponent to be taken seriously rather than a rival to be taken to task.
But by turning his broad back on New York and signing a five-year, $20.25 million contract with the Los Angeles Dodgers as a free agent, Darryl Strawberry has created a cherished rivalry with the Mets, a rivalry that should endure as long as he does.


The Nation; A Longtime Precedent for Disregarding Precedent
WHEN the Supreme Court overturned five of its own precedents during its last term, all in the area of criminal defendants' rights, liberals on and off the Court complained that the new majority had embarked on a course not only regrettable but illegitimate.
Nothing about the cases had changed, Justice Thurgood Marshall declared in an angry dissent from one of the rulings, issued hours before he announced his decision to retire, adding: "Only the personnel of this Court did."
Conservatives, not surprisingly, saw the matter very differently -- it was "payback time," as L. Gordon Crovitz, a Wall Street Journal editorial page editor, wrote in a recent column.
"The hypocrisy here is impressive," he wrote, noting that liberal Justices were not shy about overturning precedents when they had the votes.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
June budget deficit, in billions
-53.0
-5.5
Wednesday
June durable goods, percent change
3.8
1.0
Mid-July auto sales, in millions
7.3
7.0
Thursday Initial jobless claims, in thousands
395
400
Tuesday: Two-year Treasury note auction  Wednesday: Five-year Treasury note auction  Thursday: Plenary session of the Soviet Central Committee in  Moscow *
Housing vacancies *
United States import and export price indexes  Friday: Report on commercial loan activity  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Q and A
Air Pollution in Mexico City
Q.
I expect to be in Mexico City around Christmas.
In spite of how bad the air pollution is there, are there precautions one can take?
Are some sections worse than others? -- John Ponciano, Holland, Mich.
A.
Mexico City's air is considered by many the most polluted in the world.
You are likely to experience the effect of the pollution, as it is generally at its worst in December into March, when air inversions often keep bad air trapped over the city.
This year there were thermal inversions every day in January, 27 days in February and 28 days in March.
Pollution is usually at its worst at midday, but when there is an inversion, early morning is worst.
Generally the southwestern part of the city, which includes Coyoacan and San Angel, popular with tourists, is highest in ozone.
Carbon monoxide and lead are heaviest downtown with its concentration of traffic, and sulfur is heaviest in the industrial northern section.
One way to keep up to date on air conditions is to look at The Mexico City News, an English-language daily paper, which publishes a daily air quality index.
The index divides the city into five sectors, telling, for the previous day, levels of ozone, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and carbon dioxide in each, on a scale of zero to 500, with 100 being the highest acceptable level for each substance. (Zero to 100 is satisfactory, 101 to 200 is unsatisfactory, 201 to 300 is dangerous and 301 to 500 is very dangerous.) Suspended particles -- namely, dust, fecal matter and other substances -- are not rated.
Another information source is the English-language FM radio station, Radio VIP, 88.1 on the dial.
At 7:15 each morning, a pollution expert discusses the outlook for the day.
The most common reaction to the bad air is a runny nose, cough and irritated eyes; eye moistening drops and throat lozenges may provide some relief.
Those who wear contact lenses should take glasses, as the lenses often become irritating.
Beyond those problems, the chief risk is of respiratory system infections, such as bronchitis or sinusitis, according to Dr.
Richard F. Thompson, director of the travel clinic of the Sunnyvale Medical Clinic, in Sunnyvale, Calif.
Dr.
Thompson recommends that concerned travelers, especially those with a history of respiratory problems, check with a doctor before they go to Mexico City, and ask about medications to take along in case of problems.
Travelers should drink plenty of fluids, which can help move irritating particles out of breathing tubes, he suggests.
Dr.
Daniel Libby, a pulmonary specialist at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York, also cites the risk for anyone with a history of asthma.
He suggests considering a filtering mask.
Here are some precautions that many Mexico City residents take when pollution is highest: Stay indoors when pollution is at its daily peak, and avoid walking around congested areas during rush hour.
Avoid gas stations, whose fumes may aggravate eyes and lungs.
Indoors, keep windows closed, and use air-conditioning.
Do not exercise outdoors when pollution is at dangerous levels.
Working Farms With Guests
Q.
Are there working farms in driving distance of New York to which families can go? -- Barbara Feldman, Spring Valley, N.Y.
A.
A working farm about 120 miles north of New York is Merrill's Farm, R.D. 1, Roscoe, New York 12776; (607) 498-4212.
The owners raise beef cattle on their 450 acres farm, which borders the Catskill Forest Preserve.
There are four rooms for guests, each with two beds.
The cost is $40 a bed a night, including all meals.
The greatest concentration of such places in driving distance of New York is near Lancaster, Pa., about three and a half hours away.
One is Cedar Hill Farm, 305 Longenecker Road, Mount Joy, Pa. 17552; (717) 653-4655.
The farm raises chickens and grows corn and soybeans.
Guests stay in an 1817 farmhouse at $55 for two in a room with private bath, including breakfast.
Jonde Lane Farm, 1103 Auction Road, Manheim, Pa. 17545, (717) 665-4231, eight miles northwest of Lancaster, has four guest rooms in a 1859 house.
The 100-acre farm has 30 cows and 70,000 broiler chickens, plus kittens, puppies, a pet lamb and a pony.
The rate is $40 for two adults plus $5 a child, including breakfast.
All rooms have shared bath.
Country Pines Farm and Cottage, 1101 Auction Road, Manheim, Pa. 17545, (717) 665-5478, is a dairy farm with guest rooms in a cottage converted from a smokehouse and in the main house, which was built in the early 19th century.
Rates are $40 for two people; $5 per child and $10 for each additional adult in a room.
Breakfast is $2.50; free for children.
Hut-to-Hut Colorado Hiking
Q.
I am interested in hut-to-hut backpacking in the Colorado Rockies.
Can you provide information? -- Michael Solomon, Millburn, N.J.
A.
Eleven huts along the 10th Mountain Trail in Colorado, used previously only in winter for cross-country skiers, have been opened this summer for hikers.
The huts are in the central Colorado Rockies in an area roughly bounded by Aspen on the southwest, Leadville on the southeast, Vail Pass on the east and Vail on the north.
The huts are at altitudes ranging from 10,300 to 11,700 feet.
Each sleeps 16 and is furnished with mattresses and pillows on sleeping platforms, propane cooking stoves, wood stoves for heating and kitchen utensils.
Hiking along the trail is of intermediate difficulty, the trail association says, and off-trail hiking is intermediate to difficult.
The huts are designated for hikers, mountain bikers and horseback riders; a four-wheel drive vehicle may be allowed, but only if necessary to take supplies. (The huts are near the Holy Cross and Hunter Frying Pan wilderness areas, which do not allow mountain bikes.) The fee is $20 a person a night, and reservations are vital, available from the 10th Mountain Trail Association, 1280 Ute Avenue, Aspen, Colo. 81611; (303) 925-5775.
The association also books space in three private lodges along the trail, at $20 to $27 a person a night.
Radio City Christmas Show
Q.
What will be the dates of the Radio City Christmas show in 1991?
How does one get advance tickets? -- Sallie Pryor, Winston-Salem, N.C.
A.
The upcoming Christmas Spectacular at Radio City Music Hall will take place Nov. 15 this year to Jan. 7, 1992.
Tickets, which will go on sale Aug. 28, will be $22 to $37, depending on date and seat location.
Tickets are sold at the Radio City box office, at 50th Street and Avenue of the Americas. in New York, or from Ticketmaster outlets anywhere in the country.


Many With Breast Cancer Can Have Limited Surgery
Despite the National Cancer Institute's endorsement of breast-conserving therapy, doctors estimate that two-thirds of the women who would qualify for this procedure on the basis of their type of tumor still have the breast removed.
For some women, the major operation known as a mastectomy is still a reasonable and reasoned choice, said Dr.
William Wood, head of the surgery department at Emory University Medical Center in Atlanta, But for many, he said, "The decision to have the operation is based on misinformation and misunderstanding."


100 Degrees of Suffering, And Not Even a Record
It really was that hot again yesterday.
A torrid 100 degrees was recorded in Central Park a few minutes after 2 P.M., almost 11 years after New York City last broke the three-digit mark -- a reading of 102 recorded on July 21, 1980.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Katonah, N.Y. 322,750
Increase Miller Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, deck, 1 acre; taxes $6,796.
Larchmont, N.Y. 342,000
36 Concord Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 73-year-old colonial; fireplace, new kitchen, breakfast room, 1-car garage; taxes $6,138.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 300,000
153 Clarence Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 51-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room; taxes $6,227.
Avon, Conn. 184,000
66 New Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; master bedroom w/skylights and dressing area, pool w/poolhouse, 0.67 acre; taxes $3,179.
Darien, Conn. 264,000
4 Patton Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; fenced-in yard, screened porch, 0.20 acre; taxes $2,239.
Deep River, Conn.  $90,000. 18 Spring Street. 4-bedroom, 1-bath, 180-year-old colonial; 910 square feet of space, dining room, barn; taxes $913.
OTHER AREAS Aquebogue, L.I. 142,000
Ida Lane
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1-year-old colonial; basement, fireplace, deck, 0.50 acre; taxes $3,100.
Commack, L.I. 300,000
2 Timber Ridge Drive  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; dining room, den, basement, fireplace, pool; taxes $6,500.
Jackson, N.J. 116,000
17 Liverpool Court  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 15-year-old ranch; c/a, 1-car garage, family room, patio; taxes $2,705.


Elizabeth McMahon and Shane O'Keefe to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. McMahon of Winnetka, Ill., have announced fall wedding plans for their daughter, Elizabeth Bailey McMahon, and Shane Paul O'Keefe, a son of Richard Edward O'Keefe and Margaret W. O'Keefe, both of Larchmont, N.Y.
Miss McMahon, 31 years old, is a staff psychotherapist at the Seacost Mental Health Center in Portsmouth, N.H.
She and her fiance graduated from Connecticut College.
She received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.


Golf; Birdie Queen Rules Wykagyl
They call Betsy King the Birdie Queen, and she certainly justified that nickname this afternoon with four consecutive birdies in the last five holes in the third round of the JAL Big Apple Classic.
King got the birdies at the Wykagyl Country Club in 100-degree heat that prompted some to dub the tournament the Baked Apple Classic.


Correction
A photograph of the Never Fail cake, with the Food column on July 7, failed to match the cake described in the recipe.
The cake in the photograph was baked in an 8-inch pan; the recipe called for a 9-inch pan.


Complaints
To the Editor: Your article "Complaints That Get Results" (Travel, June 16) struck a very responsive chord here at the Better Business Bureau.
However, we were disappointed that you omitted the B.B.B. as one of the most popular places to which people turn to resolve travel disputes.
Indeed, we are generally able to satisfactorily resolve two out of every three complaints filed with the bureau.
In addition, there are a number of travel agencies and tour operators that participate in our "Customer Commitment" program.
This service offers consumers special complaint handling and binding arbitration if they so choose.


U.S. Ruling Reopens Feuds On New York Council Map
The Justice Department's rejection of a districting plan for the New York City Council threatened yesterday to reopen divisions on the commission that drew up the plan, with some members pushing for a broad review and others calling for only minor technical adjustments.
Such a review, going beyond the objections raised by the Federal Government in three of 51 districts, could lead to a renewal of the political wrangling that dogged the commission and could delay the submission of new district boundaries to the Justice Department.
It could also add pressure on the city to delay the September primaries and November general election for the expanded Council, the cornerstone of an ambitious reorganization of municipal government.


Food; Surplus Value
WELL, I MADE THE PIE," MY neighbor Debbie Clark said, sighing. I knew what she meant. It was May, and rhubarb season was upon us with a vengeance. Debbie makes a killer rhubarb pie -- one simply flavored with sugar and orange zest. Her crust is superb. But the unspoken question hung between us: How many rhubarb pies can one family eat?
This question is put to the test each spring in our town, as rhubarb pies show up in great abundance at potluck suppers and other community gatherings. (I am waiting for a potluck to which every participant brings a rhubarb pie. I bet in May, in Vermont, it has happened.) A friend, coming to dinner, casually volunteers to bring dessert.
"Not so fast," I say.
I know her game: She is trying to unload yet another rhubarb pie.


Elizabeth Allen Weds J. H. Edgar
Elizabeth Hall Allen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew M. Allen of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Armonk to James Hayes Edgar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clement B. Edgar Jr. of Glenmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
W.
Harrison Abernathy performed the ceremony.
The bride, 22 years old, was until recently a music teacher at St.
Veronica School in Cincinnati.
She is to start studies for a master's degree in teaching at Harvard University in August.
She is a summa cum laude graduate of Dartmouth College and a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a senior executive at the Bozell advertising agency in New York.


Cashing In on Health Care's Troubles
Like many investors who have amassed huge fortunes, Richard E. Rainwater is a consummate contrarian.
A Texas financier who made his first $100 million helping Sid Bass cut billion-dollar deals, Mr.
Rainwater buys troubled properties and businesses when they are totally out of favor, hoping to cash in when they are more popular.
His latest big venture certainly qualifies: struggling Sun Belt hospitals.
Mr.
Rainwater readily concedes that the hospital industry is overcrowded, poorly led and subject to increasing cost containment efforts by the Government and health insurance companies.
But Mr.
Rainwater points out that his companies are run by seasoned hospital executives who have been willing to close unpromising facilities and rebuild those that remain.


Alan M. Wexler Is Married to Marie-Laure Barruel
Marie-Laure Barruel, the personnel director for Datanomics, a computer consulting company in Piscataway, N.J., was married yesterday to Alan Michael Wexler, a computer consultant for The New York Times.
The Rev.
Robert F. Kaeding, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Shimon Berris officiated at the Kirkpatrick Chapel in New Brunswick, N.J.
Mrs.
Wexler, 27 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Brockport.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michel Barruel of Paris, where her father is a vice president of Bureau Veritas, an engineering and insurance concern.


East Anglia
To the Editor: One omission in the otherwise attractive description of Norwich (Travel, June 16) was the site of Julian of Norwich's hermitage.
The small Church of St.
Julian is uninteresting except for the adjoining hermitage itself (now a secondary chapel) and a stunning wall-size painting of one of Julian's visions.
But the real interest here is Julian herself.
She has become one of the most revered mystics, theologians and spiritual writers in contemporary Christian studies.
She was the first woman to write a book in the English language.
Her influence is especially important in today's efforts to espouse the realms of spirit and matter.


Sylvan Gives Voice to America . . . And Sings Native Fare On a New Disk
America has long excelled in producing baritones.
Usually the line is traced in operatic terms, with Lawrence Tibbett, John Charles Thomas, Leonard Warren, Robert Merrill, Cornell MacNeil and Sherrill Milnes as key names, though we should probably not look to their successors for the emblematic American baritone of today.
Successors there are, of varying capabilities, in the roles those six filled at the Metropolitan and elsewhere, but they seem less and less central to anything interesting or vital on the musical scene.
There is a new kind of American baritone, likelier to be found in the classical-music counterculture of historical instruments, new music, "alternative" opera, song recital.
William Parker, William Sharp and Sanford Sylvan are examples.
They are as different from one another as any of the star baritones named above, but they have in common that they never sound like, or seem to want to sound like, any of that group in full cry.
They are sensitive and thoughtful, and one has the impression that they choose the music they sing because they particularly care about it -- nowhere more than in Mr.
Sylvan's new record of song cycles by Chanler, Copland and Barber ("Beloved That Pilgrimage," Nonesuch 79259-2; CD and cassette).


George N. Putnam, 82, a Maryknoll Teacher
The Rev.
George N. Putnam, a Maryknoll priest who taught at universities in China and Africa, died on Tuesday at St.
Paul's Hospital in Hong Kong.
He was 82 years old and lived in Wuhan, China, where he had taught English at the Wuhan Institute of Technology since 1987.
He died of heart failure following a stroke, said a spokesman for the missionary order.


Glory and Records Across the Atlantic
For professional yachtsmen, the oceans of the world are playgrounds for winning races.
For Serge Madec, a Frenchman who has made the fastest trans-Atlantic sailboat crossing, speed records are like toy blocks waiting to be toppled.
Now Madec has his eye on the powerboat record across the Atlantic.
It is an ambitious project spearheaded by a major sponsor, Jet Services, an express parcel service in France.
The effort has taken four years and more than 20 million francs ($3.3 million) to organize.


Commercial Property: Central Park South; Change, but Not at the Coliseum
FROM Columbus Circle to Grand Army Plaza, Central Park South presents a motley face, grandeur mingled with mediocrity.
Like the physical setting, the commercial real-estate scene is decidedly mixed.
The most obvious transformation now under way is at the Essex House, near Seventh Avenue, which Nikko Hotels International hopes to turn from dowdy to deluxe, spending more than $75 million.
At Fifth Avenue, the Sherry Netherland Hotel has also embarked on a renovation.
The General Motors Building is undergoing a three-year, $7.5-million facelift, including the replacement of some 400 of the 44,000 marble panels in which it is clad.
And Donald J. Trump still plans to add new penthouse suites to the great mansard roof of the Plaza Hotel.


Reversal of Fortune


The Nation; When the E.P.A. Isn't Mean Enough About Cleaner Air
FROM Maine to California, July has been do-it-yourself month for clean-air advocates.
Without prodding from the Federal Government, 12 Eastern states and the District of Columbia moved last week toward subjecting themselves to the strictest rules on car emissions available, those written by the state of California.
In Los Angeles, the week before, the largest gasoline marketer in the country, Arco, said it had independently developed a new fuel that was cleaner than the Federal Government requires and was even cleaner than methanol.
Arco, hoping to get an edge on the market, wants California to order its use.
Less than a year after passage of the Clean Air Act of 1990, it might seem odd to find state governments and private companies lining up to be regulated yet more closely.
Throughout most of the first two assaults on smog and other pollutants, the Clean Air Acts of 1970 and 1977, the states cowered at the thought of more regulation and reacted mostly when threatened with loss of Federal road funds and other sanctions.
And until two years ago, the oil companies barely owned up to the possibility that they could have anything to contribute to cleaner air.
Now they seem positively masochistic about it, begging to be ordered to clean up their gasoline.


Yearly Washing Urged For Aluminum Siding
TO keep aluminum siding looking its best, many manufacturers recommend washing it at least once a year.
Damaged siding should be promptly repaired.
Wash the siding by wetting an area with hard spray from a garden hose and then scrubbing it with a soft brush dipped in strong nonabrasive household detergent mixed with water.
Usually one cup of detergent added to one gallon of water is adequate.


Parish Hawkings, a Teacher, Marries
Parish Hardy Hawkings, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
D.
Mark Hawkings of Mantoloking, N.J., was married in Bay Head, N.J., yesterday to Hannibal Juan Lucius Bogliaccini, the son of Alberto R. Bogliaccini and Marta M. Perez-Ruiz, both of Madrid.
The Rev.
Edward B. Gammons Jr. performed the ceremony at All Saints Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Bogliaccini, 27 years old, is a mathematics teacher at the Peddie School in Hightstown, N.J., where her husband teaches Spanish and philosophy.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of W. R. Lazard &amp; Laidlaw, brokers in New York.


Perhaps Clark Should Subscribe
To the Sports Editor:
Jack Curry's article on plays at the plate ("Home, Brutal Home: Catchers Bar the Door," The Times, July 8) gave fans an edge in watching this year's All-Star Game.
With one out in the fifth, down by a run, the National League's Will Clark tried to score from third on a sharp ground ball to first.
Had he read the article, Clark might have tried a hook slide instead of the higher, more aggressive slide which allowed Carlton Fisk to make the tag.
ALAN BORST New York


A Fall Wedding For Ms. Morrison
Mr. and Mrs.
Barclay Morrison of Hilton Head Island, S.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter Barbara Sheffield Morrison to Michael Missiras, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Andrew Missiras of Linwood, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Morrison, 33 years old, is the president of Redgate Properties, a consultant in New York to Japanese business executives.
She graduated from Wesleyan University.
Her father, who is retired, was the general manager of the tube division of Carpenter Technology, a specialty metals company in Reading, Pa.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Righetti Is a Father
San Francisco Giants pitcher DAVE RIGHETTI became the father of triplets on Friday when his wife's sister, impregnated by artificial insemination with his sperm, gave birth to two girls and a boy, NICOLLETTE LEE, NATALIE PAIGE and WESLEY DAVID RIGHETTI.
The Giants announcement did not say where the births occurred but reported that all three children were doing "great." (AP)


A Past Revisited; Headliners
In the closely watched unification of Germany, no single event seems to pass without examination.
And so when plans are made to rebury two historic Prussian monarchs, the ceremony, scheduled for Aug. 17, takes on added significance.
What, people ask, does it say about the new Germans?
Chancellor Helmut Kohl is expected to attend the ceremonies honoring Frederick the Great and his father, Frederick Wilhelm I, whose remains will be reburied at their summer palace in Potsdam, southwest of Berlin, after being interned for safety reasons in the south during World War II.
The reburial, arranged mostly by the Hohenzollern family, will probably attract tens of thousands of onlookers.
The kings, who ruled from 1713 to 1786, are remembered for their militarism; their iron cross and eagle was later adopted by the Nazis.
Brandenburg Governor Manfred Stolpe, who argued that the Fredericks symbolized "Prussia's virtues and vices," said, "Only those who always question the past, in its heights and depths, will overcome it and learn."


Travel Advisory; Tours to Watch Top Skaters
Colonial Travel in Farmington, Conn., specializes in package tours to national and international figure skating events.
Barbara Cassella, whose son Francis was an ice-dancing gold medalist at the United States National Championships in 1971, has been designing Colonial's figure skating trips for the past 12 years.
Her next tour is to Skate America, an international competition in Oakland, Calif., from Sept. 18 to 23.
The $699 package (per person, double occupancy, without air fare) includes five nights at the Oakland Park Hotel, an all-event ticket to the competition (which also admits the holder to practice sessions), breakfasts, optional tours and all taxes and services.
In 1992, the tour company will be offering four or five packages for skating fans, including the United States National Championships in Orlando, Fla., Jan. 8 to 13, the European Championships in Lausanne-Ouchy, Switzerland, Jan. 18 to 27, and the 1992 World Championships in San Francisco next March.
Colonial Travel is at 784 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, Conn. 06032; telephone (203) 677-0875.


Ms. Redenbacher, Actress, Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Walter E. Redenbacher of Pawlet, Vt., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Janice Redenbacher, and Brendan Eugene Sachtjen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilbur M. Sachtjen of Bronxville, N.Y.
The prospective bride, 29 years old, is an actress known as Janice Reed; she is seen primarily in television serials.
She graduated from Marymount College.
Her father retired as a regional manager in Parsippany, N.J., for Levolor, the window-shade and home furnishings company.


Invitations and Momentum
IT is the season of roses, spiders and State Council on the Arts exhibitions, of which that playing the Montclair Art Museum here is a New Jersey Arts Annual.
Begun as a juried event, in 1985, the annual has since become an invitational with the inviting left up to the host museum.
In the catalogue introduction, the Montclair's director, Robert Koenig, explains that he and his aide-de-camp, Alejandro Anreus, chose 24 candidates from about 125, some already known to them, others found in the council's files and slide registry.
The show, however, seems sparse, and some artists are not represented by their best efforts.


A Family That Thrives on Athletic Competition
FOR the Van Nostrand family of Brightwaters, learning to lob comes right after learning to walk.
The family is so devoted to tennis that King Van Nostrand, 57 years old, learned it tied to a tree.
"I remember my brother on a rope," said Allan Van Nostrand, 60, King's brother.
"My mother would take him down to the tennis court, tie him to a tree, and she'd go out and play. He was 3 then." King soon got off the rope and onto the court, whacking balls with his brother and parents.


Revisiting 'South Pacific'
"SOUTH PACIFIC" is a hit.
That's old, understated news, if you remember April 1949, when the Richard Rodgers-Oscar Hammerstein 2d-Joshua Logan musical became the rage of Broadway, after a historic tryout at the Shubert in New Haven.
Then the original-cast album, first released on 78 r.p.m., with Mary Martin, Ezio Pinza and Juanita Hall, made history of its own.
But some people who live in the real world of VCR's and CD's may not be able to identify Ens.
Nellie Forbush and Emile de Becque, the roles originated by Miss Martin and Mr.
Pinza.
For them, Bloody Mary is a drink that comes with brunch, rather than the part Miss Hall created.
How consequential then is "South Pacific" more than 40 years later?


Sports People: FOOTBALL; The March Is Over For Saints' Mayes
After one season as a rookie sensation, a second as a star running back, one as a respectable journeyman, another on the sideline and one spent largely on the New Orleans Saints' bench, REUBEN MAYES has abruptly announced his retirement.
The 28-year-old Mayes, who was relegated to the third-string last season, made the surprise announcement Friday night after running well during the day's practice session in LaCrosse, Wis.


Making a Difference; Another Software Marriage
Hot on the heels of an Apple-I.B.M. joint venture and the proposed acquisition of Ashton-Tate by Borland International, the Microsoft Corporation is facing still another challenge.
Two of the software giant's scrappiest competitors, Raymond J. Noorda's Novell and Dick Williams's Digital Research, announced last week that they would join hands.
Digital's DR-DOS has long offered the only viable alternative to MS-DOS, Microsoft's basic disk operating system for PC's.
And Novell's Netware has consistently outsold Microsoft's LAN Manager in the market for network operating systems.


Campus Life: Johns Hopkins; Sampling a Career In Teaching Before Graduation
Undergraduates from the Johns Hopkins University now have a way of pursuing a career in teaching without switching to another school or attending a teachers' college after graduation.
The Johns Hopkins University School of Continuing Studies has introduced an Accelerated Master of Arts in Teaching program this summer to recruit students in Hopkins and from other private institutions as potential teachers before they pursue graduate degrees.


INSIDE
De Klerk Under a Cloud
A scandal has damaged the South African President's ability to negotiate over the nation's future.
Page 3.
24 Hours of Murder


Brazil Abortions: Illegal in Name Only
In a hillside shantytown here, Selma, a 46-year-old cleaner, has a personal reproductive history that seems out of character for Brazil -- three children and 13 abortions.
On paper, abortion is illegal in Brazil, Latin America's most populous country.
In March, a Brasilia jury convicted a woman of having an abortion.
In June, the Sao Paulo police raided a succession of underground clinics.


BEST SELLERS: July 21, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
2
2
19
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
3
9
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
4
4
11
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
5
6
4
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The disappearance of a couple sailing off Bermuda raises a question: is a fabled creature from the deep responsible?
6
5
4
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
7
7
11
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) Inspired by his grandfather, a London vendor, a man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
8
8
69
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
9
16
3
THE PIRANHAS, by Harold Robbins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) A young man discovers the ways of Hollywood, Wall Street and organized crime.
10
9
5
THE RUSTLERS OF WEST FORK, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $18.) A frontier novel featuring Hopalong Cassidy, first published in 1951. (LP)
11
10
6
VORTEX, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $21.95.) A war in southern Africa, sometime in the future, involves Cuba and the United States.
12
1
DARKNESS, by John Saul. (Bantam, $17.50.) A family moves back to a Florida town, where something evil awaits.
13
11
12
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of two perpetrators of an insurance scam.
14
14
5
A SOLDIER OF THE GREAT WAR, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $24.95.) An elderly Italian professor recalls a life spent as soldier, hero, deserter, lover and family man.
15
12
8
IMMORTALITY, by Milan Kundera. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) Through the lives of characters in 19th-century Weimar and present-day Paris, the author reflects on contemporary life.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
5
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America, past, present and future.
2
1
35
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
3
4
5
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
4
3
10
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How the President and his high military commanders made their decisions during the first two years of the Bush Administration.
5
2
BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) Two former F.B.I. agents report on the downfall of Paul Castellano, head of the Gambino crime family.
6
6
10
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) The changing role of today's male.
7 *
7
3
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
8
5
3
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
9
11
4
PAUL HARVEY'S FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH, edited by Paul Harvey Jr. (Bantam, $15.) Anecdotes told by the radio broadcaster.
10
10
7
COUNSEL TO THE PRESIDENT, by Clark Clifford with Richard Holbrooke. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the lawyer who served as adviser to several generations of Democrats.
11 *
13
4
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
12
8
7
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
13
9
7
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
14
2
UNDER THE INFLUENCE, by Peter Hernon and Terry Ganey. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized account of Anheuser-Busch.
15
3
BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS, by Stephen Jay Gould. (Norton, $22.95.) Essays on natural history.
16 *
15
9
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated on campus.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
24
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) An illustrated book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
2
3
37
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
3
2
80
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
4
5
117
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's advice about how to make a personal fortune.
5
4
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE LAST ITALIAN: Portrait of a People, by William Murray. (Prentice Hall, $21.95.) Mr.
Murray's second volume of casual essays about Italy and its civilization is partly just fine journalism, partly a lover's keen, observant diary of his affair.
TURKISH REFLECTIONS: A Biography of a Place, by Mary Lee Settle. (Prentice Hall, $19.95.) A diverting mixture of travelogue, history, polemic and contemporary portrait that is a model of how to take pleasure in places and people along paths not lately beaten.
PETER DOYLE, by John Vernon. (Random House, $22.) Mr.
Vernon's energetic third novel takes us from the squalid New York of the Gilded Age to the weird open spaces of Colorado, along with a picaresque hero and a couple of Bonapartes, one a cyborg.
PANGS OF LOVE: Stories, by David Wong Louie. (Knopf, $19.) This inventive first collection of short stories tends to feature protagonists with an unstable sense of identity, forced either to reinvent themselves appropriately or sink into isolation.
JERNIGAN, by David Gates. (Knopf, $21.) Mr.
Gates's profoundly sorrowful first novel concerns a father crippled by alcoholism, emotional turmoil -- or drought -- and perpetual irony.
THE ADVENTURES OF AMOS 'N' ANDY: A Social History of an American Phenomenon, by Melvin Patrick Ely. (Free Press, $22.95.) A Yale historian examines one of America's greatest cultural enigmas -- the amazing popularity, among blacks as well as whites, of "Amos 'n' Andy" on radio for more than 30 years.
AMERICAN NERVOUSNESS, 1903: An Anecdotal History, by Tom Lutz. (Cornell University, $29.95.) A witty, concrete, gossipy study of neurasthenia, the disease that racked nearly every self-respecting member of the Edwardian brainworking classes.


Focus: Omaha; Thriving Through Both Boom and Bust
IN the late 1980's when Conagra, the giant food-processing company whose labels include Swift, Hunt, Wesson and Chun King, was seeking a suitable site for a new corporate headquarters, this former cattle and railroad junction on the prairie hardly seemed fitting.
A study commissioned by the company to determine the best location had placed its existing base in Omaha 18th.


The Region; Comparison to '75 Makes Too Much of a Bad Thing
THROUGH the twisting negotiations that led to a New York City budget a few weeks ago, estimates of deficits, revenues and tax projections came and went like the odds on a racetrack tote board.
But one number remained fixed, looming grimly above the others: 1975.
That was the year, with the city's near bankruptcy and sweeping layoffs and service cutbacks, that has become accepted shorthand for municipal disaster.
And no matter what their agendas, virtually all the players in this year's budget process had an interest in evoking 1975.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My kitchen ceiling is covered with a stippled paint.
There is no exhaust fan, so there is grease on the ceiling.
I am now remodeling the kitchen and installing a fan, but have to paint the ceiling first.
If I clean the ceiling, it will remove the stipple.
How do I paint over the grease without the paint's becoming loose because of poor adhesion?
A.
I would not paint over the grease, for it almost always leads to trouble.
Wash it off first.
If the washing removes some of the stipple, you can always apply a new stipple paint that will give you the same texture.
Even after washing off most of the grease, I would still advise priming the ceiling with a stain-killing sealer like BIN, Kilz or Enamelac before proceeding with the regular paint.


The Millenium
To the Editor:
In your article on June 30 about the new downtown Millenium Hotel  [ "Bond, Vista, Marriott -- Now Comes the Millenium," June 30 ] , owner-developer Peter S. Kalikow explains the eccentric spelling.
But he doesn't share his reasons for choosing millennium -- correctly spelled or otherwise -- as the hotel's name.


Editorial Notebook; The L.A.P.D.'s Thin, Savage Blue Line
An independent commission's report on the Los Angeles Police Department ought to be required reading for elected officials in all big cities.
The ugly police subculture it documents may be the inevitable result when a city tries to do its policing on the cheap, using quasi-military intimidation in place of adequate resources and sensitive responses to community realities.
The Los Angeles commission was appointed to investigate the infamous videotaped beating last March of Rodney King, kicked and clubbed endlessly after being stopped for speeding.
Chief Daryl Gates, now reportedly prepared to retire because of the incident, sought to portray the officers' savage conduct as aberrant.
The report makes clear that in fact it was all too predictable.


Dell Aims for the Big Leagues
Humbled leaders of big personal computer companies like I.B.M., Apple and and Compaq Computer have slashed prices, trimmed payrolls and even linked arms this year in various deals to share technology and revive an industry beset by a lag in new technology, financially ailing dealerships and a recession.
But not Michael Dell.
The 26-year-old Mr.
Dell is winning corporate customers, expanding his staff and grabbing market share by playing marketing hardball, stressing service and churning out reliable, innovative and lower-cost desktop models -- all I.B.M. compatible -- that fill market voids.


Finding and Capturing Beauty on the Island's Golf Courses
JOHN YANG is a man who takes his time.
He spent five years photographing a single formal garden, Innisfree, in Millbrook, N.Y., and almost as much time hauling his cumbersome antique equipment, painstakingly framing his sensitive vision of more than 60 golf courses from North Carolina to Vermont, including several up and down Long Island.
Though he would probably not agree with Mark Twain, who said, "Golf is good walk spoiled," neither does this self-styled photographer of golf landscapes play golf.


Diane M. DePatie Planning to Wed
September wedding plans for Diane Michelle DePatie and Victor Scott Consoli, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ben Consoli of Methuen, Mass., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas C. DePatie of Quonochontaug, R.I.
Miss DePatie, 24 years old, and the prospective bridegroom, 25, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is the Northeast regional sales executive at Anne Klein II for Lord &amp; Taylor.
Her father, who is retired, was an educational consultant at I.B.M. in Palo Alto, Calif.


Style Makers; Arthur Bernier, Special-Events Promoter
If Arthur Bernier had sold lemonade as a child, he would not have been stuck behind the stand.
Instead, he would have gone door to door, promoting his product and establishing a lemonade-stand franchise in the neighborhood.
As a boy in Baldwin Harbor, L.I., Mr.
Bernier shoveled snow and mowed lawns, but he soon moved on to selling super-bouncing balls in grade school.
In college, he made more than $60,000 marketing sportswear at 45 universities.
By the time he graduated in May 1989 from the State University of New York at Binghamton, he had difficulty finding a job because he was overqualified for entry-level positions.


STRANGER THAN FICTION
The anecdote concerning Saul Bellow's true birth date reminded me of a conversation I had with my father about his birthday, which we celebrated on Columbus Day, Oct. 12.
Like many immigrants who arrived here from Eastern Europe early in the 20th century, my father had no birth certificate.
When he went, as a young boy, to register for school in New Haven, he was asked for his birth date.
He knew that he had been born around the Jewish New Year, and so, to show that he was a "real American," he said, "Columbus Day."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MASTER CLASSES
Lucie Arnaz and Laurence Luckinbill will teach a series of master classes at the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts in Goldens Bridge.
Auditions and advance registration are required.


Golf; O'Meara, Baker-Finch Co-Leaders
With identical eagle-birdie finishes, Ian Baker-Finch of Australia and Mark O'Meara of the United States separated themselves from a crowded field today to take the lead in the British Open after three rounds.
The 30-year-old Baker-Finch, who also led the tournament in 1984 after three rounds and was second to Nick Faldo last year at the same point, made 3's on Royal Birkdale's par-5 525-yard 17th hole and the 472-yard 18th.
He had a course-record six-under-par 64 today and a 54-hole total of four-under 206.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Bad Back Hobbles Stieb
After being sidelined with a shoulder problem after his last outing with the Toronto Blue Jays on May 22, DAVE STIEB began complaining of back pains.
Now, after a magnetic resonance imaging examination, doctors say the 33-year-old pitcher is suffering from a herniated disk that has put painful pressure on the sciatic nerve.
Stieb (4-3) has been put on a conservative treatment program of rest and physiotherapy, according to club officials, who said he was not expected to pitch until late in the season.


Dell Aims for the Big Leagues
Humbled leaders of big personal computer companies like I.B.M., Apple and and Compaq Computer have slashed prices, trimmed payrolls and even linked arms this year in various deals to share technology and revive an industry beset by a lag in new technology, financially ailing dealerships and a recession.
But not Michael Dell.
The 26-year-old Mr.
Dell is winning corporate customers, expanding his staff and grabbing market share by playing marketing hardball, stressing service and churning out reliable, innovative and lower-cost desktop models -- all I.B.M. compatible -- that fill market voids.


Wall Street; The Elder Statesman of Value
In his youth, Philip L. Carret did not plan on becoming a Wall Street legend.
He planned on becoming a chemist.
Fortunately for the investors who have been enriched by Mr.
Carret's acumen over the years, he happened to visit a grimy gas company laboratory in Boston during his college years -- and he was appalled by the celluloid collar, that era's equivalent of the clip-on tie, worn by his tour guide.
"In my book, a celluloid collar was the worst sartorial sin you could commit," he said during an interview last week in his Manhattan office.
"I asked myself, Am I going to spend my life in a stinking place like this, wearing a celluloid collar?"


Turkey
To the Editor: Having returned in May from Turkey, I especially enjoyed Mary Lee Settle's article on Cappadocia (Travel, June 16).
Because of the effects of the gulf war on tourism in Turkey, Cappadocia's hotels were 90 percent vacant.
There were occasional tour buses of Germans or Scandinavians, but one could visit the principal sites undisturbed by crowds.


We Need Informed Discussion of Health Plans; Subsidize Training
To the Editor:
While Congress has been busy devising plans for national health insurance, comparing our system with that of Canada and other countries, very little attention has been paid to the cost of medical school and the training before a physician is permitted to practice.


Travel Advisory; U.S. Warning On Algeria
American citizens are advised by the Department of State to defer travel to Algeria.
In an advisory dated July 5, the department said violent confrontations between government and opposition forces in Algiers and other cities have led to a nationwide state of siege and accompanying curfew.
American visitors, the advisory added, should register with the United States Embassy in Algiers, which can also provide information.


STRANGER THAN FICTION
James Atlas's article "Stranger Than Fiction" (June 23), on the Janet Malcolm case and how far journalists can go in inventing or editing quotes, contains a marvelous range of closely examined examples, dating back to Coleridge, Goethe and Johnson.
But he does not mention the most troubling and authoritative example of all, the Bible.
The Bible is full of, presumably, exact quotes from God.
God told Noah precisely how to build the ark.
The Old Testament contains page upon page of laws, prefaced by phrases like "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying. . . . " How Moses could remember so much, and how it could be transmitted verbatim, before the days of printing, is not explained.
ROBERT GORHAM DAVIS
Cambridge, Mass.


A 'Romeo and Juliet' in Sunglasses
HOW to make Shakespeare accessible, involving and unassuming while remaining true to the text and speaking the speeches with clarity and ease?
That is the question, and the elusive knack that can provide an answer is somehow graspable to the young Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival.
In its fourth summer under a tent, against a beguiling setting on the majestic grounds of the Boscobel estate, the company presents a "Romeo and Juliet" to get caught up in.


The Good Side Of Wrestling
To the Sports Editor:
I have waited for some substantial and positive coverage of amateur wrestling.
In four months, we have seen: one short article on a college coach's indiscretion; another short article on the nation's No. 2-ranked collegiate team's coach's difficulties with the N.C.A.A.; one feature article on the dangers of weight loss and Wisconsin's reaction, and a feature article, purporting to be about the high school nationals in Pittsburgh.
In this last article ("Getting Ahead Can Be a Tussle," The Times, April 15) we were not told of any place winners in different weight classes (some were from our area), nor of any states that did particularly well.
It focused again on the negative aspects (weight loss, scrambling for dubious scholarship opportunities, etc.).


Baseball; Forward to the Future And Yanks Love It
The Yankees saw part of their past and part of their future today.
By the time the long afternoon had ended, they surely felt far better about where they are going than about where they have been.
Two more of their prized rookies -- pitcher Wade Taylor and outfielder Bernie Williams -- delivered the Yankees to a third straight victory over the Oakland Athletics and sent them back over .500 for the second time on their current 10-game trip.
The triumph also sent the Yanks into third place, one-half game ahead of Boston.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My kitchen ceiling is covered with a stippled paint.
There is no exhaust fan, so there is grease on the ceiling.
I am now remodeling the kitchen and installing a fan, but have to paint the ceiling first.
If I clean the ceiling, it will remove the stipple.
How do I paint over the grease without the paint's becoming loose because of poor adhesion?
A.
I would not paint over the grease, for it almost always leads to trouble.
Wash it off first.
If the washing removes some of the stipple, you can always apply a new stipple paint that will give you the same texture.
Even after washing off most of the grease, I would still advise priming the ceiling with a stain-killing sealer like BIN, Kilz or Enamelac before proceeding with the regular paint.


Making a Difference; Teaching the Real Thing
For some time now, business schools have been touting the virtues of team building, of cross-functional approaches to problems and of production methods like just-in-time inventory control.
Now the University of Tennessee's College of Business Administration is ready to practice what it teaches.
"If business must change its paradigm of management, we must change the paradigm of teaching management," said Warren Neel, the school's dean.


IN SHORT: FICTION
DROWNING  By Lee Grove. Viking, $19.95.


Leah T. Pavetti Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Pavetti of Waterford, Conn., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Leah Thomas Pavetti and James Francis Hogan Jr., the son of Mr.
Hogan of Bayport, L.I., and the late Natalie Michalski Hogan.
Miss Pavetti, 27 years old, received a law degree from Suffolk University in May.
She is a graduate of Barnard College.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Pavetti &amp; Freeman in New London, Conn.
Her mother, Sally Thomas Pavetti, is the curator of the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford and of Monte Cristo cottage, the O'Neill family home in New London.


Travel Advisory; Irish Club Med Offers Fishing
The newest branch of Club Med and the first to highlight fishing has opened in southwestern Ireland.
Club Med-Waterville is on the Dingle Peninsula in the Ring of Kerry, County Kerry.
It occupies the former Waterville Lake Hotel and sits atop a bluff overlooking Lough Currane to the east and the Atlantic Ocean to the west.
The lake offers anglers salmon and brown trout, while the salt water holds sea trout.


Radio City Rap


A Mystery Among Four Neighbors
GOOD neighbors are not always what they seem, and upper-middle-class suburbs are not modern-day Elysian Fields.
At least that is the viewpoint of Douglas Post in his new play, "Murder in Green Meadows," at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale through Aug. 4.
The idea of the play is to examine material behind the "perfect" facade of green manicured lawns and high-priced architecture of a well-planned suburban community.
The action is in the new home of Thomas and Joan Devereaux.
A woman, who turns out to be their neighbor from across the street, enters uninvited through the unlocked open front door.
The neighbor, Carolyn Symons, is the epitome of the perfect neighbor.
She is intelligent, attractive and helpful.
Her husband, Jeffrey, is a perfect match for her.


Patricia Harris, Student, Is Wed
Patricia Anne Harris, the daughter of Dr.
Joan Harris Wilson of Huntington, L.I., was married there yesterday to Charles Assue Brown, the son of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Frank Brown.
The Rev.
George Hill performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Brown, 26 years old, graduated from Indiana State University, where she is a graduate student in psychology.
Her mother is an administrator in the South Huntington, L.I., school system.


FOOTBALL: Notebook; Lion Eyes A Bigger Share
The Detroit Lions are finding out that even if you build it, he won't come unless the price is right.
Dan Levy, the Lions' new offensive coordinator, has constructed new ways to get running back Barry Sanders more involved in the offense.
Levy doesn't know how any of them will work out, because Sanders, who has played two seasons in the National Football League, is holding out in a bid to renegotiate his contract.


Italian Classic Updated for Summer Buffets
WHEN I was a teen-ager, my mother bought a copy of Elizabeth David's "Italian Cooking." It changed our lives.
Since we had been raised on English food (for us, spaghetti was something produced by spontaneous combustion in a can and served on buttered toast), the book was a revelation.
In its pages, she found a strange-sounding recipe, veal with tuna fish sauce.
A classic Italian dish dating from the 1890s, it was, Mrs.
David suggested, the perfect thing for a summer buffet.
And indeed, that summer I think we had vitello tonnato every time anyone came to dinner.
Guests would leave clutching the scribbled recipe in their hands, ready to surprise their own visitors in the future.


Baseball; Leyland Perfects A Cure for Stress
When the paramedics came onto the airplane that had made an emergency landing at the Columbus, Ohio, airport last Sunday evening, one of them asked Jim Leyland, who was having chest pains, "Have you been under any stress?"
Several of the Pittsburgh Pirates' coaches laughed.
They were not treating Leyland's distress lightly, but it was obvious that the paramedic didn't know that the stricken passenger was a major league baseball manager who lived with public stress at least 162 days a year.


A Wall of Islands in the Midnight Sun
ON the top deck of the mailboat King Olav, passengers chatted with one another, read or simply leaned back in their chairs to enjoy the softly luminous air.
The ocean's expanse was silver, dotted with rocky islets.
Suddenly someone called out, "It's straight ahead! The Lofoten Wall!" We crowded the railing, binoculars in hand, and got our first glimpse of the soaring, serrated peaks penciled across the horizon.
The sight is spectacular.
The wall is formed by a string of mountainous islands, part of an archipelago reaching into the ocean from the northern coast of Norway, well above the Arctic Circle.
Formed when Greenland separated from Europe billions of years ago, the islands' abrupt peaks, composed of granite and limestone, are estimated to be 3.5 billion years old -- among the oldest in the world.


Other Viewpoints On Jet Noise
"Jet Noise: A New Battle Looms" forbodes drawn-out acrimony between Federal and state bureaucracies and no relief forthcoming from jet noise.
The F.A.A. demonstrated its good will and flexibility by changing airline flight paths during the U.S.
Open tennis tournament.
That act benefited only a minority of people.
A majority now cries out for a similar show of good faith -- while the "battle looms."


Someone Had Blundered
FATAL DECISION
Anzio and the Battle for Rome.
By Carlo D'Este.
Illustrated. 566 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $35.


Robin Munro Weds Steven Gronlund
Elizabeth Robin Munro and Steven Mark Gronlund were married yesterday at the Ira Allen Chapel at the University of Vermont in Burlington by the Rev.
Larry Roban, a Lutheran minister.
The bride, 28 years old and known as Robin, is a daughter of Margaret Munro of Darien, Conn., and Allan F. Munro of Greenwich, Conn.
The bridegroom, 32, is a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Glen Gronlund of Worthington, Ohio.
Mrs.
Gronlund is a marketing assistant at International Business Machines in Burlington.
A graduate of St.
Lawrence University, she received an M.B.A. from the University of Vermont, as did her husband.
Her father is a partner in Greenwich Associates, financial consultants.


A Revivified Royal Ballet Floats a Decadent 'Swan'
The Royal Ballet's rebirth, already revealed at the Kennedy Center in March and confirmed in the season concluded yesterday at the Metropolitan Opera House, is no longer a secret.
The prime interest lies, then, in the United States premieres the British company is taking on tour (Miami Beach, Tuesday through July 29; Austin, Tex., Aug. 1 to 4; Costa Mesa, Calif., Aug. 6 to 11).
The more often Anthony Dowell's 1987 staging of "Swan Lake" was performed here, the richer it grew in meaning and stylistic coherence.
A dominant designer, Yolanda Sonnabend, seemed at first to have submerged the choreography and familiar narrative in mysterious fantasies -- mirrors amid washed-out gauze for a corps of swans in feathery, tattered skirts.
The truth is this production remains faithful to the standard 19th-century choreographic text while freshly reinterpreting it through design elements.


'Are You Going to Do Laundry Today?'
To the Editor:
Many reasons no doubt contribute to a single adult's decision to live with his or her parents, and Jeffrey Bendix's tribute to the superior social skills of women (letter, July 2) may explain in part why men are more likely to make such a choice than women are.


Jury in St. John's Sex Case Deliberates for a Fourth Day
Jurors in the St.
John's sexual-assault trial deliberated for a shortened fourth day yesterday without reaching a verdict, and after a day off at their request today they will resume deliberations tomorrow.
The jury in State Supreme Court in Queens heard testimony read back to them that had been given by Thomas Dean, a St.
John's student who was a prosecution witness, and heard Justice Joan O'Dwyer instruct them again on the meaning of sexual abuse.


Lori Duggan Wed To David J. Gold
Lori Ann Duggan, the daughter of Virginia Haas of Rockaway Beach, Queens, and the late Donald J. Duggan, was married in Brooklyn yesterday to David Jonathan Gold, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hadley W. Gold of Brooklyn.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Gold, 26 years old, is the deputy director of communications for the New York City Campaign Finance Board.
She graduated cum laude from New York University.
Her mother is a physical therapy assistant at nursing homes in Queens.
Her father was a computer specialist at the Bank of New York.


BUSH, IN TURKEY, MUTES WAR TALK
President Bush expressed concern today about reports of fighting in Iraqi Kurdistan, but said he did not anticipate using the American-led rapid deployment force being set up in Turkey in the current fighting.
Arriving in Turkey for a two-day visit, Mr.
Bush sought to play down the reports of hostilities, adding that he thought President Saddam Hussein of Iraq would not do anything that would bring the allied intervention that followed Iraqi reprisals against rebellious Kurds in northern Iraq.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Lucerne
Countrywide celebrations are marking the 700th anniversary of Switzerland's birth, and this summer's Lucerne Festival of music comes in the middle of them.
On Aug. 1, 1291, delegates from three forest districts hugging Lake Lucerne banded together in a treaty of mutual assistance against foreign encroachment -- interference by the House of Hapsburg.
The document enshrining the Everlasting League can be viewed in the Archives of the Federal Charters in the town of Schwyz near the lake's eastern shore.
Lucerne, which during the Middle Ages grew from a fishing village and Benedictine abbey into a trade center, joined the Everlasting League in 1332 as its fourth member and first city.
Prosperous Lucerne has 60,000 inhabitants today while as many more live in its metropolitan area.


Munich Subway
To the Editor: A recent trip to Munich was marred by an incident on the U-Bahn, the city's clean, safe, efficient subway system.
The U-Bahn is operated on the honor system; riders buy and time-validate their own tickets, which are subject to spot checks by plainclothes inspectors.
The ticketing machines offer only perfunctory instructions in English.
I encountered an inspector who found that I had underpaid by about 60 cents.
Though I was obviously a non-German-speaking tourist I was ordered off the train at the next station to buy a new ticket.
Fortunately I was spared the severe tongue-lashing and fine inflicted upon a friend several years ago.
MARC BRUMMEL New York, N.Y.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, the Art View column of the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday and its subheading, about "A Summer Selection" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, rendered a word incorrectly.
The affected sentence, in the first paragraph, should have read, "Behind its flat, noncommittal title there lurks a disjunctive mix that is something quite new for the Met." The word preceding "mix" should not have been "destructive."


States Seeking Aid on Budgets From Pensions
Growing numbers of state and local governments are drawing money from or slashing contributions to their pension funds, raising concerns about the funds' ability to pay retirees decades from now.
To many government officials, reducing pension contributions or finding a way to recapture any pensions surpluses are simply prudent financial steps.
The money is needed, they note, to avert the types of steep reductions in services or layoffs that many local governments are ordering.
And in some cases the employee unions support the changes rather than accept layoffs.
Fast-Growing Technique
In the past, governments facing financial difficulties have occasionally sought help from their pension funds, as New York City did in the 1970's.
In the last several years, cuts in Federal assistance, the faltering economy and the political difficulty of raising taxes have led more states and cities to look at pension money as a means of addressing budget problems.
At least 18 states, including New York and California, have delayed or reduced payments to their pension plans in the last two years, or are considering doing so.


Peru TV News Program Ends
A popular television program, which disclosed a military document on killing guerrillas that said "the best subversive is a dead subversive," was canceled, the producer said on Friday.
Cesar Hildebrandt, executive producer and anchor of "En Persona" ("In Person"), said that although the network had given him no reason, he believed that it had acted under pressure from the armed forces.


Campus Life: Juilliard; Students Bring Music To Children in Oakland
Victor Ramirez picked up his tiny violin and in three sweeping steps was positioned to start his lesson.
Before the 8-year-old met Alanna Wheatley, a student at the Juilliard School in New York City, his summer plans were to play in the street.
Ms.
Wheatley has given private violin lessons to Victor and 22 other minority children at her parents' home here, thanks to a summer grant of $3,000 provided by Juilliard.
She is one of the first five students to receive Juilliard grants to create summertime socially aware projects, the school said.


On Language; Poetic Allusion Watch, Expanded
THIS DEPARTMENT'S unique contribution to uniculturalism, named the "Poetic Allusion Watch" but familiarly known to deep readers as PAW, has long exposed the devices that writers and speakers use to slip secret erudition past their audiences.
Today we begin with poetry buried in the prose of the labor movement, and then give the envelope a hard shove: into allusions to biblical-Shakespearean compounds, classical music titles, even to the heart of arcana -- titles of economic treatises.
No sizzling grounder gets through the Great Shortstop.
In a column about the rockiness of the marriage that makes up the Democratic Party, David S. Broder of The Washington Post used as a source Lane Kirkland, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
The "new-age issues" -- presumably matters that concern Shirley MacLaine a lot, and roil the waters of West Coast hot tubs -- have come to define liberalism today, leaving workers, ethnics and other members of the classic New Deal coalition feeling out in the cold.
My brother Broder quoted Mr.
Kirkland -- originally a maritime worker, but a speechwriter along the way -- saying that Democrats need a candidate "who can
shake the barley
. . . on issues that are important to the traditional base."


Tuna Sold for Humans Bore Labels for Cats
A food distributor voluntarily recalled about 30,000 cans of tuna sent from a New York warehouse after shoppers found cat food labels under labels that indicated the tuna was for humans.
Gateway Foods, a La Crosse distributor, recalled the 6.5-ounce cans of IGA Chunk Tuna in Water from stores in western Wisconsin and Minnesota.
Labels underneath others identified the product as Star-Kist's 7th Heaven cat food.


MAN DIES, SON HIT IN BRONX SHOOTING
An immigrant window maker who showed up to work yesterday at dawn was shot to death and his son wounded outside a Bronx factory by a gunman whose demands for a job at the plant were rebuffed, the police said.
Francisco Crisafulli, 48 years old, had brought his teen-age son, Allen, to the Optimum Window Manufacturing Company plant at 311 Casanova Street in the Hunts Point section for a half day of work, the police said.
The elder Mr.
Crisafulli, a skilled window maker, and his son, who was visiting from Italy, had later planned to attend the wedding of the company president's son.


Ms. Stocking Wed To F. W. Whelan
Catherine Noble Stocking, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David W. Stocking of Groton, Mass., was married yesterday in Groton to Franklin Watkins Whelan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert J. Whelan of Bryn Mawr, Pa.
The Rev.
John T. Atwater performed the ceremony at St.
James Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Whelan, 21 years old, graduated from William Smith College.
Her father teaches English at the Bromfield School in Harvard, Mass.
She is the granddaughter of Fred H. Stocking, emeritus professor of English at Williams College.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the marriage of Courtney Page Brown and Paul Gregory Lafortezza misstated the type of ceremony and referred incorrectly to the bride.
The Rev.
J.
Diane Mowrey, a Presbyterian minister, performed a Presbyterian ceremony.
The bride is keeping her name.


Giants' First Pick Puts Carthon on the Spot
It is a cruel April ritual, one that Maurice Carthon knows too well.
A reliable, hard-working veteran watches the National Football League draft.
His team selects a player at his position in the first round.
Hurt and confusion follow.
When the Giants took Michigan fullback Jarrod Bunch with the 27th pick in the draft, Carthon became a starter on borrowed time.
Eventually, the rugged Bunch will supplant him.
Carthon's mission now is to delay the switch, to make the change a matter of seasons instead of months.


European Trains
To the Editor: In early March I looked for the French National Railways in Rockefeller Center in order to gather information on a trip to France.
The French Government Tourist Office informed me that Rail Europe, in White Plains, was handling rail information for France and other European countries.
I telephoned Rail Europe and received a portion of the needed information.
Subsequent attempts to reach Rail Europe by phone were unsuccessful so I wrote them.
I outlined my itinerary -- Brussels to Strasbourg by train, then to Colmar, Nancy, Rheims and Paris.
I received information on Switzerland and Germany but not the French rail schedule I needed.
I wrote to Rail Europe three times.


Dave Swid Dies at 86; Ran Trucking Concern
Dave Swid, a former president of the Yale Express Trucking Company and of a business that helped build the New England Thruway, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Swid, who had lived for many years in the Murray Hill section of Manhattan, died of heart failure, said his son, Stephen, the chairman of the Municipal Art Society.


Polyester: A New Look, A New Name
Since the days of sherbet-colored leisure suits and double-knit jackets, synthetic fabric has been low on cachet and high on caricature.
But polyester's image is changing with the 90's.
For one thing, it goes by a new name: microfiber.
Like rayon, another synthetic fiber that is also enjoying renewed popularity, it bears little or no resemblance to its predecessor in appearance, drape, breathability or feel.
Microfiber's appeal lies in its ability to imitate lustrous washed silk as easily as it mocks buttery brushed suede.
In most cases, it costs as much.


Nancy Goldreyer to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Goldreyer of Purchase, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Nancy Patricia Goldreyer and Andrew Kenneth Davilman, the son of Judith Davilman of Port Washington, L.I., and the late Jack Davilman.
Ms.
Goldreyer, 29 years old, is an assistant vice president, and Mr.
Davilman, 30, is a trader at Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Emory University and received a master's degree in counseling psychology from the California Institute of Integral Studies in San Francisco.
He graduated from Dartmouth College and received an M.B.A. degree from Stanford University.


Wall Street; Prelude to a Big Bank Merger
The idea of a merger between Chemical Banking and Manufacturers Hanover had been talked about for years before a deal was finally announced last week.
When the companies sat down to talk early this month, they quickly agreed that they would use market prices as a determinant in setting the terms of the deal, which wound up as an exchange of 1.14 shares of Chemical for each one in Manny Hanny.
The market's view of the relative merits of the two banks has been widely variable.
Manny Hanny suffered in the mid-1980's, as investors realized it had been hurt more than most banks by loans to the third world.
Then last fall, amid widespread alarm over the state of the banking industry, Chemical's share price plunged much further as investors focused on bad real estate loans.


Yearly Washing Urged For Aluminum Siding
TO keep aluminum siding looking its best, many manufacturers recommend washing it at least once a year.
Damaged siding should be promptly repaired.
Wash the siding by wetting an area with hard spray from a garden hose and then scrubbing it with a soft brush dipped in strong nonabrasive household detergent mixed with water.
Usually one cup of detergent added to one gallon of water is adequate.


Dara Roseman Is Engaged To Marry Andrew A. Abel
Mr. and Mrs.
Herman I. Roseman of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Dara Gail Roseman and Andrew Armand Abel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred H. Abel of Cincinnati.
Miss Roseman, 25 years old and a graduate of Syracuse University, is a research analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
Her father is president of Argus Investors' Counsel, an investment management concern in New York.


Honor Over Honorariums
At long last, the Senate has voted to ban honorariums, those iniquitous speaking fees paid by people with special interest in legislation.
This is such good news that it should have been done in broad daylight, to the sound of trumpets.
But because it was tied to a pay raise, the senators did it at night, with no advance notice that would have attracted attention.
Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia deserves credit that it was done at all.
As chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, he had gotten committee agreement to raise the pay of Senate staffers, and to ban
their
taking honorariums from special interest groups.
The next step was to do the same for senators.


Tovah Feldshuh Comes to the Emelin
THE name of the act was "Call Me Tovah" when it played last April in the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel.
Next week at the White Barn Theater in Westport it will be "Tovah Cross Ovah, From Broadway to Cabaret." But for now, "An Evening With Tovah Feldshuh -- From Broadway to Cabaret" is how it is being referred to here.
It is a misnomer, for the Emelin is no cabaret.
The Emelin engagement could be called "A Homecoming for Tovah Feldshuh." As the gifted actress announces early on: "I never played Westchester County, unless you count Scarsdale High School." That was the scene of her debut, as "Anna Christie," more than 20 years ago.


Lynne Greenberg Engaged to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Kay Greenberg of St.
Louis have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Lynne Ann Greenberg and Eric Michael Avram, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morrell M. Avram of Brooklyn.
Ms.
Greenberg, 26 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
She graduated from Brown University, as did Mr.
Avram, and has a law degree from the University of Chicago.
Her father owns the Greenberg Gallery of contemporary American art in St.
Louis.
Her mother, Jan Clare Greenberg, is a writer.


Managing; Vocational Schools in a Comeback
Educators don't like to talk much about it, but over the last couple of decades the nation's vocational schools deteriorated into little more than a dumping ground for kids deemed ill fit to pursue academic degrees.
But now, with the shortage of skilled labor progressing from inconvenience to crisis, industry is unwilling to ignore any potential source of trained workers.
Instead, it is looking for ways to help turn vocational education around.
For example:


Introspection and Obsession Fill the 1991 'Marketplace' Show
AT the Bronx Museum of the Arts it is "Artist in the Marketplace" time.
But the annual that normally runs through Labor Day closes this year on Aug. 4, because the museum itself is taking a vacation then -- until Oct. 22.
And visiting hours have been curtailed to Monday through Thursday from 10 A.M. to noon (by appointment from noon to 3 P.M.) and Sundays from 1 to 4:30 P.M.
All of this is the result of the almost 50 percent reduction in the funds provided the museum by the city's Department of Cultural Affairs.


For Woman Behind Throne, a Share of an Empire
For Lillian Goldman, her fight for a share of her late husband's enormous real-estate fortune was never just about money.
It was also about controlling her own life.
To Mrs.
Goldman, the late Sol Goldman's holdings represent more than the hundreds of millions of dollars they are valued at.
They are also the fruit of a wife's business contribution, she says; of her eye for value, and of her determination to keep the empire together when her husband, disheartened by losses, was ready to quit.


On the Street; Freedom Corralled
Each generation searches for its own fashion identity, which often emerges along with its musical identity.
The Beatles, for example, influenced the dress of the early 60's, just as "Hair" did in the late 60's.
The followers of the Gipsy Kings, a French group, have corralled the freedom of multiple choices, mixing many different patterns and elements into a disciplined look.


Vegetables to Consider for Fall Harvest
THE middle of July hardly seems like the time to be thinking about fall harvests, but it is.
Vegetables planted now will be ready to eat in the cooler growing days of September on into October.
It is essential, however, to be speedy about getting to the garden centers to buy seed.
Only too soon seed racks will disappear, taken away by the dealers, or the supply will be sold out.
Mail order through the catalogues is the next best thing.


New &amp; Noteworthy
GONE PRIMITIVE: Savage Intellects, Modern Lives, by Marianna Torgovnick. (University of Chicago, $14.95.) A Duke University English professor reflects on the fear and longing modern Westerners feel for the cultures they call primitive.
"I think this is a superb book," Arthur C. Danto said here last year.
"It is lucid, usually fair, laced with a certain feminist mockery and animated by some surprising sympathies."
MIDDLE PASSAGE, by Charles Johnson. (Plume, $8.95.) In the early 19th century, an emancipated and very educated slave stows away on a boat bound for Africa, where the half-mad captain plans to capture people to sell.
"The genre switches of 'Middle Passage,' from period bodice-ripper to metaphysical drama, are -- like every other aspect of this fairly short book -- heroic in proportion," Thomas Keneally said here last year.
"There's an endearing and determined recklessness at work here. . . . This is fiction that hooks into the mind." It won the 1990 National Book Award for fiction.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Canadians at the Hall
The way FERGUSON JENKINS sees it, as soon as he becomes the first Canadian inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame, in a ceremony in Cooperstown, N.Y., today, there will be two Canadians in the Hall of Fame, both named Ferguson Jenkins.
One will be Ferguson Arthur Jenkins, the pitcher who won 284 games and put together six straight 20-victory seasons in a 19-year career with four major league teams, principally the Chicago Cubs and the Texas Rangers.


The Region; How Did the Subways Get So Full of Such Depressing Ads?
ALMOST all subway cars are now air-conditioned, each displays two maps, graffiti is assiduously and almost immediately removed.
But there are still those devil's advocates who persist in calling New York City's 700-mile-long mass transportation achievement "the electric gutter."
Reading the advertising cards posted over the fluorescent panels certainly adds to this perception, and must suggest to visitors that New York subway riders roam a daily hell far grimmer than even the worst graffiti of yesteryear.
Those suffering from hemorrhoids or anal warts can find any number of laser-packing doctors with phone numbers like M-D-T-U-S-C-H.
Those needing their torn ear lobes resewn, their roaches removed, their AIDS diagnosed, their doctors sued, find succor.
"Who cares if you've been mugged?" asks a Victim Services Agency ad illustrated with a picture of a woebegone chap wearing smashed glasses.


C.T.B.R. Varma, 78, Ex-Maharaja in India
Chitra Thirunal Bala Rama Varma, one of the last of the former maharajas from pre-independence India, died today in his former kingdom in the southern state of Kerala.
He was 78 years old.
Mr.
Varma, who ascended the throne of the old princely state of Travancore at the age of 12 in 1924, died of complications from a stroke in a hospital in the state capital, Trivandrum, the Press Trust of India news agency said.


'Police Squad 1 1/2'
In 1982, an ABC comedy series called "Police Squad!" came and went in the blink of an eye: six episodes and out.
Created by the makers of the 1980 hit film "Airplane!," the series was a sendup of the conventions of television cop shows -- stool pigeons who had more information than an encyclopedia, villains who threw their guns at the cops
before
they used up all the bullets.
Not enough viewers got the joke.
But that was before "The Naked Gun." That 1988 hit movie starred Leslie Nielsen (in photograph) as the same doltish Lieut.
Frank Drebin he played in "Police Squad!" and spawned the current sequel, "The Naked Gun 2 1/2."


Voice of Experience


Hitters Beware: Stewart's in a Habit of Staring
It was most likely a hitter who dared to peek into the eyes of Dave Stewart when the Oakland A's pitcher was at his most intense that gave the look, the glare, its name.
The Death Stare.


Julie D. Lubetkin to Wed Marc J. Fagel
Daniel and Rebecca Lubetkin of Mountain Lakes, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Julie Dawn Lubetkin and Marc Jerome Fagel, a son of Allen and Paula Fagel of Riverwoods, Ill.
Ms.
Lubetkin, 24 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of Princeton University and is studying for an M.B.A. at Stanford University.
Her father, a former Surrogate of Essex County and Democratic State Assemblyman, is a lawyer in Roseland, N.J.
Her mother is the executive director of the Consortium for Educational Equity at Rutgers University, working with school districts in New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Jult 21
Neither Ted Williams nor Joe DiMaggio played today. Both teams had the day off.


Notation and Film To the Rescue
To the Editor:
In her article "Are Dance Troupes Lost Without the Legends?"  [ June 23 ] , Anna Kisselgoff stated that "the best works tend to survive through natural selection." This is highly debatable.
The truth is, nobody has any idea whether the "best works" of any master were the ones that survived.
Until the recent advent of a truly comprehensive system of dance notation, coupled with film, very few works of any choreographer survived.
What survived were those that took the fancy of the audience and were therefore in demand, or that happened to be remembered by any given rehearser -- and were utterly dependent upon his or her probably fallible notes and almost certainly fallible memory.


Yearly Washing Urged For Aluminum Siding
TO keep aluminum siding looking its best, many manufacturers recommend washing it at least once a year.
Damaged siding should be promptly repaired.
Wash the siding by wetting an area with hard spray from a garden hose and then scrubbing it with a soft brush dipped in strong nonabrasive household detergent mixed with water.
Usually one cup of detergent added to one gallon of water is adequate.


East Anglia
To the Editor: I enjoyed the articles on East Anglia, particularly Norfolk and Norwich, and would like to suggest one place of interest that was not mentioned.
Edith Cavell, the English nurse executed by the Germans in World War II as a spy, is buried in the precincts of Norwich Cathedral.
JOAN M. COOPER Brooklyn, N.Y.


Setting for a Fair: Tents in a Hilltop Meadow
RECIPE for a refreshing New Jersey summer weekend: add 140 crafts people to a national park with mountain views and historic houses.
Season generously with high-quality craft items made of clay, metal, leather, wood or fiber.
Mix well with tasty food, lively music and art activities for the children.
This potpourri will be served up next Saturday and Sunday, rain or shine, at the annual Peters Valley Craft Fair.
Exhibitors' tents will be lined up on a hilltop meadow of the Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area, with a spectacular view of the Kittatinny Mountains in the background.


Patricia Bennett and William Greer Are Married
Patricia Ann Bennett, who will start law school at St.
John's University in the fall, and William Bradford Greer, a management trainee at the Hudson City Savings Bank in Paramus, N.J., were married yesterday at St.
Mary Roman Catholic Church in Marlboro, N.Y.
Msgr.
Edward T. Dugan officiated.
Mr. and Mrs.
Greer, both 25 years old, graduated from Colgate University.
The bride has a master's in English literature from the University of Rochester.
She is the daughter of State Assemblyman and Mrs.
Lawrence E. Bennett of Newburgh, N.Y.
Her father, a Democrat, represents the 96th Assembly District.


Anne Barnett Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Barnett Jr. of St.
Petersburg Beach, Fla., have announced fall wedding plans for their daughter Anne L. Barnett and Philip A. Rovner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome M. Rovner of Bridgeton, N.J.
Both are lawyers in New York: Miss Barnett, 30 years old, at Donovan Leisure Newton &amp; Irvine; her fiance, 31, at Sidley &amp; Austin.


Track and Field; Some Like It Hot and Perform to Meet the Occasion
By two o'clock yesterday afternoon at Wien Stadium in northern Manhattan, it was already 99 degrees, with 36 percent humidity.
The New York Games, the third time around, was getting a real piece of the urban summer this July: steamy ozone above, baked polyurethane track below.
Somehow, despite the heat and a sparse crowd announced at 8,118, the athletes persevered in this fragile Mobil Grand Prix track and field tour event.
They ran hard, perspired profusely, then loped around for victory laps that were often left incomplete, or entirely to the imagination.


Neville Kirsch, Dermatologist, 79
Dr.
Neville Kirsch, a dermatologist who practiced in West Hartford, Conn., for 37 years before retiring in 1984, died on Thursday at Yale New Haven Hospital.
He was 79 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


A Bridge New Jersey Wants but New York Doesn't
AFTER languishing quietly for decades in the shadow of the Statute of Liberty, Ellis Island, the "Isle of Hope" for many of this nation's immigrants, acquired celebrity status of its own when it was reopened to the public last September after years of painstaking renovation.
But even as visitors flock to the tiny island, Ellis Island has become the focus of an intensifying debate among officials of New York, New Jersey and the National Park Service, the official caretaker of the national monument.


European Trains
To the Editor: The chart on the various railroad passes in Europe (Travel, June 2) did not mention the new tie-in of French Rail with Avis, which provides both train passes and three days of car rental in a single package.
The package was so new last summer that the conductors were puzzled by the passes but, with a bit of mime, it worked beautifully for us.
We were able to hop off and on trains and had a car waiting at our major destinations.
We traveled by T.G.V. from Paris to Normandy and Brittany and had two days of car rental and then went from Paris to Provence for another day of driving.
GEORGE and BETTY TYLER Monroe, Conn.


Baseball; Parental Guidance Advised
It was Family Day for the Mets at Shea Stadium yesterday.
One can only trust that the children of the Mets left with their mothers early.
It wasn't the nearly 100-degree heat that was too much to endure.
It was the brand of baseball their dads played for nearly four hours that was too much to bear.
With insufficient starting pitching, horrendous relief and slapstick defense, the Mets were mauled by the Dodgers for the second time in three days as Los Angeles banged out an 11-7 victory.


Editors' Note
An article in the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday described a growing market for rock music memorabilia.
It reported huge auction prices for a range of common objects once owned or used by rock stars.
The article, by Peter Watson, a freelance writer, was similar in tone and content to one he wrote for The Observer, published in London on April 22, 1990.
Although the editors of The Observer approved the reuse of the material, The Times was unaware that its version was not fully original.


Janice V. Troeger and Ernest M. Lettieri Are Wed
Janice Virginia Troeger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter A. Troeger of Berkeley Heights, N.J., was married yesterday to Ernest Michael Lettieri, the son of Isabella Lettieri of Scranton, Pa., and the late Ernest M. Lettieri.
The Rev.
Edward G. Bradley, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Chapel of the Immaculate Conception at Seton Hall University in South Orange, N.J.
Mrs.
Lettieri, 28 years old, is a software analyst in Berkeley Heights for Dun &amp; Bradstreet, where her husband is a systems analyst.
She graduated from Roanoke College.
Her father is an engineer in the Trident missile program at the Kearfott Guidance and Navigation Corporation in Little Falls, N.J.
Her mother, Virginia Troeger, is an elementary-school librarian in Berkeley Heights.


Scandal Threatens de Klerk and Talks
The disclosure that the Government secretly financed the black political organization Inkatha to advance its rivalry with the more popular African National Congress confronts President F. W. de Klerk with a scandal that has damaged his credibility and prospects for negotiations on the nation's future.
Mr. de Klerk's grand plan to dismantle apartheid and negotiate a sharing of power with the black majority rested on his assurance that his white minority Government could be trusted to act as an honest referee as well as a participant.


Northeast Notebook: Lewes, Del.; A New Old Inn On the Shore
THIS quaint seaside community that has for years been in the shadow of its southern neighbors is beginning to come into its own, thanks in part to the $2 million restoration of a former boarding house on the city's main street.
The New Devon Inn is getting to be a major lodging attraction in this city of 2,245, particularly for couples without children who want to spend a holiday on the Atlantic Coast.


Marianne I. Arneberg Wed to Robert Gurnee
Marianne Ingeborg Arneberg, the state correspondent in Albany for Newsday, and Robert Landon Gurnee, a computer consultant at Oz Enterprises in Oakland, Calif., were married yesterday at St.
James on the Green Episcopal Church in Woodstock, Vt., by the Rev.
Donald Boyer.
The bride, 33 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Hampshire College, she is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Tor B. Arneberg of Darien, Conn., and Woodstock.
Her father is a business consultant at Nightingale &amp; Associates in New Canaan, Conn.
Her mother, Jean Arneberg, is a retired accountant.


The Executive Computer; For Face-to-Face Talks, Ask Your Machine First
Most business deals require some type of negotiation, whether it is to forge a labor contract or figure out how to get people to work together effectively.
Few executives, however, have formal training in negotiation skills.
So when the negotiations are hardball, some companies are turning to software.
Negotiator Pro ($299 from Beacon Expert Systems Inc., Brookline, Mass., 617 738-9300) is an expert system program for I.B.M.
PC and Apple Macintosh computers.
It is based on the premise that negotiation is more of a skill that can be learned than an art, and that a computer, which is inherently devoid of any personality, can help an executive plan an effective negotiation with other humans by examining their personality types.


Cycling; Hampsten Goes on Whirl With Plans to Just Wing It
Andy Hampsten, who has often been accused of overthinking the sport of bicycle racing, has decided to stop worrying and planning.
His new attitude to the Tour de France?
Wing it.
"I'm just going to ride it as a race instead of trying to be too smart about it," Hampsten said before the Tour's start in Lyons on July 6.
"Instead of having a plan, saying, 'I just won this race, now I'm going to do this or that,' I know I'm riding well and I'm completely relaxed.


Ms. Whitefield Wed to Barry Hanson
Debra Whitefield and Barry Hanson were married yesterday at the Sheridan Lutheran Church in Lincoln, Neb., by the Revs.
Dale Hansen and Bud Christenson.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Keith Ivey of Lincoln.
The bridegroom is a son of Marian Hanson of Omaha and the late Odell Hanson.
The bride, 38 years old, is the assistant managing editor for business news at Newsday in Melville, L.I., and New York Newsday in New York.
She is a cum laude graduate of the University of Nebraska.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is a mechanic with the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company in Lincoln.


Fresh Air Fund Profits Guests and Families
Amid a cacophonous crowd of her peers at the George Washington Bridge Bus Station, 7-year-old Shakira White stood with a bag about half her size and waited for her Fresh Air Fund vacation to get under way.
Shakira was one of about 120 children waiting for buses that would take them to Connecticut as part of the fund's Friendly Town program, in which about 7,000 underprivileged New York City children will spend two or more weeks this summer with host families in 13 states and Canada.
The fund, an independent nonprofit agency, has provided free summer vacations to more than 1.6 million children since 1877.


Travel Advisory; Tourists' Role in Tut's Plight
King Tutankhamen's tomb, one of Egypt's top tourist attractions and off-limits to visitors since November, will remain closed until antiquities officials decide how to mix the magic of King Tut's name with the reality of trying to keep his burial place intact.
Officials say that if the tomb in southern Egypt's Valley of the Kings suffers from a curse, as some believe, the curse is not from the Pharaoh but from its popularity among sightseers.


Yeltsin Bans Communist Groups in Government
President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian federated republic issued a decree today effectively banning Communist Party organizations from operating in Government offices and workplaces in the republic.
The decree, published by the republic's information agency, appears designed to undermine the party's traditional grip on decision-making at factories, farms and offices.
Mr.
Yeltsin, who quit the Communist Party last year, also called for legislation to bar party cells in K.G.B., police and military organizations on the republic's territory.


Communities and Their Residents Age Gracefully
Back when there were children around, the Karen Arms garden apartments boasted a sandbox and swings.
But now, 85 percent of the residents are over the age of 65, and Meals on Wheels has replaced tricycles on the winding paths of the 11-acre complex.
"We were younger when we moved in, but we kept staying, and we all got older," said Marion Osborn, 74 years old, who moved into Karen Arms 20 years ago.
"If I were stuck in a retirement home, I'd say, 'Heavens, get me away from all these old people,' but I have had quadruple-bypass surgery, and it's good to be around people who understand that. I like seeing young people, but I wouldn't want rah-rah parties every weekend. This is just right."


After 16 Years of War, Beirut Tentatively Reclaims Peace
Thousands of people gathered at a concert in the war-scarred center of this city not long ago to sing for peace.
Mona Hrawi, the wife of President Elias Hrawi, opened the event with a speech in which she compared Lebanon to a flower growing out of a rock, her description of the nation as it emerges from 16 years of civil war.
Then musicians, standing at the foot of a statue in the square near the Green Line that once divided the city into its Muslim and Christian sectors, sang, "Give peace a chance."


Hong Kong Pressured to Revamp Regulations After Bank's Collapse
In a proud outpost of unfettered enterprise, the Government's decision this week to seize the local subsidiary of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International has led to clashes between protesters and police, caused a banking panic and provoked an uproar in this normally resilient financial community.
The episode may lead to new banking regulation where people are generally proud of their commitment to laissez-faire.
It has also embarrassed the local Government at a time officials are struggling to improve their credibility and show that the Government is more than a lame-duck operation waiting for 1997, when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule.


World Markets; Fear of Taxes in Germany and Italy
Just whisper about taxes around a stock market and the mood goes sour.
Look at the German and Italian bourses, both of which have fallen after threats of tax increases.
In Germany, a decision of the Federal Constitutional Court at the end of last month requires the Government to assure that taxes on investment income will be collected fairly and efficiently by the beginning of 1993.


Q and A
Renting Condo Club Space Question: My apartment is in a condominium with extensive club facilites.
Its cost is included in the monthly common charges.
During operating hours, one room may be reserved without cost for private meetings.
But new rules let a resident rent specific parts of the club during normal hours.
Not only does thisy mean that those parts now will be unavailable for owners, but the new fees are very high.
Can the board of managers make a part of the club available for the exclusive use of one resident? . . .
Kenneth J. Bergin, Manhattan Answer: Maybe.
The answer depends on the terms of the condominium's declaration papers.
According to David L. Smith, an attorney specializing in real estate, it is standard for condominium owners to sign a power of attorney authorizing the board to make decisions for unit owners as a group.
If a check of the condominium documents shows that the managers have the right to make these changes, your only option would be for you and your neighbors to petition the board for a change.
A Smoking Neighbor  Question: I live on the top floor of a small non-regulated brownstone -- four apartments, one per floor.
Recently a tenant who smokes moved into the building.
Because the apartments are poorly insulated, the smoke filters into the hallways and then drifts up to and enters the apartments.
The hallways have no ventilation.
I have complained to the building's managing agent and superintendent, who have done nothing.
I know the tenant has an absolute right to smoke in her apartment, but what about my rights to a smoke free environment?
Are there any housing regulations that apply to this situation? . . .
Ellen Watson, Manhattan Answer: No.
Neither the city's housing code nor the Clean Indoor Air Act cover the situation that you have described.
According to Roz Post, a spokeswoman for the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development, the Clean Air Act prohibits smoking only in public places like corridors, elevators and stairwells, but not within apartments.
Thus, as you noted, your neighbor has the right to smoke in her own apartment.
If you had weather stripping installed around your door, that might keep smoke from seeping in from the corridor.
And if your smoking neighbor did the same, that might keep the corridors clear, too.
Since this problem is not the landlord's responsibility, you and your neighbor probably would have to pay the costs yourselves.
Converting a Building  Question: We bought a 10-family building which has been vacant since 1977.
We plan to renovate it and hope to join two apartments into one, thus reducing the number of units in the building to five.
We would be getting a new certificate of occupancy.
Would the building be subject to rent regulation? . . .
John Chasop, Brooklyn Answer: It probably would be.
The fact that the building has been vacant does not make it exempt from the rent-stabilization rules.
According to a spokesman for the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal, which has jurisdiction over rent-regulated housing, Sec. 2520.11 (d). of the code says that rent-stabilization law applies to all housing accommodations having six or more units, on the date the building first became subject to rent stabilization.
But John Gilbert, a spokesman for the Rent Stabilization Association, said exceptions can be made for substantially renovated buildings in which mechanical systems are replaced.
For more specific information you should contact the division.


Camera
Shelly Katz, a Dallas freelancer who is a contract photographer for Time magazine, covers most of his assignments with conventional equipment.
But he has taken tens of thousands of still photographs not on film, but on electronic imaging disks.
The electronic imaging cameras he uses look like regular 35-millimeter cameras.
But they allow even an amateur photographer to shoot a vacation's worth of pictures, play them back on a television set and make prints of them.


Headliners; A Seal Broken
The poet Anne Sexton rather proudly claimed that she held back nothing, writing about death, her mental breakdowns and erotic fantasies.
"Anne Sexton" is scheduled to be published this September by Houghton Mifflin and represents the first serious study of the poet since her suicide in 1974 at the age of 45.
Some material for the biography came from the subject's psychiatrist, Dr.
Martin T. Orne, who gave the author, Diane Wood Middlebrook, medical records, unpublished early works and more than 300 audiotapes of their psychiatric sessions.
The book charts Sexton's madness, extramarital affairs, alcoholism and sexual abuse of her daughter, but it is Dr.
Orne's action that has provoked the sharpest outcry, particularly among psychiatrists, who see it as a breach of medical ethics.
He acted with the permission of Sexton's literary executor, her daughter Linda Gray Sexton; and the Sexton children and friends have said the poet would have agreed.
"I was often more concerned about her privacy than she was," Dr.
Orne said.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Should Women Be Sent Into Combat?
EXPOSURE to danger is not combat.
Being shot at, even being killed, is not combat.
Combat is finding . . . closing with . . . and killing or capturing the enemy.
It's KILLING.
And it's done in an environment that is often as difficult as you can possibly imagine.
Extremes of climate.
Brutality.
Death.
Dying.
It's . . . uncivilized!
And women CAN'T DO IT!
Nor should they even be thought of as doing it.
The requirements for strength and endurance render them UNABLE to do it.
And I may be old-fashioned, but I think the very nature of women disqualifies them from doing it.
Women give life.
Sustain life.
Nurture life.
They don't TAKE it.
That Congressional testimony last month by Gen.
Robert H. Barrow, who retired in 1983 as Commandant of the Marine Corps, suggests what women who want to fight may have to confront first.


Baseball; Undefeated Howe Seeking New Contract With Yankees
Steve Howe, whose relief pitching has been a partial reason for the Yankees' strong revival this season, said today that he hoped to begin negotiating with the team soon on a new contract that would keep him in New York for at least two more seasons.
Howe, who has a 3-0 record, three saves and a team-low 1.21 earned run average, said he would instruct his agent, Dick Moss, to set up a meeting with Yankee General Manager Gene Michael in the next 10 days.
He said he would be seeking a deal of two or three years in length, which would likely be worth at least $2 million per season.


Ex-Nazi Scientist Tries to Renew Citizenship
A former Nazi scientist who was instrumental in developing the United States space program is trying to regain his American citizenship seven years after voluntarily relinquishing it when he was being accused of war crimes.
The scientist, Arthur Rudolph, moved back to Germany in 1984 after the United States Justice Department accused him of "working thousands of slave laborers to death" while director of the German factory that produced the V-2 rocket in World War II.


6 Teen-Agers Killed As Truck Crumples Texas Church Van
A dump truck apparently struck a car and then rolled on top of a church van returning from a youth conference this weekend, fatally crushing six teen-agers and leaving nine other people injured, the authorities said.
The northbound truck apparently rear-ended a car carrying three people Friday afternoon, then crashed into the southbound van and rolled on top of it, said Rick Gallimore of the Benton County Rescue Squad.
The accident occurred on state Route 641, about 90 miles west of Nashville, he said.


Review/Dance; An International Touch To American Festival
The idea that Americans in the arts need to begin their careers in Europe has not entirely died out.
But in modern dance, at least, the traffic has recently flowed in the reverse direction.
The American Dance Festival formalized this phenomenon in 1984 by establishing a six-week International Choreographers Workshop at its summer school on the Duke University campus.
This year, four alumni of earlier workshops -- from Indonesia, the Soviet Union, Venezuela and China -- were commissioned to create new works, using the festival's student dancers, American or otherwise.


Paige Windle Engaged To Dr. Walter F. Bloes
Jonathan W. Windle of Millbury, Mass., and Brenda H. Greeley of Shrewsbury, Mass., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Paige Windle, and Dr.
Walter Franklin Bloes, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter S. Bloes of East Orleans, Mass.
Miss Windle, 27 years old, graduated from Tufts University and is a manager at Citibank in Ossining, N.Y.
Her father, an investor, is a former president of Windle Industries, a textile processor in Millbury.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about women who received cosmetic makeovers in Macy's windows misstated the marital status of Joseph H. Lerner, who accompanied Joyce Roman.
He is married, not a widower.
A picture caption misstated their relationship.
He is a close friend, not her fiance.


Still Pristine Maldives
IN the overpopulated world of South Asia, where wildlife and the environment are depleting rapidly, the tiny island nation of Maldives is a shining exception.
Male, the small, whitewashed capital city on the island of the same name, with 40,000 people and streets of clean packed sand, rises from a clear harbor where angelfish nudge the small ferryboats.
On the outer islands, underwater gardens of multicolored coral and a crayon-box spectrum of tropical sea creatures are within wading distance of your small hotel.
You share the beach with storks and plovers.
There are no cities, only scattered villlages, and no industries but fishing, the growing of coconuts and the limited mining of coral.
For many European and Asian travelers -- and a few pioneering Americans -- the equatorial Maldivian atolls, a former Indian Ocean sultanate south of India, are a hot new discovery.
Direct air links are opening this nation of nearly 1,200 little islands -- about 200 of which are inhabited -- to Europe, Southeast Asia, South Korea and Japan.


A Fierce Intuition About Numbers
THE MAN WHO KNEW INFINITY
A Life of the Genius Ramanujan.
By Robert Kanigel.
Illustrated. 438 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $27.95.


The Nation; Under the Voting Law, Citizens' Rights Get More Than Lip Service
FROM the barrios of Harlem to the bayous of Louisiana to the cotton fields of the Mississippi Delta, the poorest part of the nation's poorest state, the long arm of the Federal Voting Rights Act is being felt once again.
Flexing its muscle, the Justice Department has objected to redistricting plans for both houses of the State Legislatures in Mississippi and Louisiana.
On Friday, John R. Dunne, the Assistant Attorney General for civil rights, blocked use of a new districting plan for the New York City Council, saying it tended to "minimize Hispanic voting strength" in parts of the city.


Alicia Sternberg Is to Be Married
September wedding plans for Alicia Boyle Sternberg, a sales representative for the Educational Foundation Institute for Cultural Exchange in Cambridge, Mass., and Jeffrey Charles Nitz, a senior operations officer at the Boston Company, a Boston subsidiary of Shearson Lehman Brothers of New York, have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Paul J. Sternberg of Norwich, N.Y.
Miss Sternberg, 25 years old, graduated from Miss Hall's School and Lake Forest College.
Her father is the general counsel and secretary of the Raymond Corporation, a maker of forklift trucks and other heavy equipment in Greene, N.Y.


All About/Beer; Behind All the Bonhomie, the Brewing Industry Gets Tough
Sometimes it's hard to tell if the beer stein is half full or half empty.
Just ask a brewer.
United States beer shipments increased 2.8 percent in 1990, to 193.2 million barrels, after years of essentially flat sales, according to Market Watch, an industry magazine.
Per capita consumption also rose, to 24.9 gallons last year from 24.4 gallons in 1989.
But shipments fell steeply in the first quarter of 1991 and are expected to be down again in the second quarter.


Castro Gets Attention, but Not Money, From Latin Leaders
Received with courtesy and little else by his fellow Latin American leaders, President Fidel Castro prepared to return to Cuba today after gaining only token gestures of friendship for his beleaguered Government.
During a two-day conference of leaders from all 21 of the world's Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking nations, Mr.
Castro pressed his requests for financial aid and other support to help Cuba pull out of its deep economic slide.
He also delivered familiar denunciations of the United States and its policies toward the third world.


100 Degrees of Suffering and Not Even a Record


Review/Jazz; Klezmer And Cool At the Y
The first half of the 92nd Street Y's Licorice Shticks, part of a continuing summer jazz series, had a whole set of dramatic moments.
The show, on Wednesday evening, brought together the groups of Kenny Davern and Giora Feidman, two clarinetists playing jazz and klezmer music respectively.
Both artists showed their skill at turning brief intervals of silence into a type of theater, even though comedy was part of the routine as well.
Mr.
Davern, backed by Dick Hyman on piano, Bob Haggart on bass and Tony di Nicola on drums, worked through older standards, using his woolly tone to caress graceful phrases.
Mr.
Davern generates a quiet, sure and intense swing, and as much as he fools around between songs, he's a master of the slow burn, in which a succession of careful ideas add up to immensely satifying performances.
And in a virtually unamplified setting, each nuance of his improvisation, from bent notes to sighs and gutteral honks, made its emotional point.


Sigrid Soderberg Weds James Pinsky
Sigrid Kristina Soderberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lars O. Soderberg of Flemington, N.J., was married yesterday to James Bartholomew Pinsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Pinsky of West Hartford, Conn., at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Nantucket, Mass.
The Rev.
David Franklin Gearhart officiated.
Mrs.
Pinsky, 35 years old, graduated from Sweet Briar College and is the director of human resources and legal support at the law firm of Farella, Braun &amp; Martel in San Francisco.
Her father is a consulting engineer.
Her mother, Nancy Soderberg, teaches English at Hunterdon Central High School in Flemington.


Jack Palance, Living the Western
Curly is described in the script as having such leathery skin he looks like a saddlebag with eyes.
It is whispered that he killed a man with a knife.
His way with words, when printable, is certainly attention-getting: "You might feel like a bunch of pigs on roller skates," he tells an agglomeration of tenderfoot types intent on "an adventure vacation."
The movie is "City Slickers," one of this summer's sleepers.
In the opinion of many viewers and critics, Curly, played by the veteran actor Jack Palance, is a treat.
In a small but memorable supporting role, he is the tough trail boss leading a real cattle drive that takes effete adventurers through mountains, storms and a raging river.
Some reviews suggested that after Curly dies about halfway through, things drag a bit.


What Makes Disparate People a Nation
To the Editor:
Despite "For the Nations of Eastern Europe, the U.S. Is More Symbol than Model" (The Week in Review, June 30), federalism -- the unique American contribution to politics -- has provided a solution for uniting disparate states and peoples.
And that without sacrificing their diversity, as may be seen in some 17 federal states from the United States in 1789 to Malaysia in 1963.
Federalism has influenced 12 more, from the ill-fated United Provinces of Central America in 1821-38 to Cameroon in 1961.
The European Community seems next.


Corrections
An article on May 19 about the Amboseli National Park in Kenya included an outdated reference to Wildlife Conservation International's specialist in the region.
As the organization pointed out in a letter on July 8, Dr.
David Western is senior conservationist, in charge of East African projects; Dr.
John Robinson became the organization's director in February 1990.


Diane E. Blanc, Lawyer, Is Wed
Diane Elizabeth Blanc and William Edward Ryan 3d, lawyers in New York, were married in New York yesterday.
The Rev.
Charles Murr performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Mrs.
Ryan is 29 years old and the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin G. Blanc of Rockville Centre, L.I.
She is a summa cum laude graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a J.D. from Harvard University.
She is on the legal staff of the New York City Council.
Her father is a vice president for finance at Advance Relocation Inc., a division of North American Van Lines in Oceanside, L.I.


Fashion; RITZY RIBS


From Oil Spills to Terrorist Threats
The soft-spoken, mild-mannered officer's name tag reads "Larrabee -- Coast Guard." Despite his self-effacing ways, Capt.
Richard M. Larrabee wields enormous authority: his full title is Captain of the Port of New York.
Captain Larrabee, who oversees a seaport with waterways traveled by 6,000 ships a year, is also responsible for oil spills and water pollution, search-and-rescue operations and the enforcement of scores of laws governing marine navigation, the safety of local rivers and harbors and their protection from terrorist threats.
He would coordinate maritime forces in the New York City area in case of a national emergency.


September Bridal For Miss DeFoyd
September wedding plans for Katherine West DeFoyd and D. Gordon Murray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Murray of Millbrook, N.Y., have been announced by her parents, Mrs.
Joseph C. A. Eckhardt of Ashland, Ore., and Jim L. DeFoyd of Houston.
The bride-to-be, 28 years old, is the projects coordinator for the New York City Mayor's Partnership Programs.
A graduate of San Francisco State University, she received a master's degree in public administration from New York University.
Her mother, Linda West Eckhardt, is a cookbook writer.
Her father is a lawyer.
Her stepfather is a psychiatrist.
Her stepmother, Margaret DeFoyd, is a radiology technician at Memorial Hospital in Houston.


Early Music: A Small Art, But Our Own
Those double dots and double bar lines in sonata scores are shorthand for "back up and play this part again." Two centuries later, musicians argue: is this an order or a suggestion?
You might ask the pianist Alfred Brendel, who has looked at little marks like these a third of the way through the long, long first movement of Schubert's B-flat Sonata and chosen not to see them.
It's not only the repeat signs that Mr.
Brendel ignores; it's also the transitional bars in Schubert's hand that take the music back to the beginning.


Other Viewpoints On Jet Noise
The article "Jet Noise: A New Battle Looms" included scant reference to the position of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey on the issue of local noise rules.
To complete the record, I would like to add the following:
We totally agree with the views of Patrick Russell of the New Jersey Coalition Against Aircraft Noise as to the legality of local restrictions on the operation of noisy Stage 2 aircraft.
The Airport Noise and Capacity Act of 1990 makes clear that while local regulations affecting Stage 3 aircraft must now be reviewed and approved by the United States Department of Transportation, Stage 2 regulations can be adopted by airport operators provided that 180 days' advance notice is provided and that the economic impact and the noise benefit of the rules are determined.


CRIME
There must have been healthier places to live after the Mexican Revolution, but none, surely, as exciting as the Mexico City of 1922 depicted in Paco Ignacio Taibo 2d's spellbinding novel THE SHADOW OF THE SHADOW (Viking, $18.95).
"Never before," marvels the author, "had the city seen such an underworld." Nor, as William I. Neuman's droll translation would have it, "such an extensive sewer system" for the efficient circulation of the city's criminal goods and services.
Amid the workers' daily riots and the nightly gang wars, four good friends -- a crime reporter, a shady lawyer, an impoverished poet and a union organizer -- try to maintain their ideological equilibrium by meeting each night in a hotel bar for a quiet game of dominoes.
Played in a spill of light that seems to hold all time in check to the hush of the conversation, the slap and click of the bones, that never-ending game becomes the serene centerpiece of this riotous book.


Big Banks, Bad Loans and Free Lunches
Will retail and small-business customers in New York willingly help the banks get out of their real estate holes?
That is Wall Street's current hope for New York banks, and was reflected in the gleeful initial reaction to the plan to merge Manufacturers Hanover into Chemical Bank.
All the New York bank stocks shot up, for one day.
The stock market as a whole waited a bit to get enthused, but by the end of the week the Dow Jones industrial average was up 35.55 points, to 3,016.32.


Counties Fail to Spend Million in AIDS Funds
NASSAU and Suffolk Counties have failed to spend more than $1 million in state AIDS money because of county hiring restraints and recruiting difficulties.


Lorraine Chow Wed to Mark Hansen
Lorraine Lee Chow, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Li Hang Chow of Cedar Knolls, N.J., was married in Madison, N.J., yesterday to Mark David Hansen, a son of Mrs.
Ann Leigh Hansen of Lawrenceville, N.J., and the late Dr.
David Hansen.
The Rev.
J.
Seymour Flinn performed the Episcopal ceremony at Grace Church.
Mrs.
Hansen, 25 years old, is to start work next month for I.B.M. as a marketing representative in Boston.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is a manager of analytical services at Warner Lambert in Morris Plains, N.J.
Her mother, Li Lee Chow, is a senior chemist for Pfizer in Parsippany, N.J.


Baseball; Carter Muzzles Skeptics, For Now
The smile was radiant, the body was lean and the mind was finally at ease.
Gary Carter had just completed a month any 37-year-old catcher could be proud of and he was not blushing about his accomplishments.
The man who had to beg for a job the last two winters has restored some luster to his career this summer as a reliable replacement with the Dodgers.
While he quieted those who had expressed doubt about him and said he should retire, Carter also silenced the critic lurking inside him.


Tigers Thrive With a Pitcher a Day
Considering that the Detroit Tigers have baseball's first All-Star strikeout team and the league's worst pitching staff, Sparky Anderson has done a remarkable job in keeping the team in what passes for a race in the American League East.
He recently pulled off one of his better maneuvers, starting seven different pitchers in the first seven games after the All-Star Game break.
The starters were Dan Gakeler, Frank Tanana, Walt Terrell, Bill Gullickson, Rusty Meacham, Mark Leiter and Scott Aldred.


Making a Difference; Building a Factory's Future
When Joel H. Beck was named director of manufacturing in the United States for Groupe Bull in 1987, a big part of his job was justifying the continued existence of the aging inner-city factory he had been running for the French computer company in Boston.
His biggest advantage, the 52-year-old ex-Marine says today, was that he thoroughly understood the challenge.
"I started there as an hourly worker in 1959," Mr.
Beck said.
"Coming up through the ranks, you get to know all the pressure points."


Commercialism Prompts Disgust
To the Sports Editor:
I read with disgust Richard Sandomir's column "How CBS Pays the Price for a 'Maddening' Deal" (The Times, June 19), in which he questions CBS's wisdom in including championship coverage of several N.C.A.A. nonrevenue sports as part of its $1 billion agreement with the N.C.A.A.


Cosmos Alumni in Doubleheader
Seven years after the collapse of the North American Soccer League, the Cosmos will hold a alumni doubleheader this evening at Giants Stadium to prove they are still beloved in metropolitan area soccer circles.
Fifty-four of the former Cosmos players are scheduled to participate, including such greats as Franz Beckenbauer of Germany (who coached West Germany to the World Cup title in Italy last year), Johan Neeskens of the Netherlands, and Carlos Alberto of Brazil.
Pele?
He will be there, to be feted between games.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My kitchen ceiling is covered with a stippled paint.
There is no exhaust fan, so there is grease on the ceiling.
I am now remodeling the kitchen and installing a fan, but have to paint the ceiling first.
If I clean the ceiling, it will remove the stipple.
How do I paint over the grease without the paint's becoming loose because of poor adhesion?
A.
I would not paint over the grease, for it almost always leads to trouble.
Wash it off first.
If the washing removes some of the stipple, you can always apply a new stipple paint that will give you the same texture.
Even after washing off most of the grease, I would still advise priming the ceiling with a stain-killing sealer like BIN, Kilz or Enamelac before proceeding with the regular paint.


State Adopts Greenway Concept For Hudson Valley
STATE legislators have approved the establishment of an open-space corridor, or greenway, along both sides of the Hudson River.
It is expected to provide a system of trails, green corridors and buffered, undeveloped lands extending from Westchester to Albany by the end of the century.
Passed as an amendment to the Environmental Conservation Law in the pre-dawn hours of the Legislature's closing session earlier this month, the measure provides technical and financial planning assistance to 82 communities in the 10 counties of the Hudson Valley, including 12 in Westchester.
It asks participants to plan open-space and economic development goals to preserve existing settlement patterns, prevent sprawl and produce a greenway.


Tracing 5 Generations of American Jews
"I'M like a cook," Anne Roiphe, the author of "The Pursuit of Happiness," said.
"I'll put in anything that will improve the seasonings."
In her sixth novel, a chronicle of five generations of a Polish-American family, Ms.
Roiphe has mixed a rabbi's daughter who sings with the Blue Onion Jazz Babies Band, a polo-playing dilettante, a Prohibition-era rumrunner and a Zionist gunrunner.


Lee Feind to Wed Roger Mondloch
Dr. and Mrs.
Carl R. Feind of Alpine, N.J., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Lee Ann Feind and Roger John Mondloch, a son of Joyce McCullough of Fairfax, Va., and the late Robert J. Mondloch.
Miss Feind, 27 years old, is the processing supervisor at ERA Five-Star Properties, a real-estate agency in Reston, Va.
She graduated from Lynchburg College.
Her father is a professor emeritus of clinical surgery at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons and an associate attending surgeon at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
Her mother, Helen Feind, is the president of Creative Theater, a musical theater for children in Englewood, N.J.


Split on Redistricting
The Justice Department's rejection of New York City's new council district lines has some members of the commission drawing the map considering major revisions.
Such a renewal of political wrangling could delay municipal elections.
Article, page 23.


The World; Syria's Tactical Leap Into the Peace Process
IMMEDIATELY after the gulf war ended, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d set off on his first Middle East peacemaking mission, buoyed by a simple supposition: that the American defeat of Saddam Hussein had opened a new "window of opportunity" for a peaceful resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
What Mr.
Baker seems to have discovered five trips later, though, when Syria finally accepted the American peace conference proposal, is that he was right about the window of opportunity but wrong about what had opened it.
It was not the end of the gulf war.
It was the end of the cold war.
More than any other Arab regime, the Syrian Government led by President Hafez al-Assad has been a creature of the competition between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Syria lived off the cold war for three decades, milking billions in economic and military aid from Moscow in return for being its most loyal Middle East ally and for allowing the Soviet Navy to use Syria's Mediterranean ports, from which it could better compete with the United States Sixth Fleet.
The Syrians could always count on the Soviets to protect them from the Americans in the diplomatic sphere, and to rearm them after every war with Israel.


Evelyn Kaplan Is Planning a September Wedding
September wedding plans for Evelyn Kaplan and Steven Herman Schulman, the son of Linda Raphael of Columbus, Ohio, and the stepson of Marc Raphael, have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Kaplan of Rye, N.Y.
Ms.
Kaplan, 24 years old, is an account coordinator at Hill &amp; Knowlton-New England, a public relations company, in Boston.
She is a graduate of Wellesley College.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Kaplan &amp; Kilsheimer.


The Business Of Pro Football
To the Sports Editor:
The way in which the New York Giants dispatched Mark Bavaro was a sobering and disturbing reminder that pro football is a business, first and foremost.


Quandary Created by Gain In Detecting Breast Cancer
Progress in detecting breast cancer in its early stage is confronting more and more women with an agonizing problem: widespread disagreement in the medical profession on how to treat them.
Because research has not yet yielded long-term answers about the best treatment for these breast tumors, women still reeling from the discovery that they have cancer must grapple with decisions that have no clear medical answer.
Is a mastectomy to remove the breast needed, or would breast-sparing lumpectomy surgery, along with radiation, do the job?
Is chemotherapy necessary to mop up cells that may have spread invisibly outside the breast?


Omaha's Becoming the Emerald City of the Plains
In the late 1980's when Conagra, the giant food-processing company whose labels include Swift, Hunt, Wesson and Chun King, was seeking a suitable site for a new corporate headquarters, this former cattle and railroad junction on the prairie hardly seemed fitting.
A study commissioned by the company to determine the best location had placed its existing base in Omaha 18th.


Headliners; The Senate Grits Its Teeth and Says Yes
IT reached the floor of the Senate at 8:47 P.M., and by 9:50 the vote was over, and it had passed.
Remarkable speed for a body known for a deliberateness bordering on the ponderous.
But then, the bill at hand was a pay raise.
By a 53-to-45 vote, senators decided that they could forgo the $23,068 they are allowed to earn from speaking fees each year as long as they simultaneously raised their pay by $23,200.
With that, they will earn $125,100 a year.
That is the same amount members of the House voted themselves in 1989, and that apparently stuck in the craws of many senators.
Not only did the 435 members of the House earn more than the nation's 100 senators did, but so did some Federal judges, officials, and even some House staff members.


Where Does a Busy TV Executive Find Time? Anyplace He Looks
WILLIAM F. BAKER lives by the clock.
With more than 30 years in broadcasting, Dr.
Baker, the president of WNET-TV, Channel 13, in New York, said he has been totally dominated by the second hands of the clocks in radio and television studios.
But when he is away from work, Dr.
Baker is just as likely to be confronting a clock -- or clocks.
He has about 80 of them at his home in Greenwich; even the stone gatehouse is alive with gentle ticking.


First Prokofiev, Then Pop!
About 90,000 people strolled into Central Park on Monday to be part of an elbow-to-elbow picnic on the Great Lawn and to hear a free concert by the New York Philharmonic.
The program of Prokofiev and Tchaikovsky ended with a display of fireworks.
The crowd roared approval, knowing that it had been part of a New York City ritual.
There will be two more Philharmonic concerts on the Great Lawn this month, and at least one in each of the other boroughs and in Westchester County; the number for information is (212) 875-5709.


In the Nation; A Costly 10 Percent
Among the people of 10 industrialized nations, those of the United States were found in 1990 to be the least satisfied with their health care system.
Yet, the U.S. allocates to medical care the highest proportion of income -- 12.2 percent of gross national product -- of any nation.
You don't have to be a brain surgeon to know that there's something wrong here -- spiraling expense not least.
The cost of corporate medical benefits rose, in an often cited example, to $3,161 per employee in 1990, 44 percent more than in 1988.


Eliza Carlson and Charles C. Lee Jr. Are to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Carlson of Gladwyne, Pa., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Eliza Anne Carlson, and Charles Carroll Lee Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee of Far Hill, N.J.
Ms.
Carlson, 24 years old, graduated from Yale University and is a research assistant at the investment management firm of Miller, Anderson &amp; Sherrerd in Philadelphia.
Her father is the president of Process Constructors, an engineering concern in Gladwyne.


A Caribbean Corner in Litchfield County
CARIBBEAN cuisine is rare in Connecticut, and finding an inn featuring such fare on a quiet road in the state's northwest corner is even more surprising.
The Salisbury Inn, between Salisbury and Canaan, looks like a typical white clapboard New England farmhouse, with a motel-style building to one side.
The house's interior -- a small, completely modern dining room with one mirrored wall, wood floors, well-spaced tables, armless Windsor chairs and soft lighting -- does not reveal the inn's double identity.
Only ceiling fans, an accent of hanging greenery and tiny red parrots stenciled in corners of the white walls offer clues.


Bootlegs: Industry's Bane, Fans' Bonanza
Record collectors, watch out for the Feds.
People who order bootleg CD's by mail have lately been finding Federal agents at their doors, as Rolling Stone recently reported.
It's part of a new crackdown on bootleg recordings, abetted by the anti-piracy program of the Recording Industry Association of America.
To music fans, piracy is one thing and bootlegging is another.
I'm all for efforts to eliminate pirated recordings, those cheap counterfeited cassettes that offer fuzzy copies of both the music and the packaging.
Performers who have slaved to perfect an album deserve to have it heard clearly; recording companies have a right to recoup their investments in recording and promotion.
And the person who buys a pirated tape probably won't buy the real thing. (Of course, a price cut for legitimate CD's and cassettes would undermine the pirates.)


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Musical Punctuation
Before Robert Geignetter of Northport practices on his musical instrument, he notifies the police, and his wife, Ethel, tells all the neighbors.
Mr.
Geignetter plays the cannon, so it makes sense to alert the nearby populace that the sounds they are about to hear are music and not war.


Streetscapes: The Flatiron Building; Suddenly, a Landmark Startles Again
PERHAPS it will never look as dramatic as it did in 1902 and 1903 as its surprising triangular form shot up at the foot of Madison Square.
But the cleaning of the facade of the Flatiron Building is still about as startling an architectural sight as the late 20th century can reasonably expect.
Day by day, crews are moving around the building in scaffold-width increments, swabbing off years of grime to reveal the bright light tan of terra cotta and brick.


'EXCUSE ME,' HE SAID
Suzanne Berne's distraught story of a brief encounter with a "flasher" may well represent the reaction of many women (Hers: " 'Excuse Me,' He Said," June 30).
There are some, however, who are capable of a cooler response.
A friend of mine tells of being the lone passenger on a city bus one day when a man boarded, sat down across from her, coughed for attention and opened his trench coat to reveal an erect penis.
She gave it a momentary glance, murmured, "Very nice," and went back to reading her novel.
The perpetrator hastily got off at the next stop.
E.
M.
HALLIDAY
New York, N.Y.


We Need Informed Discussion of Health Plans; Hospital Billing Errors
To the Editor:
We recently completed audits of charges for health-care services from hospitals and physician groups in the Kansas City area.
The results of this yearlong study have been startling.
All the invoices for service we reviewed had erroneous charges.


Technology; The Robots That Go Where Humans Fear to Tread
These workers do not mind toiling for hours in 130-degree heat and high humidity, or even working under water.
They stroll through deserted machine rooms looking for leaks and breakdowns.
They do not notice most radioactivity unless they are told to, in which case they do it better than a human.
They do get tired climbing stairs.


Back From Everest With Tales to Tell
AUDIENCES love to hear Ian Wade talk about his mountaineering expeditions, especially his ascent of Mount Everest last year.
Mr.
Wade, who lives in Easton, stood atop the 29,028-foot Everest, the world's tallest mountain, in May 1990, as a member of the Earth Day International Peace Climb, an American-Soviet-Chinese endeavor.
The climbers approached the mountain, which straddles the border between Nepal and Tibet, from the Tibetan side, the route taken by pre-World War II expeditions.
He recently recalled his varied adventures for the Appalachian Mountain Club in Fairfield, at a sporting goods store in New Rochelle, N.Y., and at two appearances in Manhattan, at the Explorers Club and the English-Speaking Union.


Making a Difference; Gaining Ground
The freefall of the real estate market may have others nervously pondering the future, but Dave Liniger, co-founder and chairman of Re/Max International Inc., is fairly sanguine.
A recently released survey of residential real estate transactions involving brokers showed Re/Max picking up the most market share of the country's seven biggest franchise brokerage chains.
The survey by Real Trends, an industry newsletter, reported that Re/Max, the second-biggest chain, increased its share to 7 percent in 1990, from 6.1 percent in 1989, edging up on the industry leader, Century 21, which dropped slightly to 10 percent, from 10.2 percent.


Making a Difference; A Second Chance for Grumman -- and Long Island
Paul C. Bavitz was a key part of the Grumman Corporation's unsuccessful effort during the mid-1980's to win the contract for a new Navy attack plane.
Now he and Grumman are getting a second crack at the program, and the stakes are high for the Bethpage, L.I.-based company.
Grumman said last week that it would bid to build the new plane, known as the A-X, as the leader of a team that includes the Boeing Company and the Lockheed Corporation.
The Navy is beginning a new competition following the decision earlier this year by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney to cancel an earlier version, the A-12, when it ran into severe cost and schedule problems.
The A-12 was being built jointly by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and the General Dynamics Corporation, which in 1985 beat out Grumman, among others, for the $50 billion program.


John Ellis Is Wed To Ailsa Moseley
Ailsa Moseley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Brady Moseley of Hamilton, Mass., was married yesterday in Byfield, Mass., to John Maguire Ellis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William V. Ellis of Gloucester, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas Oates performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Moseley Chapel of Governor Dummer Academy.
Mrs.
Ellis, 27 years old, graduated from St.
Paul's School in Concord, N.H., and attended Tufts University.
Her father is the president of the Sterling Racecourse in Boston.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
FLOATING COMMUTERS
Wealthy commuters from America's suburbs to nearby business and financial centers caused traffic jams in the early 1900's just as they do today, except that they were waterway tie-ups rather than highway or railway bottlenecks.


NORIEGA SEEKS USE OF SECRET PAPERS
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega argued in a closed hearing this weekend for the right to use United States Government secrets in his defense against drug-trafficking charges.
Mr.
Noriega, the deposed Panamanian leader, who was allowed out of jail to attend the hearing, wants access to more than 700 documents to bolster his contention that any links he had to cocaine smuggling had the approval of United States intelligence agencies.


Construction at Nazi Death Camp Site Stirs Protest
The construction of a shopping center here near the site of a wartime death camp has touched off an impassioned debate pitting the desire to never forget the Nazi past against eastern Germany's efforts to put its Communist past behind it.
The Kaiser supermarket chain's construction project, on a cobblestone road built during the war with slave labor from the Ravensbruck concentration camp about 600 yards away, has drawn outrage from Jewish groups, former inmates and others who consider it an insult to the tens of thousands of women and children who died there.


If You're Thinking of Living in: New Milford
TUCKED away from major highways and almost ignored by the 1980's housing boom, this tiny Bergen County borough of 2.2 square miles is a true bedroom community.
It is 98 percent residential, a short drive from Manhattan and, as one resident put it, "a family town."
Probably the last time New Milford was on a well-traveled thoroughfare was on Nov. 20, 1776, during the Revolutionary War.
On that date, said Howard W. Rose, the borough historian, Washington's army crossed New Bridge over the Hackensack River as it retreated from Fort Lee to Pennsylvania.


Italian Classic Updated for Summer Buffets
WHEN I was a teen-ager, my mother bought a copy of Elizabeth David's "Italian Cooking." It changed our lives.
Since we had been raised on English food (for us, spaghetti was something produced by spontaneous combustion in a can and served on buttered toast), the book was a revelation.
In its pages, she found a strange-sounding recipe, veal with tuna fish sauce.
A classic Italian dish dating from the 1890s, it was, Mrs.
David suggested, the perfect thing for a summer buffet.
And indeed, that summer I think we had vitello tonnato every time anyone came to dinner.
Guests would leave clutching the scribbled recipe in their hands, ready to surprise their own visitors in the future.


The Grown-Ups; A Few Drinks, a Few Laughs, A Few Momentous Decisions
THEY began 17 years ago at Rambouillet, just outside Paris, these annual summer gatherings, with a handful of national leaders gathered in relative obscurity to talk about economic problems.
But they have turned into the annual meetings of the Board of Directors of the Planet Earth, where political and military questions often dominate, where reputations and alliances and friendships are formed, and where great policy questions are pushed up or down the international agenda.
Which is, of course, why Mikhail S. Gorbachev wanted so badly to come here last week, even if it did expose him to derision as a Bolshevik beggar.
Critics complain that the G-7 summit conferences have become too elephantine and elaborate (this year's spectacular was a mini-tattoo, complete with lasers, fireworks and bands, in the courtyard of Buckingham Palace).
All the important decisions are made in advance, the critics say, and all the rough edges of real debate are smoothed away so the 3,000 or so journalists who now attend can concentrate on image-building for domestic politics.


Giving Credit Where Credit Is Due
To the Editor:
"Putting a Practical Spin on Training" (Managing, June 23) suggests that Noel M. Tichy, business professor at the University of Michigan, "is generally credited with pioneering the concept of action learning." While his name is frequently associated with action learning in the United States, he is not its developer nor its first or sole American advocate.


A Collection of Treasures
An Iranian silver bowl emblazoned with leaping tigers, a Lebanese copper warrior with hollow eyes, and an Egyptian pottery sphere that depicts a hedgehog curled up in fear are among the offbeat, visually compelling antiquities that Norbert Schimmel pursued over 35 years.
These artifacts and scores of others are on view in "Ancient Art: Gifts From the Norbert Schimmel Collection to the Metropolitan Museum of Art," a display of 120 objects that will remain at the museum through Sept. 1.
The exhibition includes most of the 150 items that the Berlin-born New York industrialist donated to the Metropolitan beginning in 1955.
Schimmel, who was 85 years old at his death last year, had given the bulk of his gift in the 1980's, including one of his greatest treasures -- 25 limestone reliefs from the Amarna period in ancient Egypt.
Two of these hefty wall decorations from a temple built in the 14th century B.C. by King Ikhnaton are in the show.
The rest are installed in a special gallery in the Egyptian Wing.


Help the Russians, Not Gorbachev
The London economic summit meeting ended without the leaders of the Group of Seven committing massive sums of money to prop up the Soviet political system and economy.
But American taxpayers should remain vigilant: the Bush and Gorbachev administrations will get together again to look for ways to finance the Soviet future.
The U.S. appears more committed to Mr.
Gorbachev than to a set of principles.
Before the Soviet economy can be reformed effectively, democratic values and methods must be allowed to sink deeper roots.
The Gorbachev regime faces a crisis of legitimacy.
It does not have popular support.
Otherwise, why would President Gorbachev avoid a vote like the one that elected Boris Yeltsin as leader of the Russian republic?
Only with democratically elected leaders does the Soviet Union have a chance of taking the steps necessary to avoid catastrophe, much less to raise its people's living standard.


Lucretia Osborne Weds Jonathon Wells
Lucretia Mott Osborne and Jonathon Hatfield Wells were married yesterday at the Foster Memorial Chapel at Lake Owasco in Scipio, N.Y.
The Rev.
John F. Smith, an Episcopal priest, and the Rev.
Ann E. Tottenham, an Anglican priest, officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederik R. L. Osborne of Auburn, N.Y.
The bridegroom, 31, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael H. Wells of Shrewsbury, Vt.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Glen Rock 176,500
515 Ackerman Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; deck, fireplace, rear yard; taxes $3,526.
Howell 121,000
24 Woodland Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 22-year-old ranch; full basement, pool, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $2,758.
Jackson 116,000
17 Liverpool Court  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 15-year-old ranch; c/a, 1-car garage, family room, patio; taxes $2,705.
Marlboro 160,000
19 Lakeview Drive  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 6-year-old ranch in adult community; 2-car garage, patio; monthly maintenance $135, taxes $4,069.
Ridgewood 292,000
375 Wastena Terrace  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, over 50-year-old colonial; new kitchen, fireplace, new plumbing, full basement; taxes $6,400.
Waldwick 175,000
14 Grove Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 55-year-old Cape Cod; h/w floors, new bath, full basement; taxes $3,449.
OTHER AREAS Scarsdale, N.Y. 300,000
153 Clarence Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 51-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room; taxes $6,227.
Darien, Conn. 264,000
4 Patton Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; fenced-in yard, screened porch, 0.20 acre; taxes $2,239.
Massapequa, L.I. 235,000
130 Windsor Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $4,800.


Where Time Comes From
To the Editor:
In his review of "The Arrow of Time" by Peter Coveney and Roger Highfield (June 23), James Trefil quotes St.
Augustine's reply to the query "What is time?": "If no one asks me, I know what it is. If I wish to explain what it is to him who asks me, I do not know." But St.
Augustine did not have the same difficulty in explaining where time came from.
He said it came out of the future, which didn't exist yet, into the present, which had no duration, and went into the past, which had ceased to exist.
ANTHONY SCARIANO  Chicago


This Week: Look Ahead
The midsummer lull is a good time to start thinking about next year's game plan.
Do you need better-raised beds, more manure and compost, a new, sunnier space for cut flowers and vegetables, fall cover crops to add nitrogen to the soil and make it tillable.
Even city dwellers can cut down on their garbage and make compost by using redworms.
In New York, agents at the Cornell Cooperative Extension, 15 East 26th Street, will teach you how to compost newspaper and food waste with worms in a box, right in your kitchen.
It's a great science project for kids and helps the planet, too.
Call (212) 340-2939 for more information.


'Macbeth' In a Noisy Jungle
AFTER an aimless "As You Like It," the Levin Theater Company's Summer Shakespeare Fest is offering a "Macbeth" with an agenda, ironbound by a concept and meticulously spun out in its visual details.
And even for a play that has been much interfered with -- modernized, politicized and reset in innumerable ways -- "Macbeth," according to the director William Esper's jungle fever view, presents several points of departure.
It may be the longest version yet of Shakespeare's shortest tragedy, it must be one of the noisiest and the people in it are painted blue.
But none of Mr.
Esper's differences bear the slightest claim to distinction.
In the Amazon rain forest, a tribe known as the Blue People is said to exist.
This production is set in their ancient so-called civilization, against a cacophony of thumping, knocking, shrieking, hooting, croaking, crowing, chirping, wailing, trilling, stomping and pounding.


Vegetables to Consider for Fall Harvest
THE middle of July hardly seems like the time to be thinking about fall harvests, but it is.
Vegetables planted now will be ready to eat in the cooler growing days of September on into October.
It is essential, however, to be speedy about getting to the garden centers to buy seed.
Only too soon seed racks will disappear, taken away by the dealers, or the supply will be sold out.
Mail order through the catalogues is the next best thing.


STRANGER THAN FICTION
Atlas writes of the "elusiveness of truth" in works of nonfiction.
This problem was well known to the historians of classical Greece and Rome, and they addressed it directly.
Thucydides states that he does not know precisely what historical figures said in momentous orations so he writes for them the speeches they might have or ought to have given.
Livy states that, when there are two versions of specific incidents, he will provide readers with both, and let
them
decide which one is true. ROBERT J. YAES
Lexington, Ky.


Dell Aims for the Big Leagues
Humbled leaders of big personal computer companies like I.B.M., Apple and and Compaq Computer have slashed prices, trimmed payrolls and even linked arms this year in various deals to share technology and revive an industry beset by a lag in new technology, financially ailing dealerships and a recession.
But not Michael Dell.
The 26-year-old Mr.
Dell is winning corporate customers, expanding his staff and grabbing market share by playing marketing hardball, stressing service and churning out reliable, innovative and lower-cost desktop models -- all I.B.M. compatible -- that fill market voids.


For Israelis, Talk or Pain
No matter what happens when Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d visits on Sunday, for the people of Israel his stop in Jerusalem will likely bring a profound change in their lives.
Of course, if the Israeli Government says yes, makes the requested concessions and agrees to attend a regional peace conference, there is the chance that at long last many Israelis could realize their fondest wish, to make peace with all their neighbors.
But the answer is widely expected to be no, meaning a worsening of tensions with the Arabs and expected economic repercussions from Israel's main benefactor, Washington.


Sunday Outing; An Inventor's Home on the Hudson
In 1844, Samuel F. B. Morse sent the first message over the wires of his newly invented telegraph system from Washington to Baltimore.
There, operators translated the dots and dashes of the Morse code into words: "What hath God wrought?"
Three years later, flush with money earned from his invention, Morse, who had been a poor artist, bought an estate called Locust Grove on a bluff in Poughkeepsie over the Hudson.


Katherine Brown Weds John Haworth
Katherine Ray Brown, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Brown of Conway, Mass., was married yesterday in Deerfield, Mass., to John Howard Haworth, the son of Mary Henley Haworth of Edmond, Okla., and the late E. Howard Haworth.
The Revs.
George and Andrea Anastos performed the Congregational ceremony at the First Church of Deerfield.
Mrs.
Haworth, 29 years old, is a direct-marketing specialist at the Lotus Development Corporation in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is the chief executive of the Monarch Life Insurance Company in Springfield, Mass.
Her mother, Mary Thorpe Brown, a social worker, is a founder of Family Therapy Associates in Greenfield, Mass.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending July 6 MANHATTAN East Midtown 365,000
480 Park Avenue (58th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, fireplace; maintenance $1,273, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Charles H. Greenthal Residential Sales)  East Village 685,000
242 East Fifth Street  3-family, 4-story, attached, brick town house; dining room, 3 fireplaces in primary duplex; dining area, fireplace in others; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in each; 20- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $3,155 (Broker: Eychner Associates-Kingman Associates)  Lincoln Center Area 210,000
205 West End Avenue (70th St.)  (Lincoln Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, terrace; maintenance $1,111, includes gas and electricity, 58% tax-deductible (Broker: Kuzmuk Realty)  Stuyvesant Square Area 275,000
301 East 22d Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,450-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area; maintenance $1,170, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman Associates)  TriBeCa 360,000
57 Warren Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, dining area, 13-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $770, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Bascom &amp; Sears)  BRONX  City Island 325,000
81 Buckley Street  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, private beach rights, 50- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $500 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Riverdale 145,000
4525 Henry Hudson Parkway  (Briar Oaks)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; remodeled kitchen and bath, terrace; maintenance $770, includes gas and electricity, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: ERA/ Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  BROOKLYN  Flatlands 180,000
1482 East 48th Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, terrace, hospitality suite on ground floor, 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,176 (Broker: Dwork &amp; Korn)  Sheepshead Bay 175,000
2293 East 29th Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Windsor Terrace 162,000
35 East 2d Street  2-family, detached, frame house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; two 1-car garages, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $700 (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  QUEENS  Astoria 278,000
32-14 38th Street  2-family, semi-attached, frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit; finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/Metalios Real Estate)  Fresh Meadows 262,000
56-08 186th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills 143,125
457 Leverett Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining area, c/a, 24- by 98-ft. lot; taxes $1,324 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Huguenot 260,000
800 Rathbun Avenue  2-family, detached, brick and frame house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 38- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)


Style Makers; Monique Carter, Professional Dresser
The fashion-conscious public might not recognize Monique Carter, but she doesn't mind.
Providing dressers, seamstresses and pressers to department stores, magazines and top designers is far more important, she said, than recognition.
Ms.
Carter, 43 years old, has worked as a professional dresser on and off since she was 18, when she began as a dresser for her grandmother Clara Johnson, who owned Clara Johnson Professional Dressers in Manhattan.


Data Bank/July 21, 1991
Housing Starts
June
May
April
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,040
982
981
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.3
0.2
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
79.3
79.0
78.6
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.7
0.7
0.5
Business Inventories
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
-0.5
0.3
-0.8
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$35.3
$35.6
$34.0
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$39.8
$40.1
$38.1
Coal Production
July 12
July 5
June 28
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
18,081
13,599
17,050


A Gardener's Guide to Sex, Politics and Class War
Call me bookish, but I bet there are many of us who choose their pastimes on the basis of the accompanying literature.
Fly-fishing would hold little appeal if not for the shelf-ful of classics that comes with it, and until snowmobiling or pickerel-fishing acquire a halfway decent literature, people like me will have no trouble leaving them alone.
After all, it isn't only God and nature that made the trout a more interesting creature than the pickerel; Norman Maclean and Thomas McGuane and William Humphrey deserve at least part of the credit.
It was the bookstore's long and unexpectedly lively shelf of garden writing that led me deep into the garden world.


New Yorkers, etc.
There's a little phrase -- five words, that's all -- that should not only be stricken from vocabularies but also be consigned to oblivion.
It is, "If only I had known."
The variations on this little beauty are "If you had only told me earlier," "Why didn't you say something before?" and "You never mentioned that to me -- what a pity!" They all boil down to an implication that if the other person had had earlier knowledge of whatever subject is under discussion, things would have been different.


Updated Classic


Chicago Journal; Artists Try to Recreate a Great Street
Under a giant tent in what used to be a vacant three-acre lot in the middle of downtown Chicago, 15-year-old Melvin Roberson is making plaster of Paris masks.
They are inspired by the nightmares that roused him as a child growing up in a tough neighborhood on the city's South Side.
One mask has bloated eyeballs and dead bodies falling from its mouth.
Melvin is one of 259 inner-city teen-agers who are turning their experiences into art in a pioneering effort to shoot some economic life into Chicago's old downtown, the city's original retail center before it was eclipsed by the glamor of North Michigan Avenue.


Finding Love


Another Young Star, Another Harper Loss
She will be 31 years old Aug. 15, which today made her double her opponent's age with a few months to spare.
In the 13 years Peanut Louie Harper has made her living hitting tennis balls, she has seen her share of teen-age phenoms, watched as they skyrocketed past her in the rankings.
Tracy Austin to Steffi Graf to Monica Seles to Jennifer Capriati, Harper has lost to them all, and never, she said, has felt a pang of envy.
"Once every few years, these special talents come along," she said.
"You can't compare yourself to them, it's not fair to. I'm just an ordinary, average person."


Give Him a Puppy. And Get the Lady a Gun
Only a year ago, movie audiences were thrilling to the sounds of breaking glass and flying expletives, but this summer's films bring to mind a different kind of dirty word: sensitive.
Scratch any one of this season's movie heroes and you will find a gentle, thoughtful, considerate guy, even if he happens to be a trained killer made partly of metal.
This summer's films are loaded with midlife crises, second thoughts about the fast track, commendable male role models and attitudes that are spiritually or politically correct.
Possibly as a consequence of so much exemplary masculine behavior, the season's heroines, in a marked departure from the window-dressing bimbo roles of just a year ago, are less likely to be lending support and comfort and more likely to be spitting nails.


Disease Kills 600 in Nigeria
An unidentified disease that is fatal in six days has killed about 600 people in southeastern Nigeria and prompted thousands of others to flee, doctors and community leaders say.
The disease is "characterized by fever, general body pain, jaundice, vomiting of blood, restlessness, inability to pass urine and coma followed by death," Dr.
Samuel Idiagbe told reporters on Friday.
Some towns in Bendel state, including Mbiri, Igbodo and Emuhu, are recording about six deaths a day from the disease, said Dr.
Idiagbe, medical director of Anioma Hospital in Agbor.


For Young Heads, Individuality Counts
A summer hat that shades tender noses, ears and shoulders from too much of a good thing is vital to a child's wardrobe.
The younger the child, the more important it is that the hat fit snugly enough to stay on; ties should be sturdy and resist willful fingers.
Ideally, a hat also should meet with the wearer's approval, expressing his or her individuality.
"From the age of 4, you can't just buy them any old hat and bring it home," said Roz Viemeister, owner of Shoofly, 506 Amsterdam Avenue at 84th Street in Manhattan.
"It's so personal." Her hats fit children 6 months to 6 years old.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My kitchen ceiling is covered with a stippled paint.
There is no exhaust fan, so there is grease on the ceiling.
I am now remodeling the kitchen and installing a fan, but have to paint the ceiling first.
If I clean the ceiling, it will remove the stipple.
How do I paint over the grease without the paint's becoming loose because of poor adhesion?
A.
I would not paint over the grease, for it almost always leads to trouble.
Wash it off first.
If the washing removes some of the stipple, you can always apply a new stipple paint that will give you the same texture.
Even after washing off most of the grease, I would still advise priming the ceiling with a stain-killing sealer like BIN, Kilz or Enamelac before proceeding with the regular paint.


UP AND COMING: Paul Brady; Irish, Yes. Quaint? Hardly.
"You know, you try to be a sensible human being, but at the same time you're programmed to be male," says the Irish singer-songwriter Paul Brady.
"That's what I write about. It's caused me the most pain and upset of my life, trying to deal with my own makeup. It's sort of an exorcism." Mr.
Brady's lyrics are terse, frequently rueful reflections on what he calls "the male dilemma." On "Trick or Treat" (Fontana/Mercury), Mr.
Brady's latest album, the themes of love and betrayal loiter anxiously around the edges of the record's glossy pop sound.
Enormously popular in Ireland, where his records linger at No. 1, the 44-year-old Mr.
Brady is relatively unknown in this country.
Jon Pareles of The Times has referred to Mr.
Brady's writing style as that of an "Irish Jackson Browne" and likened his "high, liquid tenor" voice to that of Jesse Colin Young.
Mr.
Brady's songs have been recorded by Tina Turner and Carlos Santana; Eric Clapton has tapped him to open concerts in Europe.
Bonnie Raitt, another fan, has recorded two of his compositions on her new hit album, "Luck of the Draw": in the title song, a waitress awaits her big break as a screenwriter; in "Not the Only One," romantically disenfranchised protagonists find redemption.
Mr.
Brady sings backup on both songs, and Ms.
Raitt performs a duet with Mr.
Brady on the title track of "Trick or Treat."


Results Plus
BOXING  Moon Keeps Title


Data Update
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
June
May
June 90
Rents
170.5
0.7
8.7
Homeowner's costs
170.7
0.9
4.3
Fuel and utilities
107.2
2.6
4.9
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester,
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex,
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.83
9.86
10.31
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.30
7.29
8.53
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.68
9.69
10.14
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.26
7.34
8.23
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.73
9.72
10.22
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.15
7.14
8.48
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
10.04
10.02
10.46
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.74
7.73
8.61
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
6.30
6.40
8.09
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.23
9.23
9.83
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Magazine Says Hitler Planned to Abduct Pope
Dusting off an old piece of Vatican history, a Roman Catholic monthly magazine says in its current issue that Hitler planned during World War II to take over the Vatican, seize Pope Pius XII and his cardinals and hold them hostage outside Italy.
The Rome-based magazine, 30 Giorni, bases its conclusion in large part on written statements made by a wartime German Ambassador to Italy, Rudolf Rahn, who described the kidnapping plot and attempts by him and other senior officials to head it off.
"We agreed that carrying out such a plan would have had tremendous consequences and that it had to be blocked at all costs," Mr.
Rahn said in a letter that he sent in the early 1970's to an American Jesuit scholar who had studied and written about the affair.
The scholar, the Rev.
Robert Graham, said Mr.
Rahn died about 10 years ago.


Misunderstood All Around
To the Editor:
In her article about Clement Greenberg  [ "Catching Up With the High Priest of Criticism," June 23 ] , Deborah Solomon says that no American art critic has been more influential.
I would add that no art critic, or writer of any kind, has been more thoroughly misunderstood.


East Anglia
To the Editor: The article about the north coast of Norfolk (Travel, June 16) neglected to mention that the Shrine of Our Lady at Little Walsingham is an Anglican facility administered by priests of the Church of England, appearances to the contrary notwithstanding.
Services for Roman Catholics are available in the nearby village of Houghton St.
Giles.
The site of the original shrine may also be visited.
It lies in the ruins of the Augustinian priory across the road from the Anglican shrine.
JACK BEIERLE White Plains


See Julia Act. Even Better, See Julia Jilt.
Is she Mary Pickford or Elizabeth Taylor?
America's sweetheart or a celebrity tart?
Even while Julia Roberts's latest movie, "Dying Young," is flopping at the box office, the Julia Roberts phenomenon is flourishing.
Last month the tabloids raced to keep up with her personal life: Did she fall for Jason Patric before or after she called off her wedding to Kiefer Sutherland, just three days before the ceremony?
She was the heartbroken bride, an object of sympathy, when photographs surfaced of her almost-groom with a stripper.
But a few weeks later, one tabloid ran a photo of her and Mr.
Patric under the headline "Jilting Julia." Jay Leno joked that he planned to unload the blender he'd bought for Julia and Kiefer on Donald and Marla.
No detail was too small to report.
Even now, obsessive fans might be wondering what the bridesmaids will do with those $425 Manolo Blahnik dyed-to-match sea-foam green shoes.


Behind Monty Hall's Doors: Puzzle, Debate and Answer?
Perhaps it was only an illusion, but for a moment here it seemed that an end might be in sight to the debate raging among mathematicians, readers of Parade magazine and fans of the television game show "Let's Make a Deal."
They began arguing last September after Marilyn vos Savant published a puzzle in Parade.
As readers of her "Ask Marilyn" column are reminded each week, Ms. vos Savant is listed in the Guinness Book of World Records Hall of Fame for "Highest I.Q.," but that credential did not impress the public when she answered this question from a reader:


Ola Nagy Is Wed To Robert Rech
Ola Jane Nagy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Nagy of Richmond, was married yesterday in Charlottesville, Va., to Robert Charles Rech, a son of Jane W. Rech of Huntingdon Valley, Pa., and the late Philip C. Rech.
The Rev.
Marvin F. Kerby, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the chapel of the University of Virginia.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia, where she is a law student and a member of The Law Review.
Her father is the president of Recoupe Inc., which sells wastepaper recycling systems, in Richmond.


A Vote of Confidence in Outward Bound
To the Editor:
Based on feedback from the 300 or so of our Home Depot managers who have taken part in Outward Bound programming in the last seven years, our involvement has been valuable. ("Back From the Great Outdoors," Managing, May 19.) We do not require managers to attend Outward Bound.
We offer it without arm-twisting.
In fact, more company employees than we can accommodate ask to take part.


Life in Splitsville
DIVORCE
An American Tradition.
By Glenda Riley.
Illustrated. 262 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $24.95.


Other Viewpoints On Jet Noise
The photographs accompanying the jet noise article of June 16 ("Jet Noise: A New Battle Looms"), in which noise monitoring equipment is shown, are symbolic of the Port Authority's strategy to create the impression that it is concerned about the noise pollution generated by its business.
That antiquated noise monitoring system at Newark International Airport was installed in 1972.
Despite tremendous improvements in noise monitoring system technology, where the focus has now shifted from noise monitoring to noise management, the Port Authority continues to postpone installation of such a system.


Business Diary
COMPANIES Chemical Takes On a Partner, and a Giant Is Born


RECORD BRIEFS
Haydn: 'The Creation'
Soloists; Stockholm Radio Chorus; Stockholm Chamber Choir; Berlin Philharmonic conducted by James Levine.
Deutsche Grammophon 427 629-2; CD.


Technology; The Robots That Go Where Humans Fear to Tread
These workers do not mind toiling for hours in 130-degree heat and high humidity, or even working under water.
They stroll through deserted machine rooms looking for leaks and breakdowns.
They do not notice most radioactivity unless they are told to, in which case they do it better than a human.
They do get tired climbing stairs.


Postings: Buying Distressed Projects; North Jersey Revivals
Toll Brothers, one of the region's leading builders of higher-priced houses, is finding new opportunities in the residential building slump by taking over distressed development projects from other investors.
The company, which is based in Huntingdon Valley, Pa., will open two new single-family developments in Northern New Jersey this month.
It bought the land and the development permits from VBS Bancorp Inc., parent company of Valley Savings Bank, which operates throughout Bergen County, and from the Glendon Development Company of Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Toll Brothers would not disclose the purchase prices of the properties.


Diane Morelli Weds Steven Hildner
Diane Alexandra Morelli, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ondino A. Morelli of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday in Purchase, N.Y., to Second Lieut.
Steven Talbot Hildner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Hildner Jr. of Rye.
Msgr.
Donald J. Pryor performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Manhattanville College chapel.
Mrs.
Hildner, 24 years old, graduated from Manhattanville and is studying for a master's in education at Iona College.
Her father is a dentist in Yonkers.


Village Captured in Photos, 60 Years Apart
IN the 1920's, a retired chemist who had recently moved to this Hudson River community from Brooklyn explored his new surroundings with camera in tow and a scientist's perspective, diligently photographing village scenes and meticulously documenting the images for future generations.
But Dr.
Arthur C. Langmuir, photographing nearly 1,100 local scenes over two decades, also had another mission.
The photographer, historians say, was a man ahead of his time, an environmentalist before it was fashionable to be one.


Trade in Fake Documents Thrives In Neighborhoods of Immigrants
Amid the shimmering saris, golden bangles and bustle of the bazaar that stretches T-shaped along 74th Street and 37th Avenue in Jackson Heights, Queens, an underground industry is flourishing almost out of hand: the trade in phony work documents and promises of the real thing.
Like many other immigrant neighborhoods, Jackson Heights is the scene of a grand new immigration fraud.
The practitioners don't hang out shingles, but are easy to find: corrupt storefront operators, immigration brokers, travel agents, notaries, consultants, lawyers and freelance operators all over the shopping district that caters to the area's Indian residents.


Ashley Pratt and Paul Tarr Are Wed
Ashley Adams Pratt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Loring G. Pratt of New York, was married in Haines Falls, N.Y., yesterday to Paul Richard Tarr, the son of Paul M. Tarr Jr. of Lansing, Mich., and Dorothy Rubin of Chicago.
Bishop James Mase Ault of the United Methodist Church in Fogelsville, Pa., performed the ceremony at the country home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Tarr, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan, as did her husband, and also studied at the French Culinary Institute in New York.
She is a cook at George's Ocean Terrace Restaurant in La Jolla, Calif.
Her father is a member of the individual investor services department of Morgan Stanley in New York.


Banks Are Refusing Loans for Studios
IN a city where space is the most precious commodity, the studio apartment is accepted as full-fledged housing by many New Yorkers for whom fold-away furniture and closet-sized kitchens are a way of life.
But in recent months some mortgage lenders have turned their backs on this quintessential form of New York City housing.


Young Drops a Few Hints the Jets' Way
By the time Lonnie Young got out of Phoenix, the Cardinals' management had a pretty good idea he didn't want to be there.
The veteran defensive back had dropped a few hints.
"The Cardinals hold a six-week summer school in May and the first thing I did was not go to that at all," said Young, who was acquired by the Jets on June 12 for an undisclosed draft choice.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the marriage of Courtney Page Brown and Paul Gregory Lafortezza misstated the type of ceremony and referred incorrectly to the bride.
The Rev.
J.
Diane Mowrey, a Presbyterian minister, performed a Presbyterian ceremony.
The bride is keeping her name.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Aquebogue 142,000
Ida Lane
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1-year-old colonial; basement, fireplace, deck, 0.50 acre; taxes $3,100.
Commack 300,000
2 Timber Ridge Drive  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; dining room, den, basement, fireplace, pool; taxes $6,500.
East Northport 242,500
3 Foothill Lane  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old center-hall colonial; eat-in kitchen, den w/fireplace, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $5,100.
Kings Park 151,000
47 Longfellow Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 17-year-old high ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, attic, attached 1-car garage; taxes $4,200.
Massapequa 235,000
130 Windsor Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Shoreham 162,000
20 Reynolds Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 13-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,300.
OTHER AREAS Scarsdale, N.Y. 300,000
153 Clarence Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 51-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room; taxes $6,227.
Darien, Conn. 264,000
4 Patton Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; fenced-in yard, screened porch, 0.20 acre; taxes $2,239.
Jackson, N.J. 116,000
17 Liverpool Court  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 15-year-old ranch; c/a, family room, patio; taxes $2,705.


We Need Informed Discussion of Health Plans; Medicare Overcharges
To the Editor:
It comes as no surprise that Medicare is improperly charging as many as four million of the elderly poor Medicare premiums from which they should be exempt.
From physician visits to skilled nursing and home health care, Medicare wrongly requires millions of elderly and disabled beneficiaries to bear health-care expenses covered under the Medicare laws.


A la Carte: Bar Snacks
A news release from Barney's, a rustic early American inn in Locust Valley, makes no mention of tapas, the popular appetizers and hors d'oeuvres that accompany sherry in the bars and restaurants of Spain.
But the announcement that "Barney's adds bar menu, luscious samplings of Barney's menu now at cocktail hour," amounts to the same thing.


It Hit 100!! (And It Was the First Time Since 1980)


Coins
Soviet Palladium
Several special-issue coins have been announced in recent weeks.
While their value may not increase rapidly, they hold interest for the specialty collector.


Seductive Rarotonga
THE inhabitants call it Raro, which is the sound my rented Yamaha 50 motorcycle makes revving up to circle Rarotonga.
Just about everybody rides one.
A tank of gas will take you at least three times around the mostly paved and level 19-mile coastal road.
Rarotonga is the largest and most accessible of the Cook Islands, 15 in all, scattered across the South Pacific.
Originally dubbed the Hervey Islands by humble Captain Cook, who happened upon a few of them during his voyages in 1773 and 1777, they were renamed by the Russian cartographer John von Krusenstern in 1824.
Captain Cook never actually saw Rarotonga, however.
The first European visitors were the mutinous crew of the Bounty in 1789, and from Raratonga they sailed on to Pitcairn Island in their search for a refuge from the British Navy.
The mutineers are said to have given the inhabitants of Rarotonga the seeds for their first orange trees.
Just as the men of the Bounty made a call at Raro without settling, so do today's visitors, most of whom are coming from or going to other South Pacific destinations.
For most people Rarotonga is a stopover rather than a goal and, after the 10-hour flight from Los Angeles, it's certainly a welcome one.


Sally Anne Braks Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Braks of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Sally Anne Braks, and George C. Guenther Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Guenther of Berwyn, Pa.
Miss Braks, 25 years old, is an associate producer for the "Inside Edition" television news program, which is syndicated by King World Productions in New York.
She and her fiance, 27, are graduates of the University of Richmond.
Her father is the executive vice president of Elmhurst Dairy and Steuben Foods in Jamaica, Queens.
He is the chairman of the board of the School of the Holy Child in Rye, N.Y.


The Missing Campaign Pinch-Hitting for the Democrats
In just a year, the Democrats will head home from a hard week in Madison Square Garden settling on their candidate for President and their priorities and platform.
But now, with only a year to go, they have no plausible challenger to President Bush.
They have little in the way of common priorities or program, little even perhaps by way of a party.
That's not a problem merely for the Democrats, intimidated by Mr.
Bush's virtuosity in foreign affairs and harsh wedge politics at home.
The lack of coherent opposition also constitutes a problem for the public.
With Congressional Democrats working so often in coalition, not opposition, what's sorely missing is the adversarial debate that a campaign promises, the debate needed to force the right choices for the right problems.


After 2 Weeks and 10 Losses, Reds Finally Get a Victory
The Cincinnati Reds stopped their 10-game losing streak today, with Eric Davis hitting a three-run homer in the first inning and the defense turning five double plays to hold off the Pittsburgh Pirates, 3-2.
Cincinnati won for the first time since July 5 and halted a nine-game losing string against the Pirates.
The Reds also prevented what would have been their longest losing streak in 25 years; they had lost more than 10 in a row since the 1966 team lost 11 straight.


Quotation of the Day
"A suspension of the boycott, of course, would signal for one thing a willingness to reconcile with Israel, and clearly reciprocal confidence-building moves of this nature have got to improve the climate for peace." -- Secretary of State -- James A. Baker 3d.  [ 8:1. ]


Miss Boss Weds Bradley Dorman
Robin Lisle Boss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell A. Boss of Warwick, R.I., was married in Narragansett, R.I., yesterday to Bradley Page Dorman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Brian A. Dorman of Warwick.
The Rev.
Henry F. Anthony officiated at St.
Peter's-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Dorman, 26 years old, is the manager of international subsidiary financial and administrative services at A. T. Cross Company, a maker of fountain pens and mechanical pencils in Lincoln, R.I.
Her father is the company's president and chief operating officer.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.


History's Kilroy
Hidden in the richly carved Gothic portals of Chartres Cathedral in France are some 75 sculpted human figures, surrounded by leaves and vines.
Known as the Green Man, this visual motif has been little explored, despite its appearance in Romanesque and Gothic churches throughout northern and Mediterranean Europe.
The image is the subject of GREEN MAN: The Archetype of Our Oneness With the Earth (HarperCollins, Cloth, $27.95; Paper, $14.95), written by the poet William Anderson and abundantly and beautifully illustrated by the photographer Clive Hicks.
The book traces the evolution of the image of the Green Man through mythology, religion, art and architecture, dwelling particularly on its incorporation into Christian symbolism.
Osiris, Dionysus, the illuminated Book of Kells, Martin Luther, Robin Hood and the contemporary Gaia hypothesis all figure in Mr.
Anderson's complicated, though clearly presented, discussion.
A prominent theme of the book is the connection between the artistic and architectural use of the Green Man, which has fluctuated over the centuries, and contemporary awareness and treatment of the natural world.
Not surprisingly, the theme becomes ponderous at times, especially in the last chapter, where the author calls for a return of veneration for nature through its symbol, the Green Man.
But the impressive and creative scholarship of the book is not entirely undermined.


Prince Charles Pursues a Green and Pleasant Land
In a dim attic office in St.
James's Palace, plans are afoot for the Prince of Wales's second annual Summer School in Civil Architecture, which will begin on Aug. 3.
This program, Prince Charles's most recent attempt to erase what he sees as the blot of modernism on the British cityscape, has provoked a good deal of media attention and something akin to hysteria among architects.
Supporters hope the school will reintroduce the beauty and civility lost since the introduction of modernist architecture.
Opponents, mostly modernist architects, fear that the Prince's intervention has put a hex on their efforts to grab important building contracts in the United Kingdom.
In an age of computers, professors of architecture disdain a return to the old-fashioned life drawing and crafts training that form the basis of the summer school curriculum.


Vegetables to Consider for Fall Harvest
THE middle of July hardly seems like the time to be thinking about fall harvests, but it is.
Vegetables planted now will be ready to eat in the cooler growing days of September on into October.
It is essential, however, to be speedy about getting to the garden centers to buy seed.
Only too soon seed racks will disappear, taken away by the dealers, or the supply will be sold out.
Mail order through the catalogues is the next best thing.


Postings: First Round to a Shareholder; The Right to a B. &amp; B. in a Co-op
In the latest legal skirmish over what may and may not be done in a cooperative apartment house, the board of the Diplomat, a 140-unit building at 345 East 73d Street, has lost round one in its effort to stop a shareholder from operating a bed-and-breakfast in his two-bedroom apartment.
Justice Irma Vidal Santaella of New York State Surpreme Court issued a temporary restraining order on July 9 that prohibits interference with the venture.
The shareholder, Peter Hoffman, told the court he had been taking fee-paying guests since 1987, but never for more than 10 days.
He added that similar use of co-ops "has become quite widespread." The manager for the building, Goodstein Management, advised Mr.
Hoffman in December that he was violating his proprietary lease, and then began to "harass and interrogate" his guests in January, Mr.
Hoffman said.


Are These Women Bullies?
I never thought I'd find myself feeling sorry for Warren Beatty.
This aging, crinkly-eyed Lothario, with his implacable yen for ever-younger and more visible specimens of femaleness, is hardly the sort of man to strike a chord of sympathy in a woman's heart.
Still, as I watched Mr.
Beatty play -- or try to wiggle his way out of playing -- the assigned role of Boy Toy in Madonna's "Truth or Dare," I felt myself wince.
In one scene, Mr.
Beatty, famously ambivalent about the limelight, is urged by Madonna to venture closer toward the camera.
The vulgar moniker with which she commands him reduces the actor to his licentious absurdum.
This is not lost on Mr.
Beatty, who looks stricken.


Modell Has Always Taken Risks and Doesn't Plan to Stop
The life of Arthur Bertram Modell is a colorful mosaic that overflows with 66 years of pain, triumph, tragedy and humor.
Modell, second only to the Giants' Wellington Mara in years of service among the National Football League's 28 owners, has steered the Cleveland Browns for 30 years.
Back in 1961, when the N.F.L. numbered only 13 teams and his peers included George Halas and Art Rooney, Modell was, in his own recollections, a shy and timid owner.


Postings: Reversing Decline; From S.R.O. To a Hotel On West 77th
When the limestone-and-brick building on the southeast corner of Broadway and 77th Street opened in 1919 it was an opulent apartment building.
But a steady decline over the years reduced its status to that of a single-room-occupancy hotel.
A few years ago a group of investors took a 49-year lease on the property and embarked on a renovation project.
The result of their effort, which is now nearing completion, is the Broadway American Hotel, one of the few such lodgings on the Upper West Side.


Nowhere to Go: The Palestinians After the War
ZIAD ABU ZAYYAD, A 51-YEAR OLD Palestinian journalist, sat with his wife and eight children under a framed embroidery that his wife had finished sewing only the day before.
"There is no place like home," the embroidery read, in English.
For Zayyad, it was his first day at home in the West Bank town of Bethany in six months.
He had just been released from an Israeli prison where he had shared a cell, 13 feet by 11 feet, with seven other men who, like him, were being held without formal charges or a trial.


Ms. Williamson Wed in Massachusetts
M.
Jane Williamson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Claude Williamson of Wayland, Mass., was married yesterday in Wayland to Stephen Van Rensselaer Winthrop, a son of Mrs.
Nathaniel T. Winthrop of New York and the late Mr.
Winthrop.
The Rev.
Kenneth Sawyer, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the First Parish Church.
The bride, who is keeping her name, was until recently the assistant executive secretary at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in Washington.
A cum laude graduate of Harvard University, she received a law degree from Duke University and is to start studies for a doctorate in clinical psychology at the University of Virginia in the fall.
Her father, who is retired, was an antenna engineer at the Mitre Corporation, an engineering research and development company in Bedford, Mass.


Italian Classic Updated for Summer Buffets
WHEN I was a teen-ager, my mother bought a copy of Elizabeth David's "Italian Cooking." It changed our lives.
Since we had been raised on English food (for us, spaghetti was something produced by spontaneous combustion in a can and served on buttered toast), the book was a revelation.
In its pages, she found a strange-sounding recipe, veal with tuna fish sauce.
A classic Italian dish dating from the 1890s, it was, Mrs.
David suggested, the perfect thing for a summer buffet.
And indeed, that summer I think we had vitello tonnato every time anyone came to dinner.
Guests would leave clutching the scribbled recipe in their hands, ready to surprise their own visitors in the future.


A SHOT IN THE ARM FOR THE F.D.A.
Cancer patients expected the energetic new Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, Dr.
David A. Kessler, to move quickly to make new lifesaving drugs available ("A Shot in the Arm for the F.D.A.," by Herbert Burkholz, June 30).
But this "shot in the arm" may yet prove to be a stab in the back for cancer patients.
By his punitive action against a leading drug company for promoting off-label use of a chemotherapy drug, he set into motion a process that may deter the dissemination of advanced-treatment information by other pharmaceutical companies.
Moreover, health insurers, who need little encouragement in this regard, will feel emboldened to further deny reimbursement for state-of-the-art cancer treatment.
BEVERLY ZAKARIAN
Brooklyn


Travel Advisory; Phone Warning For Callers From Hotels
Some hotels and public pay phones are charging up to three times more than major long-distance companies for the same call, says A.T.&amp;T.
Many hotels and public phones subscribe to alternate operator services, small phone companies that charge substantially more for long-distance calls.
A.T.&amp;T. estimates that more than 200 such carriers exist.
Before making a call, the company advises, hotel guests should find out what carrier their hotel subscribes to.
At a public pay phone, callers should listen for the recording that identifies the phone company.
If it isn't one of the major long-distance companies, they should dial the appropriate access code to connect them to the phone company they wish to use.
Access code to A.T.&amp;T.: 10-288-0; MCI: 10-222-0; U.S.
Sprint: 10-333-0.


A New Candor Emerging in B &amp; B Guidebooks
IN the 11 or 12 years since the bed-and-breakfast boom began in the United States, the publishing of B &amp; B books has snowballed.
A recent roundup in the Bed and Breakfast Industry Sourcebook, published by the American Bed &amp; Breakfast Association, enumerated more than 50 guidebooks, listings and collections of recommendations, including such publications as "Motorcycle B &amp; B" and "Smoke Free Travel Guide."
But a shakeout may be on the way.
One nationwide organization of B &amp; B's, after tangling with some painful realities, has undertaken to grade its members, publishing two guidebooks for the United States, one for the East and one for the West, with inspection-based ratings.
Each place that passed muster -- and more than 10 percent did not -- gets a write-up by the editors and a rating.
The ratings, similar to the Mobil Guide system and the A.A.A.
Tourguide diamonds, this year range from one crown, "acceptable, meets basic requirements" to four, "outstanding." In future editions, a fifth crown will go to establishments that stay at the top level on a second inspection.


Central America
To the Editor: Belize is the hot touristic Caribbean destination.
Some of the cays have been overbuilt, as is the case with San Pedro on Ambergris Cay, but there are still many isolated resorts on secluded beaches, quiet and private, much as San Pedro was when I first visited Ambergris Cay 17 years ago.
From Belize City we took daytrips to Mayan ruins: west to Xunantunich, northwest to Lamanai (highly recommended), and north to Altun Ha, having lunch at the Maruba resort in Maskall Village.
Each is a maximum of two hours by car from Belize City; the roads are good, and the combination of car and river boat offers wonderful scenery.
Belize City has a unique charm for a Central American city, with many first-class hotels like Radisson Fort George, Ramada and Biltmore Plaza.


Dong Beijing a 2d Favor?
As the Senate prepares to vote on whether to suspend trade advantages for China, many experts say the initial beneficiaries of such a cutoff would be the very hard-liners that the sanctions are aimed at.
The Senate is expected to vote soon, perhaps Monday, on revoking most-favored-nation trade advantages.
The goal of the cutoff would be to encourage China to free dissidents from its prisons, end the use of torture, and ease the repression that prevails from Tibetan monasteries in the west to universities in eastern cities like Shanghai and Harbin.


Another Look at the 60-Hour Week
To the Editor:
I read "Productivity and the White Collar" (Forum, July 7) with interest.
While I agree with five of the six points, I take issue with the sixth, namely: "How hard are people working?" The question is very valid, but saying that "people should be willing to put in 60-hour weeks if conditions are right. . ." is without much basis.


Sex, Demons and War of TV Ratings Enliven Court Battle of 2 Evangelists
In the battle of the television evangelists Marvin Gorman versus Jimmy Swaggart, the court record is replete with elements of alleged sexual misconduct with female church members, reports of a deaf mute who spoke under demonic possession and "personal moral failures."
All this in only the first week of a trial over a $90 million defamation suit brought by Mr.
Gorman, who accuses Mr.
Swaggart of sabotaging his quest for higher television ratings, not to mention revenge.


The Executive Computer; For Face-to-Face Talks, Ask Your Machine First
Most business deals require some type of negotiation, whether it is to forge a labor contract or figure out how to get people to work together effectively.
Few executives, however, have formal training in negotiation skills.
So when the negotiations are hardball, some companies are turning to software.
Negotiator Pro ($299 from Beacon Expert Systems Inc., Brookline, Mass., 617 738-9300) is an expert system program for I.B.M.
PC and Apple Macintosh computers.
It is based on the premise that negotiation is more of a skill that can be learned than an art, and that a computer, which is inherently devoid of any personality, can help an executive plan an effective negotiation with other humans by examining their personality types.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Uecker on the Mend
BOB UECKER underwent surgery for an abdominal aneurysm on Friday and was reported resting comfortably afterward.
Doctors at the hospital in Milwaukee said that Uecker, a Brewers broadcaster who gained fame for his self-deprecating humor about his undistinguished major league career, would be in the hospital for about 10 days and should be able to resume normal activities in six to eight weeks. (AP)


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MUSICAL ELABORATIONS  By Edward W. Said. Columbia University, $19.95.


Frances Daniels To Marry in Fall
Edwin A. Daniels Jr. and Sidney E. Daniels, both of Baltimore, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Frances Stewart Daniels, to Brodie Lyle Cobb, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Brodie Cobb of Dallas.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Daniels, 29 years old, is a special-events manager in San Diego.
She and her fiance graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is the executive director of the Rouse Company Charitable Foundation in Columbia, Md., and was a vice president of the Rouse real-estate development company.


Shoreham Dismantling Is Upheld by Rehnquist
Proponents of the Shoreham Nuclear Power Station on Long Island failed yesterday in Washington to delay a license that permits the plant's owner to begin dismantling it.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist denied the request, a spokeswoman for the United States Supreme Court said.


Sunday Dining; Between the Brunch and Dinner Hours
Lower Manhattan continues to spawn restaurants and nightclubs of every stripe.
Many bargains can be found between the two urban coastlines.
Rents are still generally lower than in most uptown neighborhoods.
And because the nightlife is so poopular downtown, restaurants tend to keep later hours.
Here are three spots to consider.
Le Lucky Strike
59 Grand Street, (212) 941-0479 -- Le Lucky Strike, which opened in late 1989, is a moderately priced bistro in SoHo that looks as if it has been there forever.
In fact, this creation of Keith McNally (the Odeon, Cafe Luxembourg and Nell's) and four partners is in the former La Gamelle, a bohemian hangout that had the bad timing to be a rough-and-tumble bistro before rough-and-tumble bistros became the rage.


U.N. Says Kurds Take Most Parts of an Iraqi City
After the first serious outbreak of fighting in northern Iraq since the violent aftermath of the Persian Gulf war, Kurdish guerrillas control most of a major city in the region and are engaged in a tense standoff there with surrounding Government forces, United Nations officials said today.
The officials, reporting by radio from the city of Sulaimaniya, told United Nations officials here that the rebels took over large areas of the city on Thursday after clashes with Iraqi forces that resulted in scores of casualties.


SAUDIS WOULD LIFT BOYCOTT IF ISRAEL HALTS SETTLEMENT
Saudi Arabia announced today that it would support Egypt's offer to suspend the 43-year-old Arab boycott of Israel if Israel would suspend settlement-building in the occupied territories.
The Saudi announcement marks the first time any Arab nation besides Egypt has offered to end the boycott, albeit conditionally, before a full peace settlement between Israel and its Arab neighbors.


On the Way With L.B.J.
LONE STAR RISING
Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908-1960.
By Robert Dallek.
Illustrated. 721 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $30.


Joan Barzilay Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Barzilay of New York have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Joan Barzilay, and Anthony Alan Freund, a son of Patricia W. Drasner of Tequesta, Fla., and John H. Freund of Pound Ridge, N.Y.
Ms.
Barzilay, 26 years old, graduated from the Dalton School and Brown University.
She is a junior assocate editor at Glamour magazine.
Her father is the editor of the Letters to the Editor Department at The New York Times.
Her mother, Alice Barzilay, is the director of admissions at the Rodeph Sholom School in New York.


Inside the K.G.B.
To the Editor:
I am writing to express my gratitude to you for publishing the review of my book, "Inside the KGB" (May 5).
I would also like to thank the reviewer, James Rusbridger, for his sound, positive opinion of the book and his warm words about me.


Candidates Fault Ruling On Districts
For those who have been preparing to run for seats on the New York City Council, the Justice Department's recent decision to reject the redrawn district lines has stirred fears and frustration.
Candidates interviewed yesterday said they hoped that the rejection would not knock the elections planned for this fall off schedule.
Some said that a delay would be unfair to the scores of candidates who had spent so much time and money on their campaigns.


Which Show Did You See?
To the Editor:
The review by Roderick Conway Morris of the Celtic art show in Venice  [ "Ancient Celts Return to Haunt the Grand Canal," July 7 ]  left me open-mouthed.
When my husband and I visited the show at the Palazzo Grassi on May 31, we did not find the exhibition to be "bold and exuberant" so much as gimmicky and contrived.
We did not see exhibits "well displayed"; in fact, many of them were impossible to see at all.
All the "visual surprise, variety and suggestiveness" of the installation that so delighted Mr.
Morris were obscured for us by the presence of many other people who were also there to see "The Celts."


Political Talk
Bullish on Holtzman
City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman was not particularly a Wall Street favorite in her previous jobs as a member of Congress and Brooklyn District Attorney, at least as measured by campaign contributions.
But she is now that she plays a major role in selling municipal bonds and overseeing city pension funds.


All Around the Town


Dana Berg Plans September Bridal
September wedding plans for Dana Christina Berg and Howard Allen Hall Jr., a son of Mrs.
Robert A. Burch of Wilton, Conn., and Dr.
Hall of Providence, R.I., have been announced by her parents, Mrs.
Coleman J. Charnok 3d of Westport, Conn., and Fredric L. Berg of Weston, Conn.
Miss Berg, 28 years old, is the Middle West marketing representative for Prudential Securities Investment Management in New York.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is the chairman of the Washington Mint, a direct marketer of rare coins in Weston.
Her mother, Diana C. Charnok, is the vice president of marketing at Scott Pools in Woodbury, Conn.


Mutual Funds; When the Load Isn't Signaled
The National Association of Securities Dealers is proposing to cap fees levied under Rule 12b-1, which lets mutual funds pay some marketing expenses from fund assets.
The change, if approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission, would address a provision under which funds that impose 12b-1 fees but have no upfront sales charges can call themselves "no load" funds.
But, says Charles Trzcinka, an associate professor of finance at the State University of New York at Buffalo, funds that levy annual 12b-1 fees equal to no more than 25 basis points, or one-quarter of 1 percent of the amount in the investor's account, would still slip through the cracks.


Yankee Doodle Is Doing Dandy
It is hard to remember a time when American classical music was so large a part of the recording scene.
Each month brings a flood of releases of new and old works, including many first recordings.
Michael Fine, director of artists and repertory for Koch International, which specializes in recordings of American music, says he thinks that the emphasis has come about because the market has become glutted with overfamiliar works and many companies are looking for the small "target" audience that wants new things.
For Bob Hurwitz, head of Elektra Nonesuch, which for years has been a leader in American music recordings, the impetus is simple: American music is great music, he says.


The Ainu
To the Editor: The Q. &amp; A. reply about the Ainu people of Japan (Travel, June 2), while providing excellent information, missed an opportune moment to point out that the Ainu most definitely are not Indians.
Indeed, scholarly opinion appears to classify the Ainu as Caucasians.
Perhaps the person who wrote the inquiry, assumes that tribal people of the Western Hemisphere and elsewhere are "Indians." This would, however, be carrying the "10 lost tribes" idea a bit far.
GEORGE H. J.ABRAMS New York, N.Y.
The writer is a special assistant to the director, National Museum of the American Indian.


It's Cornstock, Not Woodstock
ON most summer evenings, the only sounds carrying across the shallow lakes of northwestern Minnesota are the whine and sputter of outboard motors, as anglers set out through the twilight, trolling for pike and walleye.
But for three days beginning Aug. 2 in Detroit Lakes, Minn., the hazy northern nights here will be broken broken by other, less familiar, sounds: the distant riff of amplified guitars and the muffled bass backbeat of drums, drifting clearly through the woods and over the windless surfaces of lakes.


Yearly Washing Urged For Aluminum Siding
TO keep aluminum siding looking its best, many manufacturers recommend washing it at least once a year.
Damaged siding should be promptly repaired.
Wash the siding by wetting an area with hard spray from a garden hose and then scrubbing it with a soft brush dipped in strong nonabrasive household detergent mixed with water.
Usually one cup of detergent added to one gallon of water is adequate.


Baseball; Inductees Cast in Bronze And Set for Immortality
The road to immortality on the gallery walls of the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., where more than 354,000 pilgrims reverently viewed the 206 bronzed countenances of past greats last year, begins in the Pittsburgh studio of the sculptor Susan Wagner.
Photographs supplied by the Hall of Fame in March helped Wagner sculpture three-dimensional, bas-relief likenesses of Rod Carew, Ferguson Jenkins, Gaylord Perry, Tony Lazzeri and Bill Veeck, who will be inducted today, out of oil-based clay.


Beach Party
One of the more unusual collaborations around at the moment is a project called "Swimming" that combines the photographs of Tina Barney and a short play by Tina Howe, two chroniclers of upper-middle-class angst.
The work, which is on view at the Borden gallery through August, has just been published by the Whitney Museum Library Fellows as part of its Artist and Writers Series.
The setting is a "stretch of protected beach along the Atlantic Coast," where Sally Tidings sits under an umbrella with her two grown children, Will and Bobo, and intermittently tries to elicit information about their father's new wife.
Bobo's friend Zoe is with them.
A sampling:


Residents Are Angry Over Reservoir's Cost and Water's Taste
IT is hard to find anyone who does not admire the beauty of the Manasquan Reservoir.
The meandering verdant preserve has a 740-acre lake that sprang up in the middle of what used to be little more than the scrubby northern fringes of the Pine Barrens.
Since the reservoir opened and began operating a year ago, under the New Jersey Water Supply Authority, the lake and several hundred adjoining acres have attracted a plethora of wildlife -- deer, waterfowl and songbirds -- and residents say that the sailing and fishing for bass and trout are excellent.


Sports of The Times; The Man for Whom Gaedel Hit
WHEN it occurred, few who happened to be involved ever thought that this, above everything, is what they would first be remembered for.
It was Bill Veeck's brainstorm that produced a midget to pinch-hit for a member of the St.
Louis Browns in the second game of a doubleheader against the Detroit Tigers on Sunday afternoon, Aug. 19, 1951.
For most associated with that game, and that moment, it is their fate that they, like Veeck, would often be recalled for having participated in it.
They include Bob Cain, the Detroit pitcher, and Bob Swift, the Detroit catcher, who hunkered on his knees to make a target for Cain for the minute strike zone, and especially Frank Saucier, the Browns outfielder, who was replaced by the midget.


Miss White Weds Joseph Caulfield
Leslie Allis White, an animated-art specialist at Christie's, and Joseph Thomas Caulfield, an associate in the New York law firm of Bigham Englar Jones &amp; Houston, were married yesterday at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Short Hills, N.J., by Msgr.
William P. Devine.
Mrs.
Caulfield, 27 years old, graduated from Hollins College in Roanoke, Va.
She is a daughter of Suzanne M. Veler of Springfield, Ohio, and Walter R. White of Dunedin, Fla., a retired general manager of the Sanibel Island (Fla.) Hilton.
Her mother is a fund-raising director for Wittenberg University in Springfield, where her stepfather, Dr.
Richard P. Veler, is a professor of English and the editor of university publications.


Bronx Arts Ensemble to Begin Its Summer Cycle
THE Bronx Arts Ensemble, which presents intriguing concerts during the regular season, also operates in warm weather.
Each year it offers a free cycle of Summer Music programs and the '91 series begins next Sunday.
That is when Paul Gallo, more usually in the ranks of the top-notch clarinetists, conducts the Ensemble in music for "Summer Winds," including Robert Baksa's Octet and other works for multiple woodwind instruments by Mozart, Gounod and Beethoven.


New Luxury Tax Trimming Boat Sales
THE 10 percent excise tax on pleasure boats, coming on top of the recession, is helping to scuttle parts of the local boating industry, say those who make their livings building, selling and maintaining the boats.
The luxury tax, which began Jan. 1, is applied to that part of a new boat's sale price over $100,000.
The National Marine Manufacturers Association, the industry trade group, estimates that from 10,000 to 15,000 boats nationally will be subject to the tax.


Dollar Is Down Sharply Again
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
136.41
136.35
148.55
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7470
1.7895
1.6378
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1585
1.1483
1.1556
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6943
1.6505
1.8185
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$370.40
$368.25
$360.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Postings: Battery Park City; A Planning Evolution
Battery Park City is a community of the future that has had several pasts.
There was the 1966 housing plan, based loosely on Le Corbusier's Ville Radieuse concept of slab-like buildings set in open space.
There was the 1969 monolith plan, a seven-story structure running the length of the site, a mile-long mall within it and giant hexagonal towers erupting from it.
There was the 1975 "pod" plan, in which each housing complex on the landfill would be a self-contained center (one of these "pods," Gateway Plaza, actually got built).
And there is the 1979 plan, now in effect, that attempts to integrate into the project the best of Manhattan's urban design, in its street network, arrangement of parks, distribution of mass and use of materials.


Sullen Hero
BRANDO
A Life in Our Times.
By Richard Schickel.
Illustrated. 218 pp.
New York: Atheneum. $21.95.


Books From The Times
COMING TO TERMS.
By William Safire. (Doubleday, $25.) What famous words did Yogi Berra and Samuel Goldwyn really say?
How long is a New York minute?
Why can't a Senator stand supinely by?
What's a better expression for "significant other"?
"Coming to Terms," William Safire's seventh collection based on his "On Language" columns in The New York Times, offers answers to these and many, many other questions that have swum into his ken, augmented and sometimes corrected by his worldwide chain of correspondents, the Lexicographic Irregulars, the Squad Squad and the Gotcha!
Gang.


Satellite Dishes
To the Editor:
"Media Impresario Is Selling Movies Via Satellite Dish" (June 23) omitted several key pieces of information.
Satellite television dishes have become a prominent part of the rural American landscape.
However, they can be found in cable areas as well.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 21, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Guests from many parts of the world get together in a small Scottish town.
2
4
THE VOICE OF THE NIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.95.) A reprint of a 1980 novel, published under a pseudonym, about a shy boy and his evil best friend.
3 *
9
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
4
5
DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $5.95.) Dirk Pitt moves fast to save America from a Japanese extremist.
5
1
THE PRIZE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.50.) In 1066, a lovely Saxon woman chooses a fierce Norman warrior as her husband.
6
3
DYING YOUNG, by Marti Leimbach. (Ivy, $5.95.) While devotedly caring for a man dying of leukemia, a woman has an affair with a stranger.
7
5
SECOND CHILD, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) A horrible crime committed 100 years ago comes back to haunt a quiet Maine village.
8
4
BREATH OF SCANDAL, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) The nightmare a woman suffered in a Texas town and how she gets even years later.
9
40
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
10 *
1
LADY BOSS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $5.95.) Lucky Santangelo schemes and maneuvers to get control of a major movie studio.
11
9
SECRETS OF THE MORNING, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.95.) A young music student is haunted by the ghosts of her lovers, present and past.
12
26
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers.
13
1
LEGACY, by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $4.95.) Spock battles an old enemy in a new "Star Trek" novel.
14
1
TRIAL, by Clifford Irving. (Dell, $5.99.) A lawyer discovers that the murder one client is charged with was actually committed by another client.
15 *
19
RED DRAGON, by Thomas Harris. (Dell, $5.95.) A retired F.B.I. agent returns to service to track down a serial killer.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
9
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
4
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
3
1
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
4
87
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
5
402
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
6 *
8
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
7
18
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
8 *
48
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) The Arab-Israeli conflict over the past decade.
9
2
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
10
42
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
51
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
8
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
3
31
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
13
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
5
18
THE REVENGE OF THE BABY-SAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


About Cars; In a Small World, Mirage Is an Oasis
ONE of the nice things about the mail is that it carries pats on the head.
But it also carries brickbats, and I have been catching a few of those lately from people who are mad at the Japanese.
For one thing, these folk do not forgive World War II.
But they appear to be even madder about the fact that the Asians build world-class cars.
That ability is certain, however, and nobody -- least of all the automakers in Detroit -- will quibble with Japan as a tough competitor.
Japan is beating the Motor City's brains out, and its biggest club is not, as some believe, a misguided public perception of foreign quality.
Like it or not, the quality is there.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13
The Saudis will support Egypt's offer to suspend the 43-year Arab boycott of Israel if Israel suspends settlement-building in the occupied territories.
The announcement came during Secretary Baker's visit.
Page 1


The Executive Life; Tied in Knots? Unravel With a Trip to Childhood
So.
The guy is driving you crazy.
You're his boss and he won't stop giving you a hard time.
But you can't face the thought of firing him.
Think again. Only this time, think of your kid brother.
Kid brother?


Noted With Pleasure
The Imaginary Writer
Natalie L. M. Petesch, a novelist, laments the fact that some readers hopelessly confuse writers with the characters they create.
Her essay "Of Love and Art" is included in "The Confidence Woman: 26 Women Writers at Work," edited by Eve Shelnutt (Longstreet Press).
If as an author you successfully and compellingly write about venereal disease, you are treated as if you had one; if you write about child abuse or murder, you are considered to have had firsthand knowledge of these matters.
Thus, the strange consequence of your imaginative re-creation of these horrors will be that you as a Person, a Self, an Identity, are soon being treated as if you were quite another Person from what you know yourself to be.
Your "public" -- that is to say, the society of
un
self-conscious, confiding, amiable, friendly, and above all so-called "normal" people -- begins now to distance itself from what it believes to be the writer's real Persona. . . .
And at the very split-second during which you-as-Author become aware of this distancing, you are catalyzed into becoming Someone who, only seconds before, you were not: before your own eyes you have been transformed into someone, something else -- at best an intrusive, symbiotic presence making honey (and, as it is commonly believed, money) off other people's private lives -- or at worst a betrayer of tales told in confidence.
In Pursuit of the Essential
When we travel, Albert Camus argues in this passage from his journal, we are seeking, more than pleasure, the chance to find through the strangeness and challenges of the journey some fresh connection to the eternal.
This is from "Notebooks 1935-1942" (Paragon, paper).
What gives value to travel is fear.
It is the fact that, at a certain moment, when we are so far from our own country . . . we are seized by a vague fear, and an instinctive desire to go back to the protection of old habits.
This is the most obvious benefit of travel.
At that moment we are feverish but also porous, so that the slightest touch makes us quiver to the depths of our being.
We come across a cascade of light, and there is eternity.
This is why we should not say that we travel for pleasure.
There is no pleasure in traveling, and I look upon it more as an occasion for spiritual testing.
If we understand by culture the exercise of our most intimate sense -- that of eternity -- then we travel for culture.
Pleasure takes us away from ourselves in the same way as distraction, in Pascal's use of the word, takes us away from God.
Travel, which is like a greater and a graver science, brings us back to ourselves.
The Idyllic, Endangered Past
Jed Perl contrasts the frank, robust delights of the vanished aristocratic world celebrated in the Babar stories for children with the far more pallid image of an elegant past currently in evidence.
This is from "Gallery Going: Four Seasons in the Art World" (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich).
The Babar stories, with their crystal-clear views of an idyllic pre-World War I world -- a world of refined manners and pretty tea parties and amusing outings that have their bad twists but always turn out fine -- fit right into the yuppie yen for old-fashioned family living.
Some people are offended by what they see as the commercialization of Babar; but I'm not so sure that Babar's aura is diluted by commercialization. . . .
So much of what the current back-to-tradition nostalgia boom presents is faceless stuff.
The Ralph Lauren outfits and the bleached-pine furniture give a chilly, hollowed-out view of earlier times.
And the advertisements for many of these products suggest that it's not the pleasures but the repressions that people are really nostalgic for.
Babar carries us into a different past, a past that's not only privileged and refined, but also full-bodied, a past that hasn't had the blood leeched out of it.
Fortune's Wheel
Classical Sanskrit poetry, produced between the 4th and 12th centuries A.D., is distinguished by its terse grace and ironic celebration of time's passage.
This untitled poem attributed to Kalidasa is included in "Dropping the Bow: Poems From Ancient India," translated by Andrew Schelling (Broken Moon Press, paper).
Considering many  things in my heart  I hang onto life.
Don't you succumb to  bewilderment now,  lovely one.
Whose  lot is just  joy or just sorrow?
Fortune goes down  and goes up like a  cartwheel revolving.
Risky, Necessary Behavior
Melvin Konner reminds us that we are a reckless species, we have evolved in part because of risk taking, and we cannot even now entirely dispense with the need to take rash chances.
This is from "Why the Reckless Survive: . . . and Other Secrets of Human Nature" (Penguin, paper).
As for me, when I avoid . . . risks, I feel safe and virtuous but perhaps a little cramped.
And I suspect that, like many people who watch their diet carefully -- despite the lapses -- and exercise more or less scrupulously and buckle up religiously, I am a little obsessed with immortality, with the prospect of controlling that which cannot be controlled.
I know I am doing the sensible thing -- my behavior matches, most of the time, the spectrum of real possibilities.
But against what scale of value?
I sometimes think that the more reckless among us may have something to teach the careful about the sort of immortality that comes from living fully every day.


Justice Blind, Deaf and Mean
ADAMS V. TEXAS
By Randall Dale Adams, William Hoffer and Marilyn Mona Hoffer. 347 pp.
New York: A Thomas Dunne Book/St.
Martin's Press. $19.95.


Lisa M. Gravin Planning to Wed
Ginger D. Karren of New York and Laurence A. Gravin of Des Moines have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Lisa Marie Gravin and Charles Stein Siegel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Siegel of Houston.
Miss Gravin, 30 years old, graduated from Southern Methodist University in Dallas, where she operates a public-relations firm under her own name.
Her father is a vice president and the director of stores for Younkers department stores in Des Moines.
Her mother was the founding president of the San Antonio Opera Guild and is a publicity agent in New York.


Peering Into Peepholes and Finding Politics
It could not have been easy for Elizabeth Broun.
But in the face of growing protests from artists, curators and many others over her removal from an exhibition of a work by Sol LeWitt she found "degrading and offensive" to women, the director of the National Museum of American Art in Washington wisely reversed herself a few days ago and put the work in the show.
"Eadweard Muybridge and Contemporary American Photography," a traveling exhibition that opened at the museum on June 28, was organized by Jock Reynolds, director of the Addison Gallery of American Art at the Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., and James Sheldon, the Addison's curator of photography.
Charging censorship, they had demanded that Ms.
Broun close the show she had borrowed if Mr.
LeWitt's work was not reinstalled.


Tech Notes; All's Fair in War and Fishing
For avid anglers, there is almost no limit to the means that may be used in pursuit of fish.
That has long meant using sonar to "see" the terrain under the boat.
Now a new product from Bottom Line, a unit of Computrol, based in Meridian, Idaho, turns tradition on its side.
Instead of beaming the sonar down, the Bottom Line Scout beams to the side.
"That's where you're casting anyway," said Joe Kuti of the American Fishing Tackle Manufacturers Association.


Headliners; Priorities Recast
After losing badly in the 20-state Super Tuesday primaries in 1988, Representative Richard A. Gephardt quit the race for the Democratic nomination for President.
The next year he had better luck in another kind of race, the contest for Democratic majority leader of the House.
Mr.
Gephardt uses that bully pulpit to fire salvos against the Republicans and President Bush, and last week he said flatly that he had no intention of trying another run for the White House.
Mr.
Gephardt had said before that he was not seeking the nomination, but he had continued to raise money and solicit advice privately for another campaign.
"In the end," he said, "how a public servant can best serve the causes in which he or she believes cannot be determined by polls, and cannot be resolved even with the best intentioned advice of others." To date, with Mr.
Bush enjoying extraordinarily high public opinion ratings and the 1992 primaries nearing, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts is the only declared Democratic candidate.


Students Not Rowdier, but Their Neighbors Have Changed
To the Editor:
Your report of the squabble between Harvard Law School's Lincoln's Inn and some neighbors who resent that law students party on weekends almost as aggressively as they participate in their educational rigors (Law page, June 28) is too parochial.
The story is not that there is a squabble between some elite Harvard Law students who belong to a selective club and their neighbors, but that this is merely a manifestation of a national phenomenon.


Horse Racing; And They're Off, Again, For a Season at Saratoga
New York racing rings down the curtain on 11 weeks at Belmont Park tomorrow and heads upstate for an expanded summertime meeting of five weeks at Saratoga with a full cast of local stars that includes Strike the Gold, Fly So Free and Meadow Star.
The curtain rises Wednesday afternoon at the track where racing was first staged in 1864, the track where champions often bite the dust, where Man O' War lost to Upset in 1919 in his only defeat in 21 starts, where Secretariat lost to Onion in 1973.


East Hampton Showplace on the Block
40 rms, water vu, asking price $25 million.
IT is a realty agent's dream listing, a 57-acre estate with a four-car garage, dramatic oval pool, nine fireplaces and outbuildings including a studio-theater where Enrico Caruso, Isadora Duncan and Anna Pavlova performed.


Italian Classic Updated for Summer Buffets
WHEN I was a teen-ager, my mother bought a copy of Elizabeth David's "Italian Cooking." It changed our lives.
Since we had been raised on English food (for us, spaghetti was something produced by spontaneous combustion in a can and served on buttered toast), the book was a revelation.
In its pages, she found a strange-sounding recipe, veal with tuna fish sauce.
A classic Italian dish dating from the 1890s, it was, Mrs.
David suggested, the perfect thing for a summer buffet.
And indeed, that summer I think we had vitello tonnato every time anyone came to dinner.
Guests would leave clutching the scribbled recipe in their hands, ready to surprise their own visitors in the future.


We Need Informed Discussion of Health Plans
To the Editor:
The long-awaited Democratic leadership bill for a national program of health insurance was introduced on June 5 by Senators George J. Mitchell, Edward M. Kennedy, Donald W. Riegle Jr. and Jay Rockefeller.
This answer to the plight of 60 million regularly or intermittently uninsured Americans and the skyrocketing cost of health care for all was briefly reported by the news media and then generally ignored.


Sex Survey of Students Angers Conservatives
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, temporarily blocked a Government-financed survey on the sexual behavior of teen-agers after objections were raised by a number of conservatives, a Government health official said today.
"This is one of those times when science and politics cross paths," said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


A Touch of Class Without Being Glitzy
THE Amagansett Fish Company proves once again that a restaurant does not have to be fancy to be elegant.
The small storefront with a mere dozen butcher-paper-covered tables doubles as a fish market and gourmet takeout, yet epitomizes simple good taste.
Simple, too, and striking as well are the black-and-white floor tiles, swirling ceiling fans, sparkling white walls punctuated with brightly colored paintings and the eye-catching memorabilia.
The last can be classified as nautical-culinary and includes lobster-shaped potholders, antique bread tins and wire egg baskets formed to resemble fish.


Vegetables to Consider for Fall Harvest
THE middle of July hardly seems like the time to be thinking about fall harvests, but it is.
Vegetables planted now will be ready to eat in the cooler growing days of September on into October.
It is essential, however, to be speedy about getting to the garden centers to buy seed.
Only too soon seed racks will disappear, taken away by the dealers, or the supply will be sold out.
Mail order through the catalogues is the next best thing.


Review/Rock; Shake, Clatter and Clang: Scrap Metal as Instruments
Here's something most rock concerts don't offer: a solo for metal shopping cart, battered with sticks, scraped with chains and clanged with a cymbal thrown into its bin.
The shopping cart was just one of the metal artifacts turned into instruments by Einsturzende Neubaten, the German band that headlined a New Music Nights triple bill on Wednesday at the Ritz, with Cabaret Voltaire and Front Line Assembly.
Einsturzende Neubaten (the name means "collapsing new buildings") isn't that new; the band was formed in 1981 and has just released a second retrospective, "Strategies Against Architecture II" (Mute/Elektra).
But it remains one of the most radical bands in rock, using brutal, elemental noise as the core of its songs.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Private Robert Shurtleff, Well-Camouflaged Fighter
WHETHER women can go into combat with the armies of the United States has, in a sense, already been answered.
Big-boned Deborah Sampson, an indentured servant and self-taught schoolteacher, disguised herself in a retailored brown suit and, taking the $100 bounty, joined up as Robert Shurtleff of Uxbridge, Mass.
She served in the 4th Massachusetts Regiment of Foot for 18 months in the waning days of the Revolution.
The 4th marched to West Point to help in the fighting near New York City, which, despite the victory at Yorktown, was still in British hands.
Miss Sampson was slashed in the head with a saber in a skirmish with Tory loyalists near the Tappan Zee in Westchester.
Her comrades said she acquitted herself well, firing and swinging her musket when the two sides closed.
Later, in an ambush near New Rochelle, she was shot in the thigh.
She was left in a field with other wounded, but rather than let surgeons cut away her pants, she crawled off into a woody ravine and lay there for several days, washing and bandaging her thigh, which still had the musket ball in it.


A Universally Recognized Word
To the Editor:
Daniel Schmidt protests unnecessarily when he objects so emotionally to Sidney Zion's use of the word "goyim" in reviewing Alan M. Dershowitz's book "Chutzpah" (Letters, June 30).
Mr.
Schmidt argues that it is "a derogatory term for gentiles" and then denounces The Times as irresponsible for allowing the word to appear.


Los Angeles Chief Reported Ready to Retire
Chief Daryl F. Gates of the Los Angeles Police Department, reportedly pleased with the Mayor's new appointments to the Police Commission, has agreed to retire, two newspapers said today.
The Los Angeles Times, citing "sources close to Gates," said the Chief had drafted a tentative letter of retirement and planned to consult with his family this weekend before deciding whether to submit the letter.


Shuttle Flight Is Rescheduled
Repairs to electrical circuitry on the space shuttle Atlantis have been completed, and its launching has been rescheduled for Wednesday, space officials said today.
The Atlantis was to have been launched Tuesday, but the mission was postponed Friday after the discovery of a flaw in a circuit.


A SHOT IN THE ARM FOR THE F.D.A.
Burkholz states in his article that Kessler "has used his Washington savvy skillfully . . . drawing the attention of the press to high-recognition targets like . . . dangerous collagen injections." The characterization, in your article, of collagen injections as dangerous says much about how Kessler's initiatives are being reported.
Injectable collagen has been used by more than 770,000 patients all over the world, with a remarkable record of safety.
As with all types of medical devices and drugs, there are risks attendant to the use of injectable collagen; but the risks are local, temporary and not threatening to a patient's overall health.
HOWARD D. PALEFSKY President, Collagen Corporation
Palo Alto, Calif.


Fans Call Games a Bargain (Even With Peanuts and Cracker Jack)
WITH a big brood in tow, Phil Skrzyniarz of Cheshire entered Beehive Field in New Britain on a recent balmy evening.
His group included five of his six children and two of their friends.
They were all in high spirits, eager to watch the New Britain Red Sox play the Reading (Pa.) Phillies in an Eastern League baseball game and equally eager to besiege the concession stands for hot dogs, sodas and souvenirs.
Mr.
Skrzyniarz had spent $14 for tickets -- $1.50 for each of the children, who ranged from 5 to 13 years old, and $3.50 for himself.
That total is $2 less than the price of a single field box seat at Fenway Park, where the New Britain team's parent club, the Boston Red Sox, play.
Though he is a Boston fan, Mr.
Skrzyniarz said, he seldom takes his family to a game there.
"Much too expensive," he said.
A trip to a game in New Britain "is a much better deal," said Mr.
Skrzyniarz, a purchasing agent for the Milton Bradley toy company.
Counting refreshments for his group of eight, he said, a night out at Beehive costs about $45.
"At Fenway, it would be at least three times as much," he added.


Jennifer Burns Marries
Jennifer Downing Burns, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger J. Burns of New York, was married yesterday to Matthew Langdon Cost, a son of Mrs.
John McAlevey of Hopkinton, N.H., and Charles Cost of Madison, Me.
The Rev.
Earle Bergmann officiated at the Blue Point Congregational Church in Scarborough, Me.
Mrs.
Cost, 23 years old, and Mr.
Cost, 24, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and works as an assistant to the owner of F. O. Bailey Antiquarian in Portland, Me.
He teaches history at the Maine Central Institute in Pittsfield.


A September Wedding For Jennifer L. Tintle
Mr. and Mrs.
Myles M. Tintle Jr. of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Lynn Tintle, to Andrew Michael Reder, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jason A. Reder of Pittsfield, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Tintle, 26 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University, as did her fiance, 27.
She is an account executive at the Dictaphone Corporation in Conshohocken, Pa.
Her father is a vice president and the general manager of Miltope Business Products, a computer-peripherals company in Melville, L.I.


Mutual Funds; Invest Via Annuity? It Gets Tricky
Investors looking for tax breaks have pushed sales of variable annuities -- products that combine an investment portfolio with tax deferral -- into the stratosphere at insurance companies and stock brokerages.
Enter the mutual fund companies.
Six groups now offer variable annuities: Fidelity, Vanguard, Scudder, Putnam, Templeton and Massachusetts Financial Services.


Design; STRAWS IN THE WIND
Although wicker furniture has been around since the days of ancient Egypt, for most of us it conjures up images of sweeping Victorian verandas overlooking the sea.
Light in weight and casual in appearance, wicker has over the centuries found its way into every room in the house.
But as taste and technology change, designers are taking wicker toward the year 2000.
Some of their pieces are whimsical, others downright sophisticated -- all work as well inside as they do on the front porch.


Suspect in Gandhi's Murder Is Found Hanging From Tree
A man accused of helping the killers of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi was found dead today, his body hanging from a tree near a house where the police were holding him, news reports said.
United News of India quoted unnamed officials as saying N. Shanmugam, who was arrested on Wednesday, had escaped on Friday night from a Government lodging house.


Traffic Alert
East Side Rezoning Alliance Third Avenue Summer Festival: Third Avenue will be closed today from 42d to 57th Street from 10 A.M to 6 P.M.


The Executive Computer; For Face-to-Face Talks, Ask Your Machine First
Most business deals require some type of negotiation, whether it is to forge a labor contract or figure out how to get people to work together effectively.
Few executives, however, have formal training in negotiation skills.
So when the negotiations are hardball, some companies are turning to software.
Negotiator Pro ($299 from Beacon Expert Systems Inc., Brookline, Mass., 617 738-9300) is an expert system program for I.B.M.
PC and Apple Macintosh computers.
It is based on the premise that negotiation is more of a skill that can be learned than an art, and that a computer, which is inherently devoid of any personality, can help an executive plan an effective negotiation with other humans by examining their personality types.


British Leader Tries to Retain Summit Glow
Through four days of high diplomatic drama, Prime Minister John Major of Britain played the unflappable, self-assured host to this week's London summit, a performance that added color to his profile as the "gray man" of British politics.
But with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union and the other world leaders now gone, Mr.
Major and his advisers must confront a more difficult challenge: transferring his new burnish on the international stage into the domestic political arena.


Albert Cronenberg, 83, Former Bank President
Albert H. Cronenberg, a former president of the Merchants Bank and Trust Company in Norwalk, Conn., died on Wednesday at his home in Norwalk.
He was 83 years old.
He died of lung cancer, his wife said.


In 'Naked Hollywood,' Every Locust Has His Day
If a television set is playing in a movie, you can be pretty sure it is a comment on decadence American style.
Now, in a retaliatory strike, comes the BBC series that has already received considerable attention for sticking it to the movers and shakers of movieland.
Using their own words and all manner of visual gimmicks, the producer Nicholas Kent pictures Hollywood as wheeler-dealer heaven.
The five-part series opens with "The Actor and the Star," featuring James Caan and Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Then come programs on studio heads ("18 Months to Live"), agents, screenwriters and directors.
A sixth installment, about producers, will not be shown in the United States because two of those handled therein, Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer ("Top Gun," "Beverly Hills Cop" and "Beverly Hills Cop II") held back permission to use their film clips.


Sharmon Priaulx Wed in Annapolis
Sharmon Veronica Priaulx, a law student at Villanova University, and Shawn Brendan Rock, a systems engineer at Electronic Data Systems in Exton, Pa., were married yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church in Annapolis, Md.
The Rev.
Timothy Havlicek officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Dr.
Richard C. Halverson, a Presbyterian minister and the Chaplain of the United States Senate.
The bride, who is 24 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Veronica Meneely of Annapolis and Allen Priaulx of New York.
Her mother, known professionally as Veronica T. Pickman, is the president of the New Manhattan Corporation, an investment bank in Annapolis.
Her father is the publisher of The American Banker, a daily newspaper.


A Schoolyard as Stickball Battleground
IT is yet another Sunday morning and across the street from Catherine Peachman's house they are at it again in the schoolyard.
Her quiet village street is punctuated by the sounds of cracking bats, balls whizzing through the air, cheers and laughter.
Stray balls even roll into her yard; but the players have become too afraid of her to retrieve them.
Mrs.
Peachman, who has lived here more than 60 years, is determined to put an end to these Sunday-morning games.
The players are just as determined to remain, for this is no ordinary ball game.
This is the Ethical Stickball League, whose members have called the high school's playground home plate for nearly 20 years.


David Gans Wed To Anne Hupper
Anne Thayer Hupper, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel H. Hupper of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to David Ian Gans, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter G. Gans of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Deborah Anne Rundlett, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger W. Rothballer.
Mrs.
Gans, 26 years old, is a program director at the Turn of the Century Foundation, a fund-raising organization at Boston University.
She and her husband are graduates of Bowdoin College.
Her father, who is retired, was a manager in business practices at the I.B.M.
World Trade Corporation in North Tarrytown, N.Y.


Danielle Leonhard-Spark Is Affianced
Dr.
Arlene Spark of Demarest, N.J., and Dr.
Philip Leonhard of Hoboken, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Danielle Leonhard-Spark, and David Philip Bier, the son of Mrs.
Neil F. Luberti of Short Hills, N.J., and Stanley J. Bier of Clark, N.J.
Miss Leonhard-Spark and her fiance, both 25 years old, graduated from Cornell University.
She is a vice president and a convertible-bond trader at Mabon Nugent &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is an associate professor of sociology at City College in New York.
Her mother is an assistant professor of nutrition at New York Medical College and the director of nutrition at the college's Preventive Cardiology Center.


Sports People: FOOTBALL; 4 Broncos Arrested
It was just one of those little barroom brawls that spilled outside, but by the time the dust cleared and the broken glass was swept up early yesterday, four members of the Denver Broncos were under arrest on charges of assault and resisting arrest.
One of them, cornerback-safety ALTON MONTGOMERY, had 13 stitches in his hand.
According to the police in Greeley, Colo., where the Broncos train, the brawl began when another patron struck Montgomery with a beer bottle, and three of Mongomery's teammates, running back MELVIN BRATTON and linebackers RONNIE HALIBURTON and MICHEAL BROOKS, joined the fray.
The patron who was said to have struck Montgomery was also arrested. (AP)


Between Screenplay and Screen Stretches the Highway to Oblivion
It seemed like party time for the screenwriter Marshall Goldberg when Paramount Communications chose Stanley Jaffe as its new president and chief operating officer last March.
Mr.
Jaffe, an independent producer, had been the most ardent advocate of "Holy Men," a Paramount project based on Mr.
Goldberg's screenplay about a murder in a Hasidic community in New York City.
But more than four months after Mr.
Jaffe's appointment, Mr.
Goldberg still hasn't uncorked the champagne.
Since 1988, when he first wrote his screenplay (since revised by Steve Shagan), no fewer than five additional dramas about murders in New York Hasidic communities -- plus one comedy -- have gone into development.
So similar are the films, says Rabbi Shlomo Schwartz, a consultant on four of the projects, "I forget which is which."


Corrections
An article on July 7 about rentals in Italy misstated the telephone number for accommodations at Montalto Castle in Tuscany.
The number is 39 (577) 355675.


Corrections
A map of Dublin on June 30 included a number of errors, including the mislabeling of streets and the mis locating of the House of Parliament.
This is a corrected map.


Shelly Hotchkiss, A Banker, Weds
Shelly Justine Hotchkiss and Joseph Otto Cogguillo 3d were married yesterday at St.
Therese's Roman Catholic Church in North Haven, Conn., by the Rev.
Patrick J. Berkery.
The bride, 26 years old, is a daughter of Mrs.
Donald Hotchkiss of Branford, Conn., and the late Mr.
Hotchkiss.
The bridegroom, 31, is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Cogguillo Jr. of Milford, Conn.
Mrs.
Cogguillo, a graduate of Quinnipiac College, is a corporate banking officer at the Bank of Boston Connecticut in New Haven.


The Nation; For Lagging American Banks, Survival Means Consolidation
ANY doubts about the future of American banking were pretty much settled last week.
The Chemical Banking Corporation and the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, two of the industry's giants, announced they were merging to pare costs and get in shape financially for the coming era of national banking.
It was a bellwether.
The 1990's, by all accounts, will be a decade of wrenching consolidation for the nation's 12,300 banks.
And the Chemical-Manufacturers Hanover merger will undoubtedly prompt other banks, large and small, to start browsing for partners.


Foreign Affairs; The Mad Hatters Return
Nearly unnoticed and after rancorous closed-door debate, the Senate Armed Services Committee approved deployment of a system to defend the United States against missile attack.
This issue is the inner sanctum of Nuclear Wonderland to the priesthood of strategic Mad Hatters.
Like no other nuclear question, it fuses esoteric theology and street politics.
Like no other, it sends liberals and conservatives to their torches and thumb screws.


All the Members Of This Wedding Sound Like Shaw
If you think you'd like to make acquaintance with George Bernard Shaw's "Getting Married," I recommend that you trot off to the library, check out Volume IV of the collected plays and prefaces, and settle into a comfortable armchair for a couple of hours.
You could also drop by the Circle in the Square, where this talkative 1908 work -- its author called it a "conversation" -- is being performed.
But I don't know that you'd be much further ahead of the game.
While I am not one of those who feel that Shaw is usually better read than said, this fitful production is awfully tedious in the long run.
And it's tedious because the characters never seem to be speaking their own minds.
They're all speaking Shaw's.


The Cultivated Gardener; When No Ordinary Geranium Will Do
The front porch is definitely not the most subtle spot in the home.
The backyard garden, where the children play and the lounge chairs sit, can be as quiet and modest as you wish.
But the porch is traditionally a place to pull out all the stops.
That is why ivy-leaved geraniums are frequently found hanging beside the doorbell, offering a botanical welcome.
Any bloomer is infinitely more awe-inspiring when it dangles at eye level.
And rest assured: a face-to-face confrontation with a basket spilling over with ivy-shaped leaves and a profusion of blossoms is guaranteed to dazzle.


Listen to The Ballet Music
To the Editor:
What Richard Taruskin did not bring out in his article "Tchaikovsky, Fallen From Grace"  [ June 30 ]  is what George Balanchine said about the composer: that he was the greatest composer for the ballet who ever lived and that only Stravinsky, in this century, was his second.


Historic Hood


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Pruning Clematis
Q.
We have three clematis vines on our fence.
Two bloom yearly, but in recent years one plant, the one with purple flowers, hasn't bloomed at all.
Should we trim off all the brown stalks?
Ronald W. Johnson, Michigan City, Ind.


Ideas &amp; Trends: Should Women Be Sent Into Combat?; For and Against Changing the Rules
Jets
Women may fly transports, refueling tankers, Awacs, high-altitude reconnaissance.
They may not fly fighters or bombers, or electronic jammers or reconnaissance planes in combat.
Critics Say: Combat pilots operate deep in enemy territory and are often shot down or captured.
Some pilots have to cross-train as forward air controllers -- joining infantry to coordinate air strikes.
The job is grueling -- 80 percent of the men who take Air Force training for it wash out.


Sunday Menu; Grill It All: Chicken, Fruit and Bread; Then Add Mustard
Grilled chicken, grilled pineapple and peaches on grilled country bread spread with honey mustard: this recipe is an excuse to invest in the new stovetop grill from Max Burton.
Oblong rather than round, and twice the size of the original, it covers two burners and has enough space to cook for four, or to make a dish like this chicken sandwich that has four grilled components.
The grill is available in housewares stores around the country.
If you're without a grill, indoors or out, broil the ingredients instead.


The Nation; Brought to You by Exxon -- School Reform
PRESIDENT BUSH'S announcement of the formation of a private foundation to help create "a new generation" of American schools has some people wondering whether the Administration is expecting the private sector to pick up the tab for its education reform proposal, called "America 2000."
The foundation, the New American Schools Development Corporation, was set up at the behest of Mr.
Bush to persuade corporations to donate as much as $200 million to create 535 experimental schools intended to be models of reform.
The corporation will award contracts, probably as early as this fall, to as many as seven research and development teams, which will investigate ways to create better schools.
The information will then be available for a small fee to interested communities.


Headliners; A Wrong Righted
When Mildred Leisure was two months pregnant and suffering from morning sickness in 1972, Western Electric Inc. forced her to take unpaid maternity leave -- starting a break in her employment that wound up costing her several months' seniority.
Last week, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission announced a $66 million settlement of a lawsuit in which Western Electric's parent company, American Telephone &amp; Telegraph, will compensate Mrs.
Leisure and 13,000 other employees for job discrimination related to pregnancies that began in the years 1965 to 1977.
The settlement arose from a lawsuit filed in 1978, the year an amendment to the Civil Rights Act clarified the rights of pregnant women.
Many companies have since greatly relaxed their policies about keeping women on the job during a pregnancy, but Patricia Ireland, the executive vice president of the National Organization for Women, said many women still face discrimination when they try to return to work.


Beating the Heat


Questions Linger as California Spill Sits
As a stinking, bubbling glob of spilled pesticide sinks slowly into California's largest reservoir, people who live along the wooded shoreline want to know why so little seems to be understood about it, nearly a week after it spilled from a derailed train.
The unanswered questions are urgent not just in this stunningly scenic woodland, in the shadow of Mount Shasta near the California border, but all over California.


Bank's Worldwide 'Black Network' Reported
The Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the private banking empire that was seized earlier this month by financial regulators in seven countries, maintained a clandestine division that functioned as "a global intelligence operation and a Mafia-like enforcement squad," Time magazine reported today.
The division, called the "black network" by its own members, used sophisticated spy equipment and techniques, along with bribery, extortion, kidnapping and murder, according to the magazine.
The division's 1,500 employees operated primarily out of the bank's offices in Karachi, Pakistan.


Bridge
Conventional wisdom suggests that a declarer in a slam contract will have a better chance if the opponents have bid, and provided some clues, than if they have not.
But sometimes, perversely, it works the other way.
On the diagramed deal from an early round of the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams in Atlantic City in March, North and South were Asya Kamsky of Berkeley, Calif., and Joanna Stansby of Castro Valley, Calif.
Stansby once had mixed feelings about winning an upset victory in a major knockout match: The opposing team included her husband, Lew, a three-time world champion.


Brewer Mullins Weds Chris Schoeller
Corinne Brewer Mullins, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas D. Mullins 2d of London and West Tisbury, Mass., was married yesterday in Vineyard Haven, Mass., to Karl Christian Schoeller, the son of Mildred Hayes Cross of Richmond and Karl E. Schoeller of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
James R. McLellan performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 25 years old, is known as Brewer.
She was until recently an assistant to the chairman of LaSalle Partners Ltd., a real-estate company in Chicago.
She graduated from Miss Porter's School and Lake Forest College.
Her father is the director of Petroleum Advisory Services in London.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate


The Nation; Familiar Shadow Darkens The Deal on C.I.A. Post
AS the grand strategy of the major powers unfolded in London last week, the leaders of the Senate Intelligence Committee back in Washington were proposing that $180 million be cut from the intelligence budget and diverted to a national security education program.
So goes the post-cold war world, whose frenzy comes at a bad time for the Central Intelligence Agency.
The institution is increasingly seen as part of an unwieldy, drifting, out-of-step and possibly even redundant espionage establishment that must be overhauled to adapt to new global realities and new domestic budget constraints.
To do this, the C.I.A. needs a new kind of director, a master bureaucrat and super-analyst who can respond to the fall of Communism, redefine the agency's mandate and even justify its very existence all at once.


Do Unto Others


Where Minorities Rub, It's 'Us' Against 'Them'
The political mapmakers call this block of the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn a "majority minority" area.
But to the Puerto Ricans gathered outside La Borinquena Grocery, the Dominicans in the Cibao bodega or the blacks gathered under a revivalist's tent across the street, political reality is a little more complicated.
"I know if we are given our own representatives who understand our needs, then we will feel more involved; we would feel more like citizens," Thomas Figueroa, a 59-year-old factory worker, said as he stood outside La Borinquena.


17 Killings Nears New York City Record
One of New York City's grimmest records came close to being broken yesterday, as the police recorded 17 killings in 24 hours beginning Friday afternoon.
Three people were found bound and shot to death in a Washington Heights apartment; a 35-year-old man was killed by a 14-year-old boy in a midtown Manhattan hotel, and a father was slain and his son wounded as they arrived for work at a Bronx factory at dawn.


New Proposal by U.S. on Child Care Leads to Dispute Over States' Role
State officials are warning that new rules proposed by the Bush Administration would make it much harder to enforce basic safety standards at thousands of child-care centers used by low-income families around the nation.
The new rules, published June 25 in the Federal Register, say states must set identical standards for day-care centers receiving certain types of Federal aid and for those receiving no public money.


Some Yugoslav Troops Leave Border Areas Within Slovenia
Some federal troops began moving back today from border areas of Slovenia, but did not comply with the Yugoslav Government's order to leave the secessionist republic.
Fighting continued, meanwhile, in Yugoslavia's other independence-minded republic, Croatia, where four people were reported killed and two wounded.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Long Time Coming Dillard Pruitt, a six-year pro who had never finished higher than ninth on the PGA Tour, fired a final-round 64 yesterday for a two-stroke victory in the Chattanooga Classic in Tennessee.
Pruitt birdied his first three holes to wipe out Lance Ten Broeck's one-stroke lead.
He finished at 20-under 260. (AP)


TV Dials Set to Rhode Island Bank Crisis
Six months after the collapse of a private bank insurance fund left 300,000 Rhode Island depositors locked out of their accounts, televised hearings have transfixed the state and focused attention on one question: Why were public officials and financial leaders able to withdraw their own money on the eve of the crisis?
The hearings, the first of several phases of public testimony in coming months, will resume Monday and continue through Thursday.
The nine-member investigating panel was created by the Legislature to look into the collapse of the Rhode Island Share and Deposit Indemnity Corporation, a private company that insured the deposits of 45 credit unions and banks.


Ethics Panel May Retreat In Case Against Cranston
Five months after singling out Senator Alan Cranston for possible punishment by the full Senate, the Senate Ethics Committee may be backing down, officials familiar with the deliberations say.
The six members of the committee, who resumed their closed-door discussions earlier this month, disagree over how far to go in reprimanding the Senator for his efforts on behalf of Charles H. Keating Jr., a savings and loan executive and major political contributor, say the officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Kurds Have Firm Grasp on Iraqi City
Heavily armed Kurdish guerrillas appeared today to be in full control of this northern Iraqi city, apparently with the approval of the local authorities.
The Iraqi armed forces seemed to have withdrawn completely from the town after reports of heavy fighting last week, the most serious battles reported since the unsuccessful Kurdish uprising against the Government of President Saddam Hussein in March.


Big Merger Of Banks Called Set
After almost a month of often difficult negotiations, NCNB and C&amp;S/Sovran agreed yesterday to merge in a deal that would create the nation's third-largest banking company, an executive who has served as an adviser in the deal said last night.
A combination of the NCNB Corporation, based in Charlotte, N.C., and the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation, based in Atlanta and Norfolk, Va., would have assets $116.5 billion.
Only Citicorp and the Chemical Banking Corporation, after its merger with the Manufactures Hanover Corporation announced last week, would be larger.


The Basquiat Touch Survives the Artist In Shows and Courts
While the estate of the artist Jean Michel Basquiat, who died of a drug overdose three years ago at age 27, is still entangled in litigation, attention is again focusing on the artist's work.
Critics have begun to re-examine the frenzied, graffiti-like imagery thatmade the artist a Neo-Expressionist superstar in the overheated art market of the 1980's and that has inspired reactions from high praise to scornful dismissal.


Metro Matters; The Legal Mosaic And Political Art Of Council Maps
Critics have been quick for months to second-guess New York City's Districting Commission.
But last week, Federal officials formally objected, too -- threatening to postpone this year's special elections for City Council, just as a similar legal challenge did in 1981.
What was the commission's agenda?


U.S. Will Sell Bills and Notes This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings for this week is confined to the bill and note markets, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
The Treasury will auction two-year notes tomorrow, five-year notes on Wednesday and a one-year bill on Thursday.
Late in the day Friday the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.58 percent, a six-month bill at 5.73 percent and a one-year bill at 5.88 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was offered at a price to yield 6.89 percent, while the five-year note was priced to yield 7.89 percent.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League BOSTON RED SOX -- Waived Mike Marshall, first baseman-outfielder, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Recalled Dana Kiecker, pitcher, from Pawtucket of the International League.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Placed Mike Moore, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Scott Hemond, infielder, from Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.


Sion Manoogian, 85; Was an Archbishop In Armenian Church
Archbishop Sion Manoogian, a former primate of the Diocese of the Armenian Church of America, died on Tuesday in Etchmiadzin, Armenia.
He was 85 years old and lived in Armenia and in Florida.
He died of cancer, a spokesman for the diocese said.


Corrections
Articles published Wednesday and on June 26 about a yeshiva in Bedford, N.Y., referred incorrectly to an earlier occupant of the site.
It was a home for dependent and neglected children that was known as Hillcrest, not a home for delinquent boys, according to a former director.


Corrections
Articles published Wednesday and on June 26 about a yeshiva in Bedford, N.Y., referred incorrectly to an earlier occupant of the site.
It was a home for dependent and neglected children that was known as Hillcrest, not a home for delinquent boys, according to a former director.


Israel's Blunder -- and Honesty
An Israeli magistrate's report on last October's Temple Mount riot won't restore the lives of the 17 Palestinians killed by jumpy Israeli border police.
Nor will Judge Ezra Kama's inquiry result in charges against those guilty of lethal recklessness.
But his ruling affirms the self-critical vigor of a democratic society -- and shames leaders who tried to blame the victims for a tragedy in Jerusalem that need not have happened.
When the clash occurred on Oct. 7, Israeli officials instantly accused Palestinians of deliberately provoking a bloodletting on a site sacred to Muslims and Jews.
The extraordinary symbolism assured an international uproar.


3 Store Robbers Force Manager to Aid Flight
Three men wearing masks robbed a large department store in Queens of $119,000 late Saturday night, locked more than a dozen employees in a storage room and then forced a store manager to drive them in his car to the Bronx, where they fled, leaving him unharmed, the police said yesterday.
About 10:10 P.M., after closing time, two men wearing flesh-colored masks and a third man with a black ski mask robbed the Caldor store at 66-26 Metropolitan Avenue, west of 69th Street, in Middle Village, the police said.
The robbers forced an assistant manager, Gregory Caughman, 33 years old, to open a safe at gunpoint, the police said.


Still on the Run At Spry Age of 92
NOEL JOHNSON of Pacific Beach, Calif., is 92 and runs marathons.
Last Friday, he awoke at 5 A.M. and climbed up onto the trampoline he keeps in his bedroom and began running in place for an hour.


Bridge
Beginners are taught that they should never give an opponent a ruff and sluff, but as with most such rules there are many exceptions.
This generous offering might be the only way to give the declarer problems, and was on the diagramed deal.
The occasion was the Bob Johnke Memorial Team event in New Jersey, which has an unusual format: A Swiss Team qualifies eight squads for knockout play.
The winners earlier this month, all from New Jersey, were Leonard Karp of Tenafly, Lenore Server of River Vale, Tod Thorgersen and Joe Adamo, both of Ridgefield Park, and Wayne and Rosemary Carr of Hasbrouck Heights.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt General Motors Acceptance Corp. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $5.67 billion in medium-term notes to be sold from time to time.


New President At Bank South
The Bank South Corporation has hired two executives from a rival, the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation.
Bank South's new president and chief executive is Patrick L. Flinn, former group executive vice president at C&amp;S/Sovran.
He replaces John C. Wilson, who had been interim chief executive of Bank South since Robert P. Guyton resigned on June 19.


C'mon Connecticut, Try It
Three weeks into the new fiscal year, Connecticut still has no budget.
The General Assembly can't muster the courage to enact one with an income tax, or the votes to override Gov.
Lowell Weicker's veto of the alternative, which would maintain the state's high sales tax.
Enough already. It's time to experiment.


American and T.W.A. Plan a Competing Bid for Pan Am
Trans World Airlines and American Airlines plan to make an offer today for much of Pan American World Airways, challenging Pan Am's agreement to sell most of its assets to Delta.
People involved in planning the offer said yesterday that T.W.A. and American wanted to divide up much of the bankrupt carrier.


Burning Tanker Spills Oil in Waters off Perth
The bow of a burning oil tanker tore loose early today off Australia's western coast, dumping an estimated 2.9 million gallons of light crude oil into the Indian Ocean, officials said.
Capt.
Richard Purkiss, chairman of the Western Australia state committee on fighting oil pollution, said the 210-foot Greek-registered tanker, the Kirki, was still afloat and efforts were being made to remove the remaining oil.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 22


Meulens Is Wondering About Future as Yankee
He played today, but how much longer will he stay?
Hensley Meulens isn't certain.
No one is.
But with Bernie Williams suddenly the Yankees' hot rookie and Roberto Kelly eligible to come off the disabled list, someone must go soon.
Will it be Meulens?


Children's Agency Worsens Adoption Problem
To the Editor:
The true tragedy of "Tough Adoptions: New York Tries Hard Sell" (news article, July 11) is that many adoptable children become unadoptable because of bungling and inaction by New York City's Child Welfare Administration.


Mets Pound Dodgers and Leave Them Seeing Doubles
The main event was the Mets against the Dodgers at sticky Shea Stadium yesterday, but the undercard leading to New York's 9-4 decision was just as delicious.
Those who endured the heat watched Dwight Gooden face his buddy and old teammate, Darryl Strawberry, for the first time and strike him out twice.
Then there was Bob Ojeda making his first start against his former club and getting roughed up.


This Week's Equity Issues
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
&lt;biAG Services of America Inc., a million common shares. Jesup Josepthal.


A Fine Day for Argentin of Italy
Amid the welter of signs and banners offering support to the Tour de France cyclists today, Moreno Argentin must have spotted the one that said "Forza Italia."
Argentin needed little more encouragement than "Go Italy." He went.


Reviews/Television; From 'China Beach,' Good Night, Vietnam
Like "M*A*S*H," ABC 's "China Beach" explored the subject of war somewhat indirectly, not through battles and military maneuvers, but through the eyes of the doctors, nurses and entertainers who treated the wounded and dying.
Neither series could be considered a celebration of war in the old victorious warrior mode perfected by John Wayne.
And like "M*A*S*H," "China Beach" kept getting better as the scripts improved and the cast evolved into a first-rate repertory company.
The series will end tonight at 9 with a special two-hour episode, which skillfully delivers the required smiles and tears and won't disappoint its fans.
The veterans of the 510th Evac unit, the China Beach gang, are meeting for a 1988 reunion in Youngstown, Ohio.
Most of the familiar faces are there.
McMurphy (Dana Delany) has attended with her husband, Joe (Adam Arkin), and their 2-year-old daughter.
The disabled Boonie (Brian Wimmer) gets to goof around once again with the dour Dodger (Jeff Kober).


Reds Stay on Disaster Course As Pirates Stop Them, 6-0
Randy Tomlin pitched his second consecutive shutout -- and second of his career -- as the surging Pittsburgh Pirates completed their domination of the stumbling Cincinnati Reds with a 6-0 victory tonight.
Gary Redus was 3 for 4 with a triple and double, scored twice and drove in a run as Pittsburgh won the season series, 10-2, over the defending World Series champions.


Governors Facing Fiscal Troubles Take Their Cases to the Airwaves
It used to be that only Presidents had the power and presumption to interrupt regular television programming and deliver a speech to the American people.
Whether it was a somber Lyndon B. Johnson declaring he would not run again in 1968, or more recently George Bush announcing the war on Iraq, television news directors have rarely turned down last-minute invitations to the White House.
It used to take a disaster like Three Mile Island for governors to be able to clear the airwaves and formally address their constituents.


Baker, Now in Israel, Finds Hope That Peace Is Possible
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d arrived tonight in Israel, a land of skeptics, many of whom would like to be convinced that this round of American shuttle diplomacy holds greater promise than earlier efforts.
The apparent concessions Mr.
Baker is bringing from Syria and Saudi Arabia have raised people's hopes, despite the reception given them by the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.
But these hopes find only wary expression because Syria and Saudi Arabia, along with Iraq, are regarded by most Israelis, regardless of political affiliation, as implacable enemies.


Armina Marshall Is Dead at 96; Co-Founder of the Theater Guild
Armina Marshall, an actress, a playwright and a co-administrator of the Theater Guild whose career on Broadway spanned more than half a century, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 96 years old.
She died of heart failure, said her son, Philip Langner.


Soldiers Help Battle Flooding in China


A Rumble in Valhalla
FOR many stars in various fields, immortality is a transient item.
But not in baseball, and not in this little gem of a town.
Here is where Baseball Heaven, this Players' Paradise, this Old-Timers' Olympus, lives and breathes, and where every year some new former baseball person or persons who have put away their knickers and stick and ball are awarded admission into the sanctuary known as the National Baseball Hall of Fame.
It's a pleasant diversion, for the most part, for most of America, and it's an understandably great honor for those inducted into the hall.
It represents excellence of the highest order in their chosen field, and the fact that they could throw the ball faster, hit the ball harder, and catch the ball quicker than most others.
They did it as kids, and they kept doing it as adults.
At first they did it solely for fun, then they did it for money, too.
Some fans caught up in the great romance of it forget that if there wasn't a paycheck in it, why, some of them would have had to go out instead and work in an office, or a shop, or a mine to support their families.


89 More Killed in Fighting, Sri Lankan Military Reports
Seventy-seven Tamil separatist rebels and 12 soldiers were killed in weekend clashes over a beseiged Sri Lankan army camp, military sources said today.
The military authorities said three soldiers were killed Sunday as a relief column of 2,000 soldiers advancing toward the Elephant Pass camp encountered heavy resistance from guerrillas of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, who have been fighting for an independent homeland for more than eight years.


Floyd Bennett Field Journal; Flying With the Greatest of Ease While Grounded
A dizzying, careening ride with a fighter pilot in Italy in World War II cured Harry Botkowsky of his urge to fly small planes.
These days the 72-year-old Brooklynite limits his air time to
really
small planes -- radio-controlled models that arc and buzz above Floyd Bennett Field.
"I've had plenty of opportunities to go up with friends who have planes, but I say no thank you," Mr.
Botkowsky said.
"I'd rather do my flying by myself and on the ground."


Santos Journal; In a Great Brazilian Port, Plague Comes Ashore
In a sunlit patio of the AIDS Solidarity House here, Gilmar Luiz de Santos extended a wiry forearm to show needle tracks scarring a vein.
"I used to take drugs with a lot of different groups," the 36-year-old commercial painter said, recalling years of injecting cocaine with groups of friends.
"I read about AIDS, but I never thought it would happen to me."


Hare-Raising Campaign Is More Nynex Punning
Blue bunnies are invading parts of the Northeast.
In New York City, the rabbits are appearing on bus shelters, in the subway and on phone kiosks.
In Times Square, a giant bunny -- about the length of a bus -- graces a billboard.


Cable Networks See Dimmer Future
The central story in the television industry for the last decade has been the erosion of the broadcast networks' audiences.
Now, a new story is emerging: the erosion of cable.
Executives from several of the biggest cable networks -- including MTV, Showtime and Turner Network Television -- said last week that they did not expect their channels to continue to build audiences; rather, they are calculating ways to try to hold on to their current audiences.


Power to the Readers: Ms. Thrives Without Ads
A year ago, Gloria Steinem, one of the founders of Ms. magazine, persuaded Dale W. Lang, the magazine's owner, to attempt a radical ploy to keep the moribund magazine alive.
Try eliminating advertising, she said.
Let Ms. be a completely reader-supported magazine.
This month, a fat and jubilant Ms. celebrates a full year of ad-free publication.
It claims a circulation of 150,000, double what it considers to be the break-even point.
The July-August issue has 108 pages, more than 20 percent


Quiet Celebration Suitable to Shelton
Earlier this month, BRYAN SHELTON became the first American black man since ARTHUR ASHE to win a professional tennis tournament, the Miller Lite Hall of Fame Tennis Championship in Newport, R.I.
Since Ashe retired years ago, that would appear to be cause for getting just a little bit giddy.
But when the match ended, Shelton merely shook his racquet in the direction of his coach rather than throwing a ball or a shirt into the stands.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the audience for black films misstated the box office receipts of the movie "House Party." The total is $27 million.
The article also incorrectly characterized publicity for the film "Boyz N the Hood." The publicity shows gunplay, but not drugs or gangs.


Market Place; A Weak Quarter Seen at Oil Giants
AS big oil companies release earnings reports in the next two weeks, most will post lower profits for the second quarter.
Analysts say that despite higher oil prices, compared with the spring quarter of 1990, too many other parts in the long chain of the energy business fared poorly.
"Most of the major oils will have down quarters," said Bryan Jacoboski, oil analyst at Paine Webber Inc. in New York.
"The comparisons are going to be ugly."


The Health Care System Is Broken; And Here's How to Fix It
The answer is: Managed Competition. What's the question?
This is not one of Johnny Carson's jokes.
The subject is deadly serious: what to do about the crippled U.S. health care system.
A little-known system called managed competition offers the best way out.
It can control costs, improve care and guarantee coverage to every American.


Dave Swid Dies at 86; Ran Trucking Concern
Dave Swid, a former president of the Yale Express Trucking Company and of a business that helped build the New England Thruway, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Swid, who had lived for many years in the Murray Hill section of Manhattan, died of heart failure, said his son, Stephen, the chairman of the Municipal Art Society.


Corrections
An article on July 8 about the battle for survival by pigeons in New York City misidentified a type of bird that is repopulating Central Park.
It is the red-tailed hawk.


Channels Court Audiences By Increasing Promotions
With the growth of cable television slowing and new programming competitors emerging, the established cable networks are redoubling their efforts to locate an ever-scarcer resource: viewers.
Executives at the basic cable networks that specialize in music videos, comedy shows, old movies, network reruns and women's programs say that the days of simply persuading cable system operators to carry their services are over.


The Last Is Least: Yankees End Successful Road Trip With Loss to A's
When they looked back, the Yankees saw both good and bad on the 10-game trip that lifted them to .500 and ended today.
But as they packed and prepared to fly home, they weren't quite sure what to make of the whole thing.
They won three times in Anaheim and three more times here, yet the 4-2 loss they suffered at the hands of the Oakland Athletics today didn't feel right.
They would have liked to return to New York with 7 victories in 10 games.
Instead, they settled for 6.


Girl Talks About Imminent Death After Her Siamese Twin Sister Dies
A 7-year-old girl whose Siamese twin sister died realized then that her own death was minutes away and discussed her last wishes, their mother says.
The twins, Ruthie and Verena Cady, died Friday, said their mother, Marlene Cady.
Ruthie's lungs had deteriorated in the preceding week, the mother said.


Stocks Decline in Tokyo
Stocks finished lower on the Tokyo Stock Exchange today.
The 225-share Nikkei average closed down 161.07 points, or 0.70 percent, to 22,705.29 in light trading.


Review/Dance
The Guangdong Modern Dance Company is anything but still another group on the crowded dance horizon.
For its United States debut at the American Dance Festival here, it came billed as China's only modern-dance troupe and closed its performance with a cheering audience on its feet at Page Auditorium at Duke University.
Four years ago, these same dancers from Canton would not have been familiar with the dance idioms they now executed with such polish; more to the point, Thursday night's debut program consisted entirely of choreography -- seven works -- by the company's own dancers.


Tight Money Seen Affecting Rates
Credit market analysts say that if the slowdown in the growth of an important monetary aggregate continues, the Federal Reserve Board may be forced to lower short-term interest rates.
Most market participants may not have been worrying much in the last month about that aggregate -- the M-2 money supply indicator -- as they have been preoccupied by a string of reports suggesting that an economic recovery is at hand, and by the prospect of a flood of new Treasury securities.


Silicon Graphics to Offer A Cheaper Work Station
The liquid-metal creature that easily changes shapes in "Terminator 2" is a creation of sophisticated computers made by Silicon Graphics Inc. that cost tens of thousands of dollars.
On Monday, in an effort to broaden the market for such graphics beyond Hollywood's special-effects experts, Silicon Graphics will introduce a computer with similar capabilities but costing only $8,000.
The new machine is another example of how once-costly technologies are rapidly becoming inexpensive enough to incorporate into personal computers.


Man Who Killed 11-Year-Old Is Put to Death in Louisiana
A man who abducted, raped and strangled an 11-year-old girl seven years ago was executed by electric chair early this morning.
The man, Andrew Lee Jones, 35, became the 149th person to be executed since the 1976 United States Supreme Court ruling allowing states to resume capital punishment, and the 20th in Louisiana.


INSIDE
Neither Advocate Nor Foe
The predominantly black National Urban League won't oppose the nomination of Clarence Thomas.
Page A8.


NO MEDICAID RELIEF FOR NEAR FUTURE, CUOMO WARNS CITY
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo warned New York City yesterday not to expect help anytime soon on a central element of its efforts to restructure its long-term fiscal problems, cautioning that a state takeover of Medicaid costs was a "projection for the removed future."
Mr.
Cuomo's comments came amid continuing squabbling between City Hall and Albany, and they disappointed senior Dinkins administration officials, who had hoped the state might at least begin assuming some of the city's $2 billion annual Medicaid costs by next summer.
New York requires localities to pay 25 percent of Medicaid costs, the highest local burden in the nation.


Books of The Times; Lonely, and Then Still Lonelier
Brief Lives By Anita Brookner  260 pages. Random House. $20.
Fay Langdon, the elderly first-person narrator of Anita Brookner's latest novel, "Brief Lives" (her 10th), was a singer of popular songs on the wireless in her youth.
Among her favorites were "You Are My Heart's Delight" and "Always."


Trans-Atlantic Crossing for 'Language of Cranes'
When the English producer Ruth Caleb first proposed to the American author David Leavitt that his novel "The Lost Language of Cranes" be adapted for British television by changing its setting from New York to London, he thought it was a terrible idea.
When it was suggested to the Welsh-Irish playwright, novelist and director Sean Mathias that he transpose the novel, he, too, was wary.
New York, he recalled protesting, is a "huge character" in the novel and "New York and London are completely different places."


Miss Krys Wed to William C. Miller Jr.
Madeleine Sarah Krys, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon J. Krys of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday to William Charles Miller Jr., a son of Ardith Perry of West Palm Beach, Fla., and Judge William C. Miller of Silver Spring, Md.
Cantor Siegfried Rowe performed the ceremony at the chapel of the University of Maryland in College Park.
He was assisted by the Rev.
Francis T. Gignac, a Roman Catholic priest.
The bride, 26 years old, and the bridegroom, 28, own Sterling Sounds, a Silver Spring, Md., concern that provides entertainment for social events.
They are graduates of the University of Maryland.
The bridegroom is a law student at American University.


Arab Trade Ban Hurts Others Besides Israelis
An offer by several Arab countries to end more than four decades of economic warfare against Israel would end a struggle that has wounded but not crippled the Israeli economy, many American companies and the Arab world itself.
Saudi Arabia and Jordan have offered to suspend their boycotts on trade with Israel and companies doing business there in exchange for a suspension of Israel's construction of settlements in the occupied territories.
The offer was made after Egypt, which signed a peace treaty with Israel in 1979 and does not observe the ban, suggested such an arrangement.


Market Place; A Weak Quarter Seen at Oil Giants
AS big oil companies release earnings reports in the next two weeks, most will post lower profits for the second quarter.
Analysts say that despite higher oil prices, compared with the spring quarter of 1990, too many other parts in the long chain of the energy business fared poorly.
"Most of the major oils will have down quarters," said Bryan Jacoboski, oil analyst at Paine Webber Inc. in New York.
"The comparisons are going to be ugly."


Bulgaria Wants Soviets to Extradite General
Bulgaria will ask the Soviet Union to extradite a Bulgarian Interior Ministry general linked to the death of an exiled dissident in London 13 years ago, officials said.
The general, Vladimir Todorov, who investigators say was involved in destroying files related to the killing of the dissident, Georgi Markov, in 1978, went to Moscow two months ago despite being told not to leave Bulgaria.


On This Stakeout, A Rising Fighter
JOHN BRAY of Van Nuys, Calif., was the surprise hero of the boxing finals at the United States Olympic Festival in Los Angeles last week when he knocked out MELVIN FOSTER in the third and final round, just after he himself had taken two standing eight- counts.
In the months to come, Bray, a heavyweight, will be working toward his goal of competing at the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain.
But that won't be all he's doing.
Bray has an outside job that brings him more than $12 an hour.


Review/Dance; Sylvie Guillem Steps Into 'Manon'
Confirming what everyone has learned in the last two weeks, namely that the Royal Ballet is on a comeback trail, the British company went out over the weekend with a bang -- one that included Sylvie Guillem's blazingly danced and astonishingly dramatic local debut in the title role of "Manon."
Miss Guillem, who is a principal guest artist, appeared on Friday night as the virginal heroine turned courtesan in Sir Kenneth MacMillan's three-act ballet.
Laurent Hilaire, another guest from her original company, the Paris Opera Ballet, was her partner.
Always an elegant classical dancer, he broke loose from his academic style on this occasion and offered a passionate portrayal, powerful danced, as Des Grieux, Manon's innocent and hapless lover.


Morocco Offshore Zone
Morocco will set up an offshore banking zone in Tangier next year, Ahmed Alaoui, the Government's Minister of State Without Portfolio, said in an article in a newspaper, Le Matin.


Pretoria Admits More Secret Payments
The scandal over covert Government funding for the black political movement Inkatha widened today as Foreign Minister Roelof F. Botha took responsibility for authorizing the payments of nearly $100,000 that subsidized two Inkatha rallies in 1989 and 1990.
And other payments to Inkatha and a labor union it sponsors were disclosed today.


Buddha and Genghis Khan Back in Mongolia
In a makeshift temple at the foot of a rocky cliff in the Gobi Desert, four aged lamas in saffron robes sat cross-legged on carpets before a shrine to Buddha.
They were fasting, meditating in silence and perusing sacred texts of Tibetan Buddhism.
Outside under a harsh sun lay the crumbling mud-brick ruins of the Ulgii Khiid Monastery, which once held more than a thousand monks.
It had been sacked by the repressive Communist Government that ruled Mongolia for 70 years, a Government that destroyed more than 700 monasteries in the 1930's, burning books and executing thousands of lamas.


Samba Rain Date
A public samba session at Lincoln Center that was rained out on Friday night has been rescheduled for tonight at 8:15.
The dance session, which takes place on the Fountain Plaza, is part of the center's Midsummer Night Swing series.
Tickets are $6, or $5 with a Citibank card or a New York City Transit Authority 10-pack token wrapper.


FOOTBALL
Those sonic booms emanating from the environs of the Jets' training camp in the first week of drills have not been caused by planes from Kennedy Airport or impending thunderstorms.
It's only the battle of the punters: left-footed Joe Prokop, the incumbent, dueling it out with right-footed Louie Aguiar, the phenom from the World League of American Football, who set that league's record with an 80-yard moon shot while playing for the Barcelona Dragons.


Seles Loses to Capriati and Is Fined
Monica Seles, tennis outlaw, received her comeuppance today at the foot of the Ramapo Mountains.
Here in northern New Jersey, Seles, the top-ranked female player in the world, was cornered by Jennifer Capriati's sharp service returns and by the persistent tennis bureaucracy.


Why Won't the Buses Stop for Me Anymore?
To the Editor:
Has anyone noticed this disturbing New York City transit trend?
Buses no longer automatically stop for you just because you're standing at a bus stop.
You have to hail them, sometimes to no avail.


Urban League Takes Neutral Position on Thomas
The National Urban League, a predominately black civil rights organization, will take a neutral position on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, a top official said today.
"Our position is not to oppose him -- not to be his advocate, not to be his defender -- but simply not to oppose him and let the Senate do its job," John E. Jacob, president and chief executive of the Urban League, said as the organization prepared to open its annual conference here.


The Doors Were Closed
To the Editor:
"Uncle Anselm, Uncle Sam" (editorial, July 4) refers to a time "a half-century ago when the immigration tide swept in refugees from Hitler." But the doors of this country were closed to such refugees then, save for the fortunate few.
In 1939 the liner St.
Louis, loaded with Jews fleeing Hitler, came to our shores, only to be turned back.


Essay; Saddam's Deadline
George Bush has given Saddam Hussein until Thursday of this week to "come clean" on his possession of, and capacity to produce, weapons of mass destruction, as agreed in the premature suspension of hostilities that preserved his army.
As we approach July 25, two possibilities exist, as Jacobovsky told the Colonel: Either Iraq will make public every device for the production of nuclear material, poison gas, germ weapons and rockets for their delivery -- or Iraq will release just enough data to discourage the U.S., Britain and France from carrying out their U.N.-sanctioned option to use force.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
T.W.A. and American Airlines plan to make a rival offer for Pan Am today, people involved in the offer said, and will divide up much of the bankrupt airline if they are successful.
Pan Am had previously agreed to sell its African, Asian and European routes, its Northeast shuttle and 45 planes to Delta.
A bankruptcy judge will sort out the competing offers.  [ Page A1. ]


Market Place; A Weak Quarter Seen at Oil Giants
AS big oil companies release earnings reports in the next two weeks, most will post lower profits for the second quarter.
Analysts say that despite higher oil prices, compared with the spring quarter of 1990, too many other parts in the long chain of the energy business fared poorly.
"Most of the major oils will have down quarters," said Bryan Jacoboski, oil analyst at Paine Webber Inc. in New York.
"The comparisons are going to be ugly."


At Least 3 Drown Over Weekend
With thousands seeking refuge from the heat in local waters, at least three people drowned and a fourth was presumed dead in the New York metropolitan region on the hottest weekend in more than a decade.
At Prospect Park Lake in Brooklyn, police divers spent most of yesterday and three hours Saturday night searching in vain for the body of a man who fell off a paddle boat while trying to retrieve a pack of cigarettes.
The police said the man was presumed drowned.


Racing Neglect, Drought and Death, Odd Allies Aid Nevada's Wild Horses
On a restricted missile range here, where the bleached carcasses of mustangs poke from the sagebrush, the Air Force, the Bureau of Land Managment and a small band of wild-horse advocates have joined forces to save thousands of animals from dehydration and death.
Faced with five years of drought and a shrinking Federal budget for wild-horse management, these unlikely allies are scrambling to keep Nellis Air Force Base, the home of Stealth bomber, from becoming a mass graveyard.


Ilene White Wed To Paul J. Brown
Ilene Debra White, the daughter of Roberta White of Los Angeles and the late Harvey I. White, was married yesterday in Beverly Hills, Calif., to Dr.
Paul Jonathan Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Brown of Woodbridge, N.J.
Rabbi Zvi Dershowitz and Cantor Judy Fox performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel.
Mrs.
Brown, 25 years old, is a senior buyer for Rocketdyne, the rocket engine division of Rockwell International, in Canoga Park, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Miami.
Her mother, who is retired, was a special-education teacher in Westport, Conn.
Her father was a vice president of United Technologies in Hartford.


Reporter's Notebook; If Those Are Whirling Dervishes, Then This Stop Must Be Istanbul
It was fitting, of course, that George Bush, described by some as America's most famous whirling dervish, should get a chance to see the real thing.
Playing anything-but-accidental tourists today, President Bush and his wife, Barbara, went to Topkapi Sarayi, the great palace of the Ottoman Sultans, their harems and their judicial councils, and watched five dervishes whirl.


Corporate Affairs Head Is Leaving Philip Morris
Guy L. Smith 4th, vice president for corporate affairs at the Philip Morris Companies, New York, has confirmed that he will resign in September from the corporation's top public relations post.
His decision will coincide with the arrival of Michael A. Miles, who succeeds Hamish Maxwell as Philip Morris's chairman.
Jack O'Dwyer's Newsletter, the public relations trade weekly that first reported Mr.
Smith's plans, said his departure might reflect a feeling that Philip Morris had reduced its commitment to public relations.


King Retains Title, Surviving Late Threat
Betsy King withstood a fierce charge by Ayako Okamoto this afternoon to successfully defend her JAL Big Apple Classic title at Wykagyl Country Club.
King edged Okamoto by a single shot for her second victory of the season and the 25th of her career on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour.
She also redeemed herself somewhat after failing to defend her title at the United States Women's Open last week.


Question Box
DiMaggio, Home and Away
Q.
Was Joe DiMaggio a better hitter on the road or at home during his major league career?


Lawmakers Balk on I.M.F. Funds
A request by the Administration to give $12 billion to the International Monetary Fund has run into trouble in Congress.
What initially appeared to be a routine request for an increase in the money that the I.M.F. has available to lend to countries facing trade problems has become an increasingly partisan issue.
Democrats are objecting to the Administration's handling of the request, and they are also unhappy at the I.M.F.'s resistance to making its loans conditional on environmental preservation programs and efforts to alleviate poverty.


Knicks vs. Ewing: Is There A Loophole 7 Feet Long?
It all began with a stroke of good luck, an elated Dave DeBusschere pumping his hand in triumph as he envisioned a future filled with championship seasons.
It was May 13, 1985, and the scene was the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria, where Guy Lombardo and his Royal Canadians had ushered in so many new years.
Now, the Knicks were welcoming in a new era of basketball success.
They had won the grand prize -- the rights to Patrick Ewing, the nation's most renowned college basketball player.


Miller Is Winning New Friends And Influencing His Manager
Keith Miller had two doubles, one headfirst slide and probably a few new admirers after displaying his gutsy style during the Mets' 9-4 victory over the Dodgers at Shea Stadium yesterday.
It was nothing new.
A dirty uniform, a baseball glove for the six different positions he jockeys among and a thirst for more times at bat are typical for Miller.
So is praise from his teammates.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7
Jordan agreed on the peace meeting, joining Syria, Lebanon, Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
But Israel's Prime Minister told Secretary of State James Baker he wanted more time to consider the matter.
Page A1


Measure Need, Not Money
Traditionally, many of America's private colleges and universities have admitted students based on intellectual merit regardless of their financial situation.
Financial aid, on the other hand, has been awarded solely on the basis of need.
Now these fundamental principles are under attack.
On May 22, 1991, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh charged the Ivy League schools and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with violating the Sherman Antitrust Act.
According to the Attorney General, the exchange of information among schools about financial aid decisions constitutes a conspiracy to restrain price competition.


Politics in Turmoil as Soviets Stumble Toward Democracy
While the idea of democracy is catching on in the Soviet Union, putting it into practice is proving troublesome.
As both President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian federated republic and the former Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, are learning, the pace of progress in politics, as in so much else in this country, is roughly two steps forward, one step back.


Leading the Colts Into the Future
Eric Dickerson said he has a friend who refers to Indianapolis Colts quarterback Jeff George as Buck Rogers.
"I asked him why he calls Jeff Buck Rogers," Dickerson, the Colts' running back, said.
"He said, because Jeff is going to be the quarterback that leads us into the 21st century. I like that."


At Issue: Who Best to Care For a Child, Body and Soul
Nelli K.'s picture in the Blue Book, the state's register of children available for adoption, shows a serious-faced girl with oversize bright eyes and a slight disfiguring smudge by her mouth.
When Theresa and Kenneth Orzechowski saw that picture, they thought their search for a child was over.
Mrs.
Orzechowski recalls starting to speak to her husband: "That little girl with the disfigurement in her face . . ."


How Castle Garden Came to Mean Chaos
To the Editor:
Your July 5 article about Ellis Island ends with the statement, "I finally understood the meaning of 'kesl'gartn,' an American Yiddish expression for chaos."


Figuring B.C.C.I.'s Effect On First American Bank
Federal Reserve officials have examined First American Bank closely enough the last two years to conclude that it did little business with the Bank of Credit and Commerce International and will not suffer any harm from the closing of the international bank.
But determining how much of First American, the largest privately owned banking company in the country, is owned by B.C.C.I. is more complicated.
B.C.C.I. agreed in March to divest itself of any ownership in First American but has not yet come up with a plan of action that satisfies the Federal Reserve Board.


Accounts
*
Greater Baltimore McDonald's Advertising Association, a cooperative of local franchise owners and the McDonald's Corporation, to Trahan, Burden &amp; Charles Inc., Baltimore.
Billings were not disclosed.
An agency spokeswoman said the account had been handled by DDB Needham Worldwide, Washington. *
Linens 'n' Things, Clifton, N.J., which operates 140 linen specialty stores, to Houston Effler &amp; Partners, Boston, for national broadcast advertising, including the company's first television commercials.
An agency spokesman said billings totaled $3 million.


Chronicle
DAVID DIAMOND is to receive the Edward MacDowell Medal, honoring his achievements as a composer, at the MacDowell Colony in Peterborough, N.H., on Sept. 15.
Named for the late composer, who founded the artists' colony in 1907, the medal is awarded annually to a writer, composer or visual artist.
Past recipients include Thornton Wilder, Leonard Bernstein, JOHN UPDIKE and WILLIAM STYRON.
Mr.
Diamond, 76, was educated at the Cleveland Institute of Music and the Eastman School of Music, and also studied with Nadia Boulanger.
He teaches at the Juilliard School.
He composed at the MacDowell Colony, a working retreat for writers, composers and artists, in 1935 and 1942.


Chronicle
After being laid off by NBC News in London, VISCOUNT ALTHORP, the brother of the PRINCESS OF WALES, will join a British network as a correspondent on its morning show.
His first report is an interview with ELIZABETH GLASER, the wife of the television actor PAUL MICHAEL GLASER, who contracted AIDS through a blood transfusion and passed it to her children, one of whom has died.
It is to be broadcast on Granada Television's "This Morning" program in the fall.
Charles Althorp worked for NBC since 1986, doing features and interviews of the glitter and human-interest variety.
He was laid off after the Persian Gulf war for financial reasons, NBC said, but at the time he was the only one of 50 London staff members to be dismissed.
He said he resigned.


Terrorists Used Bank In London
Abu Nidal, the Palestinian terrorist, and 10 other terrorists and arms dealers had 42 accounts at London branches of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, The Sunday Times of London reported today.
Quoting "secret B.C.C.I. documents" that it said it had obtained, the newspaper said one of the 10 was Ben Banerjee, an Indian-born arms dealer named in the Iranian arms-for-hostages scandal.
Another was Samir Najmeddin, whom the paper described as an Iraqi businessman who supplied arms to Saddam Hussein and to Argentina during the Falklands war.


Dave Swid Dies at 86; Ran Trucking Concern
Dave Swid, a former president of the Yale Express Trucking Company and of a business that helped build the New England Thruway, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Swid, who had lived for many years in the Murray Hill section of Manhattan, died of heart failure, said his son, Stephen, the chairman of the Municipal Art Society.


JORDANIANS AGREE TO JOIN IN TALKS ON MIDEAST PEACE
Jordan joined Syria, Lebanon, Egypt and Saudi Arabia today in agreeing to attend a regional peace conference proposed by the United States.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel, however, told the visiting American Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d, that he wanted more time to consider the matter.
King Hussein said, "We are ready to attend a peace conference, and we are very happy indeed it is going to be a comprehensive one." The Jordanian ruler spoke at a news conference with Mr.
Baker after their talks in Amman, Jordan's capital.
Until now, Jordan has wavered on accepting the American proposal, waiting to see if Syria would.  5 Acceptances in His Pocket
Mr.
Baker, armed with commitments from the five Arab countries to take part in a conference that would open the way for direct negotiations with Israel, flew here from Amman to try to persuade Mr.
Shamir to drop his opposition to the proposed peace talks.
The Israeli Government, though, seemed shocked -- confronted by Mr.
Baker after he obtained, over three days, commitments from the Arabs to take part in the conference and in subsequent direct talks.
Jordan also joined Saudi Arabia and Egypt in offering to suspend the Arab economic boycott of Israel if it will suspend the building of settlements in the occupied lands.
And President Bush, on a visit to Turkey, again suggested that Israel halt settlement building on the West Bank.
The Israeli public appears skeptical about the latest round of American diplomacy, tempering hope with caution.  [ Page A6. ] Deadline or No Deadline
Mr.
Baker denied that he had set a deadline for an Israeli response on peace talks, but American officials say it is possible that when President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev meet in Moscow on July 30 and 31, they will issue invitations to the conference -- as its joint sponsors -- whether the Israelis have responded positively or not.
Such a move would put Israel under even greater pressure to attend.
"We have always indicated that that would be something we might pursue," said Mr.
Baker, when asked whether invitations would soon be sent.
"Of course, it would be much better, if there is going to be a conference, if everybody could sign on before invitations are issued."
Senior Israeli officials said they had no idea what Mr.
Shamir was going to do, and the Israeli Prime Minister was saying nothing.
Mr.
Shamir's dilemma, though, is clear.
If he says yes to Mr.
Baker, his fragile coalition Government is likely to collapse and he will be challenged by members of his own rightist Likud bloc.
If he says no, he risks alienating Israel from the United States, and from much of the rest of the world.
Mr.
Baker met with Mr.
Shamir alone for 90 minutes.
The meeting was taken up almost entirely with a review of the essence of the letter that President Hafez al-Assad of Syria sent to Mr.
Bush a week ago.
In that letter, the Syrian leader is said to have committed his Government to take part in the peace conference and subsequent direct talks.
The Israelis have been deeply suspicious that Washington and Damascus struck some sort of deal.
American officials said that Mr.
Baker, without actually showing Mr.
Shamir the Assad letter, had briefed him both on its contents and on the side assurances that the United States had provided the Syrians.
What U.S.
Would Do for Syria
Those side assurances mostly involve restatements of American policy: that the United States does not recognize the Israeli annexation of the Golan Heights; that it believes that United Nations Security Council Resolution 242, calling on Israel to exchange land for peace, applies to the Golan Heights as well as to the West Bank, and that the United States is committed to pushing any peace negotiations actively, so as not to allow delays.
Mr.
Shamir asked Mr.
Baker for more time to consider the matter, and the two men will be meeting again on Monday.
"We are not under any pressure to give an answer soon," the Prime Minister's spokesman, Avi Pazner, said.
"The problem is content, not deadlines."
Before Mr.
Baker met with Mr.
Shamir, he held talks with three West Bank Palestinian leaders, led by Faisal al-Husseini, and made it clear to them that they, too, had to make some hard decisions.
American officials said it was a tough, and at times emotional, encounter in which the Palestinians were essentially told that as the weakest party in the equation, they would have to accept previously unpalatable political realities.
One of those is that the Palestine Liberation Organization, led by Yasir Arafat, can have no direct involvement with their delegation to the peace conference, since that would prompt the Israelis to walk out immediately.
The other is that no Palestinians from East Jerusalem can take part in the first stage of the negotiations.
The Israelis have ruled this out, arguing that such a role would imply that East Jerusalem, which Israel has annexed, was negotiable.
But it is possible that the second restriction might be finessed if there is a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation and Palestinians born in Jerusalem take part with Jordanian passports.
Despite those restrictions, the Palestinian leaders were told that they would soon have to come up with a list of acceptable representatives, American officials said.
An intriguing thing about the endorsements that Mr.
Baker has won from the Arab countries is that the Arab leaders all say in public that they are ready to accept Mr.
Bush's proposal to attend "a peace conference" to reach a "comprehensive solution" based on Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338.
But none of them ever mentions that this conference is intended as a ceremonial opening event for direct Arab-Israeli talks.
American officials insist that the Arab leaders have privately assured them that they understand this, but do not now want to say it publicly for fear of alienating their own hard-liners.
Each one, instead, allows Mr.
Baker to say it for him.
Thus, when reporters asked King Hussein today if he would say in public that he was committed to direct talks with Israel, he was not pleased.
Looking a bit flummoxed, the King replied, "This is about the most ridiculous question I have ever heard."
If it is so simple, the reporters persisted, why not give just a simple answer?
"What do you attend a conference to do?" the King retorted.
"To mime? To make faces at each other, or to discuss and try to resolve the problem? I have been calling for this for years and years. I assure you that this is really the intention, and it is very, very clear."
As the journalists continued to press the King to say the words "direct bilateral talks with Israel," he declared the news conference over and walked out with Mr.
Baker.
--------------------
BUSH REITERATES VIEW
ISTANBUL, Turkey, July 21 (Special to The New York Times) -- President Bush, on a visit to Turkey, suggested once again today that Israel should be flexible for the sake of peace in the Middle East and halt settlement building on the West Bank.
"The question of settlements has been important," Mr.
Bush said, in response to a reporter's question at a meeting here today with Turkish opposition leaders.
"I haven't encountered anybody in this part of the world that thinks increasing settlements is a helpful thing. And the United States policy has been opposed to it for years."
The President also said he did not want to use a "volatile" word like pressure in talking about his stance with the Israelis.
He preferred to call it "reasoning and taking this -- what I keep calling a new credibility for the United States in the Middle East -- and using that to encourage what is a very reasonable and important step to peace."


Quotations of the Day
"We are ready to attend a peace conference and we are very happy indeed it is going to be a comprehensive one." -- King Hussein of Jordan.  [ A1:6. ]
"It would be much better, if there is going to be a conference, if everybody could sign on before invitations are issued." -- Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.  [ A1:6. ]
"We are not under any pressure to give an answer soon." --Avi Pazner, spokesman for Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel.  [ A6:1. ]


World Economies


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday Budget Deficit . . .
June


Almost Like Old Times At the Cosmos' Reunion
The Cosmos were back tonight at Giants Stadium for a doubleheader reunion, reminding soccer fans of a phenomenon that died too soon, too long ago.
A nostalgic crowd of 31,871 clapped the rhythmic Cosmos clap, cheered a cameo appearance by Pele and kicked soccer balls around the Meadowlands parking lot into the night.


William Homan, 72, Senior Pediatrician and Popular Author
Dr.
William E. Homan, a pediatrician and writer, died yesterday at his home in White Plains.
He was 72 years old.
He died of emphysema and a heart attack, his family said.


Amulya L. Laskar, 60, a Professor of Physics
Amulya Lal Laskar, an expert on solid-state materials and a professor of physics, died Friday at Anderson Memorial Hospital in Anderson, S.C.
He was 60 years old and lived in Clemson, S.C.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Broadcasting Museum Moves Down a Block And Up 17 Stories
The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum opened in 1959; the Whitney Museum of American Art in 1966.
So when the Museum of Television and Radio makes its debut this fall, it will be "the first museum to open in Manhattan with its own architectural statement in this generation," said Philip Johnson, who designed it with John Burgee.
Seventeen stories tall and sheathed in white dolomite, a stone similar to limestone, the museum will be at 25 West 52d Street, next to the "21" Club.
The new structure will be four times the size of the museum's previous home at 1 East 53d Street, where it was called the Museum of Broadcasting.


Diamond-Star Deal Is Seen
The Chrysler Corporation will give control of Diamond-Star Motors to the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation, its joint-venture partner, later this month, The Detroit News reported today.
A spokesman for the Mitsubishi Sales Corporation of America, Kim Custer, said that he was uncertain of the details of the settlement, but that he expected negotiations to be completed by July 31, The News reported.


Crackdown Reported On Messages by Police
The Police Department is cracking down on abuses of its patrol car computer system following the disclosure that some officers used the system to send racist and sexist messages, The Los Angeles Times reported today.
Three full-time and 15 part-time officers have been assigned to conduct spot checks of the thousands of transmissions sent daily by patrol officers and dispatchers, the newspaper said.
The department is seeking to stop messages unrelated to police work and to identify officers who send offensive messages.


Workers Vote to End Strike at a G.M. Plant
Striking auto workers have overwhelmingly approved an agreement to end a 26-day walkout over safety issues at a General Motors Corporation plant that builds minivans.
More than 99 percent of the plant's 3,200 workers voted Saturday to approve the agreement, said Sunny Biedrzycki, a spokesman for United Auto Workers Local 239.


New Ratings A Milestone For Insurers
The decision Friday by a top Wall Street ratings agency to lower the ratings of six giant life insurers is likely to stand as a milestone in the business, insurance executives and other experts say.
Until recently, virtually all of the big insurance companies had been considered rock solid -- their ability to pay claims beyond question.
But the rating reductions by Moody's Investors Service seem likely to accelerate a shift of money, making the strong insurers stronger and the vulnerable more weak.


The Luster Fades at First American
Although banking regulators are still puzzled by exactly who owns First American Bankshares Inc. of Washington and what connections it had with the recently closed Bank of Credit and Commerce International of Luxembourg, there is not much mystery about the bank's business.
With banks in Washington and six states and $11 billion in assets, enough to make it about the 50th-largest banking company in the country, First American is much like dozens of other regional banking companies, collecting consumer deposits and making loans to local businesses.


'Why Don't You Walk Your Talk'
SOMEWHERE in America, perhaps even as we speak, a tendon snaps like a dry twig and a big man pitches forward on his face mask.
A National Football League general manager rewinds a four-minute video to watch Brian Holloway, 6 feet 7 inches, 295 pounds, 31 years old, pumping under full knee squats.
Then he reaches for the phone.
"I like that," Brian Holloway said.
"Now, I don't want the guy maimed, but out for the season would be O.K."


Expert Says Pesticide Killed All Life in River
A state wildlife expert said that the pesticide spilled into the Sacramento River after a derailment July 14 killed "every living thing in the river" and that it would be years before the fishery was restored.
Other experts testifying at a community hearing on Saturday before a panel convened by lawmakers from the area said 13 hours elapsed before officials could determine the magnitude of the spill, 45 miles north of Shasta Lake.
The lake, the state's largest reservoir, feeds into the sources of water supplies throughout California.


Bush Lifted South Africa Sanctions Too Soon; Time to Move On
To the Editor:
"South African Sanctions: Go Slow" (editorial, July 5) asserts that sanctions were a factor, among many others, in stimulating change in South Africa, though not in my view the most important.
I believe the efforts of the black people of South Africa and the recent initiatives of President F. W. de Klerk are the foremost reasons for change in South Africa.


Bush Lifted South Africa Sanctions Too Soon
To the Editor:
President Bush's decision to lift South African sanctions (front page, July 11) ignores compelling evidence that the South African Government is pursuing a double agenda -- freeing Nelson Mandela, unbanning the anti-apartheid opposition and dismantling much of apartheid's legal structure, but at the same time orchestrating violence against its chief rival, the African National Congress.
While Americans want to believe that the South African Government is unequivocally ending apartheid, the following evidence of government-sponsored violence should not have been ignored.


House Plan Fuels Debate On Business
Although members of both parties on Capitol Hill favor policies to make American business more competitive, a debate is emerging over how far to go.
Some lawmakers, mostly Democrats, seek a broad range of programs to nurture American technology.
But others, mostly Republicans, fear that some proposals would needlessly interject the Government into decisions best left to private industry and the marketplace.


With a 29 on Front 9, Baker-Finch Takes British Open
Ian Baker-Finch answered his doubters and, more important, his pursuers today by scoring the lowest nine-hole figure ever shot on the final day of a major championship and then cruising home to win the 120th British Open at Royal Birkdale.
The 30-year-old Australian, who played poorly near the lead on the final day of the 1984 and 1990 British Opens, was nearly flawless in bursting out today with five front-nine birdies for a 29 to take a commanding five-shot lead.


Lingering Heat Is Taking a Toll On New Yorkers
As the region's most oppressive heat wave in years began its second week yesterday, New York suffered.
In so many ways, the suffering was measurable: a high of 102 degrees, unbearable ozone levels, near-record water usage, the highest demand ever for electricity on a weekend.
The suffering was measurable in less concrete but no less disturbing terms as well: extra ambulance runs, joggers having trouble breathing, elderly people with heart attacks, even stabbings and shootings that some officials attributed to tempers that flared in the heat.


Boyd Traded by Expos To the Texas Rangers
The Texas Rangers, hoping to bolster their rotation for a possible run at the American League West title, today obtained right-handed pitcher Dennis (Oil Can) Boyd from the Montreal Expos.
Boyd, 31 years old, was 6-8 with a 3.52 e.r.a. for the Expos.
Texas sent minor league pitchers Jonathan Hurst and Joey Eischen plus a player to be named later to Montreal.


Review/Pop; Fate's Whims and Other Celtic Musings
"Nobody knows why Elvis threw it all away/Nobody knows what Ruby had to hide," sings Paul Brady in "Nobody Knows," a high point of his recent album "Trick or Treat." One of 20 songs that the Irish singer and songwriter performed at the Bottom Line on Wednesday evening, it compares mysteries surrounding dead public figures with the suicide of a man named Johnny whose expectations of public recognition have not been fulfilled.
Probing, expertly crafted songs like "Nobody Knows" have made the 44-year-old veteran of the Irish traditional band Planxty a respected rock songwriter, although they have not made him a star.
Bonnie Raitt recorded two Brady compositions on her newest album, "Luck of the Draw," including the title cut, which Mr.
Brady also performed on Wednesday.
The song is a sharply drawn portrait of an aspiring screenwriter in Los Angeles who works in a bar while waiting for a break.
Like "Nobody Knows," it views fame and fortune as uncontrollable whims of fate.


Life Styles Fall Victim to Connecticut Crisis
The Mordasky dairy farm is experimenting this year, out of pure necessity, with a special variety of corn that matures weeks sooner than the usual crop.
For that, blame the Connecticut budget crisis.
The farm's owner, Representative John D. Mordasky, a Democrat from Stafford Springs, is a full-time farmer who saw his part-time avocation as a state lawmaker all but take over his life this spring and summer.
He lost so much time shuttling back and forth to Hartford for budget votes and meetings that there was simply no time to sow the cornseed on time, although the 70 cows on his farm in the northeast corner of the state still had to get milked, come what may.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Papers begin to See Hints That Ad Slump Is Ending
SIX months into 1991, the prospects that newspaper advertising will show an improvement over 1990 are dim at best.
A decline in newspaper advertising spending this year would be the first back-to-back annual drop since World War II.
But like the first balmy whiff of spring in early March, the fleeting and elusive scent of better times has been detected by some newspaper exectives.


Reviews/Television; Glimpses of Einstein As Others Saw Him
The remarkable thing about "A. Einstein: How I See the World" is the way Albert Einstein's simple sweetness comes through despite a narration that clashes with his lifelong avoidance of affectation and a musical score that seems bent on defying the proposition that there is order in the universe.
The stronger elements of tonight's offering in the "American Masters" series, at 9 o'clock on Channel 13, are the interviews with the scientist's friends and associates (Abba Eban and Linus Pauling are the most readily recognizable) and, most especially, the newsreels and home movies of the little man with the bushy hair and teddy-bearish look being feted by admirers (there's George Bernard Shaw doing the honors at a testimonial) and sometimes trying to escape them.


Dr. Carmelina Peralta Is Married to John Litt
Dr.
Carmelina Peralta, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Apolinar I. Peralta of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to John Litt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur A. Litt of Tarrytown, N.Y.
Morrie Slifkin, a retired justice of the State Supreme Court in White Plains, performed the ceremony at James House in North Tarrytown.


Signs Seen in Japan Scandal Of Efforts to Curb Inquiry
Nearly every day for the last week, a leading Japanese official has issued a plea for a full investigation of Japan's biggest stock market scandal in nearly three decades.
But there are signs now that greater efforts are being made to limit the scandal's impact and avoid the prosecution of those caught in its web.
Responding to an outraged public, public officials and industry leaders promised they would get to the bottom of the charges that Japanese brokerage houses improperly compensated some big clients for market losses.
There also have been charges that some brokers financed and executed possibly illegal stock trading by an rganized-crime figure.


Celia J. Michaels Weds S. P. Evans
Celia Joyce Michaels, the daughter of Ruth Gruber of New York and the late Philip H. Michaels, was married yesterday in the Conservatory Garden in Central Park to Stephen Peter Evans, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Evans of Plymouth, England.
Justice Betty Weinberg Ellerin of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated.
The bride, 38 years old, is a freelance television producer and editor.
She graduated from the American International School in Tel Aviv and attended New York University.
Her mother writes and lectures about Israel.
Her late father was a lawyer and vice president of Sachs Quality Stores in New York.


West Virginia Roads: A Bumpy Legacy Lives On
As the four-wheel-drive lurches across the mountain, splashes through the creek and bounces down a graveled lane, miles from the cushioned comforts of blacktop, a thought occurs: John Denver may have immortalized West Virginia's country roads, but he didn't have to drive on them.
In West Virginia, the struggle to build and maintain roads is a Sisyphean quest that is woven into the state's politics, with significant social and economic consequences.


Noxious Air Lies Closer Than Mexico City
To the Editor:
As a physician practicing internal medicine and living on Staten Island, I have followed with particular interest recent coverage of the air pollution problems of Mexico City.
My office lies within half a mile of the Goethals Bridge and the Linden-Rahway chemical-refinery complex, and even closer to the Fresh Kills landfill.


Youth, 14, Kills A Man He Says Attacked Him
A 14-year-old youth emerged from a midtown Manhattan hotel Saturday afternoon, the police say, walked up to an officer, handed over a gun and calmly gave this message: he had just killed a man in a fifth-floor room.
The police are trying to determine exactly what led up to the killing of the man, 35-year-old Luis V. Cabrera.
But yesterday, they charged the youth, Luis Montalvo, with second-degree murder and criminal possession of a weapon.
They said the youth shot Mr.
Cabrera seven times.


Man Dies and 5 People Are Hurt In Unprovoked Bronx Shootings
One man was killed and three men and two women were wounded in two separate shootings -- both apparently unprovoked -- in the Bronx this weekend, the police said.
A gunman, about 19 or 20 years old, walked up to a man, his wife and his niece last night and opened fire as they stood on the sidewalk talking in front of 1285 Washington Avenue in the Morrisania section.


Ethiopia Troops Battle to Survive Misery of Peace
Six weeks after they lost the war, hundreds of thousands of Ethiopian Army soldiers, sick and hungry, are huddling without shelter in squalid camps or slogging on foot through brutal mountain passes in a chaotic nightmare of demobilization.
Hundreds of soldiers have died of exhaustion, malaria and pneumonia, relief workers say.
Exact numbers of deaths are not known because many are believed to have died in rough and remote areas.


Panel Members Differ On Districting Ruling
A leading dissenter on the panel that redrew the New York City Council district lines said yesterday that he would push for the whole map to be revised to guarantee up to 11 Hispanic majority districts in the wake of the map's rejection last week by the Justice Department as unfair to Hispanic residents.
"I frankly think this is not a matter of tinkering," said Herson Cabreras, one of four members of the Districting Commission who voted against the original plan.
"I would have to say right now that everything else is back on the table. You can't change one district without affecting everything else.


Woman Hit With Baseball Bat
A 29-year-old woman was hit over the head with a baseball bat by a man who tried to rob her as she left a subway station in downtown Brooklyn last night, the police said.
The victim, Deidre Duffy, was in critical condition at Long Island College Hosital.
The police said she was attacked shortly after 6 P.M. as she left a subway entrance at Warren and Smith Streets.
The suspect, who was about 20 years old, was wearing a New York Yankee shirt with the number 22 on the back.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Levi and Spike Lee Return In 'Button Your Fly' Part 2
NOT every advertising campaign is successful enough to inspire T-shirts.
Fewer still inspire imitative T-shirts.
Having inspired both, Spike Lee's "501 Button-Fly Report" for Levi Strauss &amp; Company 501 jeans is returning for a second year.
Since the campaign first appeared last summer, "we have definitely seen percentage increases in sales in a market that has been pretty flat," Daniel M. Chew, Levi's marketing manager, said in a telephone interview on Friday from the company's San Francisco headquarters.


Review/Music; 20th-Century Fare in Mid-July Heat
Putting on a music festival, which is a complex undertaking in the best of times, has suddenly become more difficult.
In a recent article in the Arts and Leisure section of The New York Times, Samuel Lipman, the artistic director of the Waterloo Festival in Waterloo Village here, described the difficulty of keeping an ambitious program intact in a time of recession, with government support drastically cut and private financing also harder to come by.
Although the hallmark of Waterloo since its founding in 1976 by Gerard Schwarz has been adventuresome repertory, Mr.
Lipman made no bones about the festival's new strategy for hard times, a bid to attract larger paying audiences with more standard fare.
This evening's concert carried forward the festival's advocacy of 20th-century American symphonies, particularly those of David Diamond.
But for the rest, the program played safe, with a Beethoven piano concerto and a Brahms symphony.


Review/Dance; Giving the Steps Mind and Emotion
Joyce Trisler wore her heart well sewn onto her sleeve.
It is possible to combine intelligence and choreographic craft with deep feelings, though probably that gets easier with practice.
That, at any rate, was what a program by the Joyce Trisler Danscompany suggested on Friday night at the High School of Performing Arts, where the troupe performed as part of the summer Fiorello Festival.
Trisler, a modern dance choreographer who died in 1979, was also a stickler for clarity and precision.
Her "Journey," a signature 1958 solo danced to Ives's "Unanswered Question," and "Dance for Six," created in 1969 and set to music by Vivaldi, are models of those qualities.
The solo is essentially a slow but steady voyage about the stage, arms reaching ahead lyrically and legs stretching behind.
It looks at least slightly different in the hands of each interpretor.


Panel to Decide: Should Doctor Who Aided Suicide Be Tried?
In a grand jury room here Monday morning, a panel of 23 men and women will set out to explore a frontier of the law: whether a Rochester doctor committed a crime when he helped a leukemia patient commit suicide with an overdose of barbiturates.
At least 22 states have laws that make assisting a suicide a crime, but prosecutions of doctors under the laws have been virtually unknown.
Whether Dr.
Timothy E. Quill is cleared or charged, the grand jury action here is likely to become the clearest test yet of what consitutes assisting a suicide and whether the law can permit doctors to help end life under any circumstances.
"He is a test of what the public sentiment is going to be on assisted suicide," said Jay E. Kantor, the medical ethicist at New York University Medical Center and Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan.
Case Published in Journal
The grand jury is expected to consider everything from manslaughter to misdemeanor charges in the case, which gained national attention when The New England Journal of Medicine published an article in the spring in which Dr.
Quill recounted his role in the death of a longtime patient he called Diane.


People
*
Michael Hawkins, 39, has been named to the new position of executive vice president and creative director at J. Walter Thompson Direct, New York.
He had previously been creative director at the marketing agency Chapman Direct, New York.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of July 22: MONDAY Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Howell Corp Inco Ltd Lubrizol Corp Phila Elec Rohm &amp; Haas Co Stone Container Corp Unit Dominion Inds


Earnings Drop At Affiliated
Affiliated Publications Inc., the parent of The Boston Globe, says its net profits dropped 58 percent in the second quarter.
The company cited continuing decreases in advertising revenues.
Net income was $3.1 million, or 4 cents a share, for the three- month period that ended on June 30.
That compared with earnings of $7.4 million, or 11 cents a share, in the comparable period of last year.
Revenues totaled $130.9 million, compared with $132.1 million.


Prosecutors Seek to Restore Conviction of Miami Officer
Prosecutors are seeking to reinstate the manslaughter conviction of a police officer whose shooting of a black motorist led to three nights of racial riots in 1989.
In a written appeal filed with the State Supreme Court on Friday, prosecutors said an appellate court's decision last month to grant a new trial for the officer, William Lozano, "ignores reality and confounds logic." That decision, by the Third District Court of Appeals, held that the trial judge should have moved the case out of Miami.


A New Generation Fills Winner's Circles Where Bluebloods Reigned
Students of revolution may decide someday that the torch was passed two weeks ago when the winner of the Coaching Club American Oaks went to the winner's circle at Belmont Park to accept the trophy, and in so doing, transformed the sport of kings.
Presenting the trophy (or passing the torch) was Whitney Tower Jr., vice president of the Coaching Club, president of the Racing Hall of Fame and one of the thoroughbreds of thoroughbred racing, clothed in gray pinstripes and regimental silk tie and wrapped in generations of tradition.


Chronicle
Unlike most choreographers, who may be inspired by music or plot, ELIOT FELD needs words.
And they pop into his head from unlikely sources.
Take "Evoe," a new work that will be seen during the Feld Ballets/NY preview season at the Joyce Theater in New York from Aug. 5 through 17.
"I just couldn't find a title for this ballet; they kept telling too much," Mr.
Feld said.
"Evoe doesn't because nobody knows what the hell it means."


A Sea of Doubt Swells Around Bush's Education Plan
Three months after President Bush staked his claim to be the "education President" by unveiling an ambitious plan to transform American schools, his strategy is coming under increasing fire.
Within the last two weeks, the presidents of the country's two major teachers' unions have sharply attacked his plan after earlier praising it.
A committee of business leaders assembled to raise money to build innovative model schools is reportedly facing tough going in the recession.


Salvadoran Far-Right Leader Ill With Cancer
Roberto d'Aubuisson, the far-right leader accused of death-squad involvement in the early 1980's, who went on to build the dominant political party in El Salvador, is fighting what associates say is terminal cancer.
The passing of Mr. d'Aubuisson, a hard-smoking, hard-drinking man with the style and image of a tough guy, would be likely to throw Salvadoran politics into disarray and could create confusion in the peace negotiations under way between the Government of President Alfredo Cristiani and leftist insurgents.


Wergeles President Comes From BBDO
Alan Chalfin, a senior vice president and creative director at BBDO New York, has been named president and creative director at Wergeles &amp; Drazen, New York.
Mr.
Chalfin, who is 44, succeeds Michael Drazen, who left last month to become chief creative officer of Earle Palmer Brown &amp; Spiro, Philadelphia.
A change in the agency's name, to reflect Mr.
Chalfin's arrival, is possible, said Donald S. Wergeles, chairman.


For a Little Levity, Fans Stay Tuned to Kaplan
GABE KAPLAN a radio sports talk host?
Are we speaking of the comedian who starred in the ABC-TV sitcom "Welcome Back, Kotter" from 1975-78?
Yes, that's the very same Kaplan who is host of "Sports Nuts" on KLAC in Los Angeles for 70 minutes a night, five nights a week, during drive time.


The Judge and His Sister: Growing Up Black; The Lives of Women
To the Editor:
Like Judge Clarence Thomas, I attended a Roman Catholic school in Savannah, Ga.
Like Judge Thomas, I learned lessons there that have stayed with me all my life.
I might even claim that my professional pursuits are deeply related to those lessons.
But unlike Judge Thomas, I have spent my life trying to undo their damage.
Similar sentiments were expressed by many other women students at Harvard Divinity School when I was a student there in the mid-1970's.


Reebok Profit Up 39.2%
Reebok International Ltd. said today that its second-quarter profit jumped 39.2 percent, bucking the trend in retailing, which has been weakened by the recession.
The maker of athletic shoes, based in Stoughton, Mass., said it earned $60.4 million, or 64 cents a share, in the period, up from $43.4 million, or 38 cents a share, a year earlier.
The company's revenues rose 30.6 percent, to $688.3 million, from $527.2 million.
Reebok's shares rose $1.75, to $28.75, on the New York Stock Exchange today.


Global Investors -- a special report: EMERGING MARKETS; Big Profits, Large Risks
Outside the world's developed economies, a host of stock markets in developing countries from Mexico to Malaysia, Thailand to Taiwan and India to Indonesia offer the opportunity for substantial profits.
But the price of those profits is increased risk, for these markets are volatile and generally lag far behind in the rudimentary measures required to protect investors.
In terms of basic accounting standards, the International Finance Corporation of Washington, which has established regulatory criteria for 20 of these emerging stock markets, found in a recent survey that only 7 nations -- Brazil, Chile, Mexico, India, South Korea, Malaysia and the Philippines -- have accounting standards that are acceptable by international standards.
Nine nations have standards that are merely "adequate," the I.F.C. found, and Greece, Jordan, Taiwan and Indonesia have poor accounting standards that are in need of reform, it said.


By Design; The Pins of Paris
The biggest fad with Parisian teen-agers right now is pins.
It is de rigeur to have your baseball cap or jacket lapels loaded with colorful, domino-dot-size enamel tack pins.
These can focus on one subject (cars, for instance), commemorate an art exhibit or celebrate a sport.
Others look like minuscule Lacosteshirts, Perrier bottles, Galeries Lafayette shopping bags or bottles of famous-name perfumes.
One of the favorite places to search out these pins is the small flea market that takes over a block of the elegant Avenue Matignon just off the rond-point on certain weekday and holiday mornings.
A few of the vendors that set up their card tables there still deal in stamps, but the pin pushers have practically taken over.
Prices start as low as a little over a dollar, but around $12 is average.


I.B.M. and Tandon To Share Patents
I.B.M. and the Tandon Corporation, a California computer maker, said they would share technology they are developing for personal computers and software.
The International Business Machines Corporation, based in Armonk, N.Y., and Tandon, of Moorpark, Calif., said their cross-license patent agreement covers technology and advances being developed under patents to be filed before July 1, 1996.


Careers; Late Premed Programs for Graduates
LIBERAL arts graduates unhappy in or out of the job market, nurses, engineers and others interested in midcareer changes can become doctors if they have the dedication, persistence and enthusiasm, plus a respectable scholastic average.
Many are doing just that, as schools that have had programs in place for some time have noticed a large increase in applicants since the beginning of the recession.
For the last few years, Goucher College in Towson, Md., has had a premed program intended for such persons, and especially for liberal arts majors who decide they would like to become doctors after working at other jobs following college graduation.


T.W.A. Bid Is Given To Pan Am
Trans World Airlines Inc. made formal yesterday its offer for much of Pan American World Airways, with a written proposal to combine the two struggling carriers.
As expected, the bid totals $450 million for an array of Pan Am assets, with most of the money -- $250 million -- supplied by American Airlines.
In return, American would acquire the Pan Am Shuttle and Pan Am's routes to Italy, Spain and Portugal.


To Our Readers
Because of an electrical power failure yesterday that affected certain computer lines transmitting trading data to The Associated Press, details of trading in some options on futures were not available.


Sports People: OLYMPICS; Post for Steinbrenner
GEORGE STEINBRENNER was named to the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games yesterday.
ROBERT HELMICK , president of the United States Olympic Committee, announced the appointment of Steinbrenner, who has been a U.S.O.C. vice president since 1985, to the board that will oversee the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta.
The U.S.O.C. appoints seven members to the 31-member board.
Steinbrenner replaced LEROY WALKER , who has been hired as the committee's senior vice president for sport.
The U.S.O.C. asked Walker to give up his board seat because it posed a potential conflict of interest, Helmick said. (AP)


Dublin Theater to Stage All of Beckett's Plays
Irish arts organizers plan to stage all 19 plays by Samuel Beckett in a major festival celebrating the life and work of the Nobel Prize-winning playwright.
Organizers announced today that the plays, including "Waiting for Godot," would be staged from Oct. 1 through Oct. 20 at the Gate Theater here to coincide with a series of lectures on Beckett at Trinity College.
The playwright died in Paris in 1989 at the age of 83.


2 Top Nomura Officials Quit In Effort to Curb Scandal
Desperate to contain a scandal over Japanese financial market practices, both the chairman and the vice chairman of the Nomura Securities Company resigned today, trying to check the growing damage to the world's largest brokerage house.
With tears in his eyes, Setsuya Tabuchi, Nomura's chairman, provided no details today of what Nomura had done wrong, gave only a vague confirmation that it had breached securities laws and said little about helping investigate the scandal.


Ex-Drug Agent Is Given 80-Year Sentence
A former Federal drug agent was sentenced today to 80 years in prison for selling cocaine and heroin and laundering millions of dollars from the proceeds through European banks.
The former agent, Darnell Garcia, 44 years old, received the maximum prison term from Judge Terry J. Hatter Jr. of the Federal District Court.


Robert Freihofer, 71; Led Baking Company
Robert W. Freihofer, chairman of the board of the Charles Freihofer Baking Company in Albany, died on Saturday at his home in Lake George, N.Y.
He was 71 years old.
Mr. Freihofer died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Hughes Shifts Operations
Reacting to a decline in military spending, the Hughes Aircraft Company revamped its operations today to stress its commercial businesses.
The company also moved toward the retirement of its chairman and chief executive, Malcolm R. Currie, by creating an office of the chairman.
Hughes, the military and electronics subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, said it would consolidate seven operating groups into three within the next few years.
As part of the refocusing, Hughes has created a new telecommunications and space sector.


Frustrations For Executives
Foreign business executives seeking contracts in Kuwait often grumble privately at the frustrations they continue to face, even when business prospects appear good.
There are plenty of airline flights to Kuwait these days.
On arriving you can get a cab, though it can be hard to rent a car, and confirmed hotel reservations sometimes evaporate mysteriously.
In the end, rooms can be had, although they are expensive and sometimes in disrepair -- lacking locks on the doors, for instance.


Blacks Are Found to Be Still Scarce in Advertisements in Major Magazines
Two decades after the civil rights movement began prodding the communications media to increase and diversify their depictions of members of minorities, blacks remain nearly invisible in the advertising of major national magazines, a comprehensive study has found.
Although blacks make up 12 percent of the United States population and more than 11 percent of all magazine readers, they appear in only 4.5 percent of all magazine advertisements and constitute a little more than 3 percent of the


Banc One Ponders Ameritrust Offer
The Banc One Corporation, a growing regional giant based in Columbus, Ohio, said it would consider making an offer for the Ameritrust Corporation, the Cleveland bank.


In Death, Mao's Purged Heir Wins Redemption in a Movie
One of the greatest political mysteries of modern China is the true fate of Marshal Lin Biao, who was the designated successor of Mao Zedong -- that is, until he died in 1971 after supposedly trying to assassinate Mao and seize power for himself.
Two decades later, one of the political mysteries of this summer is why the Communist Party leadership appears to be trying to rehabilitate Lin, or at least his early career.


Stocks Flat in Tokyo
Stock prices were little changed today in Tokyo.
The 225-issue Nikkei average ended the day at 22,758.98, up 53.69, or 0.24 percent.
At midday, the Nikkei had been up 34.94 points, or less than two-tenths of 1 percent.


Sports of The Times; The Coach Wants Jets Wide-Eyed
Under a bluish-gray blanket of 100-degree heat, the Jets' offensive linemen were huffing, puffing and perspiring as assistant coach Larry Beightol tutored their technique.
"Get your weight on your inside leg," Beightol barked.


Bridge
Since it is unaffected by climatic extremes, bridge has an advantage over most other competitive activities.
While others sweltered in the weekend heat, hundreds of enthusiasts battled happily for numerous titles at the New York Summer Regional Championships at the Vista International Hotel at the World Trade Center.


Miscellany
*
Honsberger &amp; Sargent, Nashville, a marketing communications agency, is closing, as two of its three principals join Earle Palmer Brown's office in that city.
Peter Honsberger and Cindy Sargent will bring several accounts with them, including Stevens Aviation.
Their new titles are senior art director and senior copywriter, respectively.


Result Plus
TENNIS Poland Stuns France Poland scored the first upset of the 1991 Federation Cup tournament in Nottingham, England, yesterday by knocking out sixth-seeded France in the first round, and Canada advanced by beating Denmark.
The unheralded Poles, who last won a Federation Cup match 17 years ago, embarrassed Nathalie Tauziat and Mary Pierce, both ranked among the world's top 100 female players.
Pierce managed to beat Magdalena Mroz, 6-4, 6-2, in the opening singles before 22-year-old Katarzyna Nowak, ranked No. 165, humbled 14th-ranked Tauziat, 4-6, 6-4, 6-4.


Amoco, ARCO and Ashland Report Declines in Earnings
Two large oil companies operating mainly in the United States, the Amoco Corporation and ARCO, said profits fell sharply in the second quarter.
Net income fell by 37.2 percent at Amoco and by 37.1 percent at ARCO.
Ashland Oil Inc., the nation's second-largest refiner after the Sun Company, said net income declined 33.3 percent in the quarter.


For Dinkins, No Fiscal 'Silver Bullet' From Albany
In announcing that the state had no immediate plans to take over $2 billion in Medicaid costs from the city, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo made it clear today that there would be no state bailout for the city as there was in the city fiscal crisis of 1975.
In doing so, he reinforced the sense in Albany and in the financial community that Mayor David N. Dinkins still must demonstrate his ability to solve his problems on his own before expecting help from outsiders.


Sears Reports a Small Increase in 2d-Quarter Earnings
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company yesterday reported higher net income in the second quarter, after a deferred charge.
Perhaps more significant, the retailer said its key merchandising group rebounded from a loss in the first quarter and posted a profit.
The company's net income rose five-tenths of 1 percent, to $239.2 million, or 70 cents a share, after a deferred-tax charge, from $237.9 million, or 60 cents a share.
Before the $64.1 million deferred-tax charge, the net was up 27.5 percent, to $303.4 million.
Consolidated revenues rose 1.7 percent, to $14.09 billion, from $13.85 billion in the corresponding quarter last year.


The Ebb and Flow of the Sahara
RATHER than pushing inexorably southward, engulfing northern Africa, the Sahara regularly expands and contracts over large areas, a new study has found.
"We were shocked by the tremendous shifts," said Dr.
Harold E. Dregne, a co-author of the study who is a professor at the International Center for Arid and Semi-Arid Land Studies at Texas Tech University.


Basketball; A Long Day For Ewing And Knicks
The first decision that had to be made yesterday in Patrick Ewing's arbitration case against the Knicks was where to hold the hearings.
The 10:30 A.M. session, originally scheduled to be held in the National Basketball Association offices on the 15th floor of the Olympic Tower, 645 Fifth Avenue, was hurriedly moved across the street to the Omni Berkshire Hotel when a power failure shut down the elevators for more than two hours.


Victim of Police Shooting Is Buried


Braves Join Pennant Race As Smoltz Beats Pirates, 7-3
The Atlanta Braves trailed Los Angeles by nine and a half games at the All-Star break just two weeks ago.
But John Smoltz certainly isn't the same pitcher he was for the first half of the season.
Greg Olson's two-run double and two Pittsburgh errors helped Atlanta score seven runs in the fourth inning, stopping the Pirates pitching staff's 20-inning scoreless streak and giving the Braves and Smoltz a 7-3 victory tonight.


Child Killed, 3 Others Hurt in Drive-By Shooting
A 4-year-old girl was shot and killed on a street in Harlem last night when two men drove by in a car and opened fire, the police said.
The girl's pregnant mother, a 17-year-old youth and another woman were wounded.
The victims were taken to Harlem Hospital Center, where the girl died.
The teen-age boy was in critical condition with a head wound.
The two women were in stable condition with leg injuries.


American Express Says Profit Falls 20%; Revenue Is Up
The American Express Company said yesterday that its second-quarter profit fell 20 percent, to $256 million, or 53 cents a share, from $320 million, or 73 cents a share, a year ago.
Revenues rose nearly 5 percent, to $6.36 billion, from $6.06 billion in the 1990 period.


Reporter's Notebook; Despite the Praise, These Shows Won't Be Back
The three broadcast networks will carry fewer hours of prime-time programs in the future, with local stations gaining access to the hours that the networks will be abandoning, Robert A. Iger, the president of ABC Entertainmentpredicted today.
In a press conference here today, Mr.
Iger said the subject of scaling down the network had come up at some ABC business meetings, though he added that such a move was still several years down the road.
ABC, NBC and CBS currently program 22 hours of prime time programs a week.
Mr.
Iger said that cutting back those hours would become necessary because the shows that fill the "bottom half" of the weekly ratings list were now unprofitable.
"We need to reduce the burden on the networks to program those unprofitable hours," Mr.
Iger said.
"I really do believe it will be tough for a network in the future to support 22 hours of programs.
"It would be to our advantage to rid ourselves of the less profitable hours."
He said the network should "cede those hours to our affiliates."
With a new season of prime-time programs around the corner, Mr.
Iger said he was eager to proclaim good news about ABC's immediate future.
But he spent most of his time here trying to put the past to rest.
Mr.
Iger braced for the press conference during the three-week press tour here today, aware that as he put it: "I'm going to get beaten up about 'Thirtysomething' and 'China Beach.' I'm sure I'll still hear something about 'Twin Peaks,' too."
Mr.
Iger canceled those three highly regarded dramas this spring, prompting protests from supporters in the press and the viewing public.
The criticism was recently underscored when canceled series became the story of the nominations for this year's Emmy Awards.
"Thirtysomething" received eight nominations, "China Beach" took six and "Twin Peaks," four.
For Mr.
Iger, the turnaround from praise to criticism has been especially abrupt.
Only last year he was being celebrated in the press as the only programmer still trying to make innovative breakthrough television.
This year, he said, "I'm taking a lot of abuse." He was smiling when he said it.
Mr.
Iger, even-tempered and affable even when he is stepping into a bull's-eye, is taking the abuse in good spirit because he says he knows that it is the business, and not personal taste, that dictates decisions about which shows survive and which do not.
Still there have been some moments when the passion about these particular series has hit especially close to home.
In June, Mr.
Iger vacationed in Hawaii.
He was about to leave his hotel for a day of snorkeling when he passed through the lobby, carrying his snorkeling equipment in a bag prominently marked ABC.
A woman in the lobby saw the ABC logo and stopped him. She was irate, he said.
As Mr.
Iger told the story: "She said: 'Do you work for ABC? Please tell me whom I can write to about canceling "Thirtysomething." They've ruined my life on Tuesday nights. What kind of jerk would make a decision like that?' "
Responded Mr.
Iger, "This is your lucky day." He got another earful later in the month, about canceling "China Beach." "I picked up the phone," Mr.
Iger said, "and my mother says, 'Robert, what can you be thinking?' "
The prospects for a two-hour movie continuation of "Thirtysomething" are "getting more and more remote," Mr.
Iger said.
ABC would like to do it and the production studio, MGM, would like to do it as well, he said.
"But this," he said, "is one of the more complicated deals I've dealt with this in this business, with a number of interlocking problems."
He said the decision to cancel the series last spring came after a season when it was never clear what was going to happen with the show.
"Some stars said they didn't want to go on; some did," he said.
"Some of the creative people didn't want to go on; some did."
He said an important faction on the show wanted there to be "definitive closure" to the series in last year's final episode.
"But MGM didn't want that," he said.
"They thought they might still sell it to us again or make new episodes for the Lifetime channel."
Though he declined to give details of what "definitive closure" for the series would have meant, Mr.
Iger said: "I approved the direction the creative people wanted to take in ending the series. We wanted an ending with impact."
One star of "Thirtysomething," Ken Olin, who played Michael Steadman, has said he was 100 percent sure that the series was completely over and that reprising his character held no attraction for him.
Mr.
Iger, however, said one snag in the deal has been Mr.
Olin's demand that he direct the movie.
All the stars and creators of the series would have been contractually obligated to remain with "Thirtysomething" had ABC decided to renew it.
But once the decision was made to cancel it, they all became free of those obligations.
"It would be awfully hard to put it all back together again now," Mr. Iger said.
By not being completely up to date on the news from the supermarket tabloids, ABC's programmers inadvertently opened themselves to criticism about another show, a new reality-based series called "F.B.I.: The Untold Stories."
The series' producers sent ABC a "presentation" tape, sort of a shortened pilot, in the spring spring to show how the series would be formatted.
The case they chose to dramatize involved the contract killing of a judge in Texas.
ABC's executive vice president of programming, Ted Harbert, said the network was completely unaware of the fact that the convicted killer in the case is the father of Woody Harrelson, who plays Woody Boyd, a bartender in the NBC series "Cheers."
Mr.
Harbert said this presentation would almost surely be turned into a full-length episode.
The connection between Charles Harrelson and his son, Woody, was widely reported by tabloid newspapers several years ago, and has also been extensively covered by newspapers in Texas.
To complete the odd circumstances surrounding this programming decision, ABC has scheduled the F.B.I. series to run opposite "Cheers" at 9 P.M. on Thursday nights.
A spokeswoman for NBC said today that the network would not comment on ABC's decision to run the show against "Cheers." Woody Harrelson also declined to comment on ABC's F.B.I. series when asked in earlier reports in a Houston newspaper.
"There's no logic in saying we shouldn't play it against 'Cheers,' " Mr.
Harbert said.
"That's where this series is scheduled. Am I supposed to move it for one night because of this connection?"


The Judge and His Sister: Growing Up Black; Not Qualified
To the Editor:
The issue is not where Judge Clarence Thomas stands on any particular issue.
The simple matter is that he has little general legal expertise and virtually no experience on the bench at any level.


West Point Installs a New Chief


Review/Dance; Outdoors at Wave Hill, Performance Traces a Life
Nature collaborated with art in a highly satisfactory manner on Sunday afternoon when Dancing in the Streets presented Sara Rudner's "Today" as part of its Dances for Wave Hill, at the Wave Hill Environmental Center in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
Created with Patricia Hoffbauer, the solo was one of those dazzling, sometimes irritating scattershot journeys through what might be a performer's life, a fictitious life or both.
Amusing and poignant in dizzyingly quick shifts, "Today" seemed to allude to an injury that caused Ms.
Rudner's virtual retirement from performing.
It also captured a dancer's life, with its intense concentration, comical exasperation and a giddy timidity before an audience.


Rape-Murder Case Suspect Arrested by Michigan Police
The state police in Michigan today arrested a man accused of raping and murdering a New York woman whose car had run out of gas on a highway.
The suspect, Lauro Quintanilla Garcia, 27 years old, of Okemos, Mich., was charged with being a fugitive from justice by the Michigan state police, said Detective Captain Kenneth L. Crump of the Broome County Sheriff's Department.
He is in the Mason County Jail awaiting extradition to New York.


C&amp;S/Sovran Merger Set With NCNB
The NCNB Corporation and the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation formally announced yesterday that they would combine in a $4.3 billion merger to create a new entity called Nationsbank.
The merger will create the nation's third-largest bank, with assets of about $116 billion.
Speaking to analysts in New York and reporters in Atlanta through a satellite and telephone linkup, top officials of the combined entity, including Hugh L. McColl Jr., NCNB's chairman and chief executive, and Bennett A. Brown, C&amp;S/Sovran's chairman, gave final details of the deal.
A 9-State Market
The combined new bank will have 1,900 branches in a nine-state region in the Southeast -- with operations from Baltimore to Miami to western Texas -- and will have some $85 billion in deposits, the industry's largest.


Pillsbury Hires Agency To Focus on Blacks
For the first time, the Pillsbury Company has hired an agency to promote its cake mixes and other baking products among black Americans.
Uniworld Group, New York, an agency that specializes in advertising to ethnic consumers, was assigned the account yesterday.
Uniworld will develop promotional materials and print advertisments for the annual Pillsbury Bake-Off.
Other assignments on the account, billings of which were not disclosed, will come later this year.


2 Are Injured in Attacks With Baseball Bats
A 28-year-old woman was seriously injured Sunday evening by a man wielding an aluminum baseball bat who tried to steal her purse as she was leaving a Brooklyn subway station, the police said yesterday.
About 45 minutes earlier, 10 blocks east in a another subway station, a 56-year-old man suffered a broken arm when he was attacked by a mugger with a baseball bat, the police said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
CNS Inc., Eden Prairie, Minn., a maker of brain-monitoring systems, has received F.D.A. approval to market a device used to screen patients who suffer from sleep disorders. *
Curtiss-Wright Corp., a Lyndhurst, N.J. aerospace components manufacturer, had 54,000 shares bought by a group led by the New York financier Mario Gabelli.
The purchase lifts the group's stake to 15.6 percent.


People
*
Don S. Maurer, 36, has been named senior vice president and director of account services at Mullen, Wenham, Mass.
He had previously been senior vice president and director of client services at Margeotes Fertitta and Weiss, New York. *
Joseph J. Gilbride, 36, has been named vice president and controller of the Interpublic Group of Companies, New York, where he has been director of financial analysis and acquisitions.
He succeeds Donald Connelly, named last week as senior vice president and chief financial officer, international, of McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York, an Interpublic subsidiary.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Canseco Is Helping A Pitcher From Cuba
JOSE CANSECO , the Oakland Athletics' star outfielder, has befriended RENE AROCHA , the pitcher who defected recently from the Cuban national baseball team, and is trying to help him realize his dream of playing professional baseball in the United States.
Canseco, who was born in Cuba, arranged for Arocha, 27 years old, to come to the West Coast over the weekend.
The pitcher is hoping for a tryout with the Athletics.
But there is a rule prohibiting major league teams from signing Cuban nationals.
Arocha, who left the Cuban team July 11 in Miami, has applied for political asylum. (AP)


2 Biotech Pioneers To Merge
In a merger of two of the pioneers of the biotechnology industry, the Chiron Corporation said today that it would buy the Cetus Corporation in a stock transaction valued at about $600 million.
In a related move, Hoffmann-La Roche said it would pay $300 million plus royalties to acquire Cetus's coveted polymerase chain reaction technology.
Cetus officials and analysts said the price might be the highest paid for medical technology for which a market has not yet fully developed.


Voting Power for All New Yorkers
Even though the Justice Department found flaws in New York City's proposed City Council redistricting, it gave the city deserved praise for "great strides" toward fair voting power for underrepresented minorities.
Assistant Attorney General John Dunne disapproved the plan because it shortchanged Hispanic voters in three districts, and he criticized other line-drawing.
But he also showed how the city could easily structure a new Council consistent with the Voting Rights Act.
Mr.
Dunne, head of the department's Civil Rights Division, delivered his judgment with such clarity and dispatch -- nearly a month ahead of schedule -- that the city's Districting Commission has ample time to meet his legal objections without disturbing the September primary or the November general election.


Adirondack Village May Lose Tourist Attraction


Bernice Jacobson, Consumer Advocate, 75
Bernice Jacobson, a retired consumer advocate who specialized in complaints about mail-order services, died on July 8 at Englewood Hospital in New Jersey.
She was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of complications after surgery, her family said.


Battling the Rumors, LeMond Is Impressive
By word and deed, Greg LeMond did his best today to dispel the rumors about his health.
With a stunning second place in a sprint finish and a gain of 26 seconds on the leader of the race, LeMond managed to sway a few people.
He was far less successful with his words.
"I'm feeling normal, a little tired but looking forward to seeing what happens," he said this morning before the Tour de France began its third and last transition stage between the Pyrenees and the Alps.


Global Investing -- A special report.; In World Markets, Loose Regulation
Seeking lush profits, investors have invaded foreign stock markets with a vengeance, but international regulators and stock-exchange officials have made scant progress toward developing uniform rules and standards to bring order to an expanding global marketplace.
The regulatory lag is ominous given the huge sums that are landing overseas, the increased importance multinational companies place on these markets for raising capital and the higher investor risks that come with loosely regulated markets.
Already, some professional money managers have backed away from some stock markets and others are scrutinizing companies to try to avoid greater risks.


Researchers Finding New Ways to Learn About Graves' Disease
NEW findings promise to help scientists unravel several mysteries about why hundreds of thousands of Americans, including the President and Mrs.
Bush, have developed an overactive thyroid gland from Graves' disease.
The new findings involve the most basic biology of the cells that come under attack in Graves' disease, one of several autoimmune disorders in which the body forms antibodies that inflame its own tissues or disrupt their function.
In rheumatoid arthritis, for example, one target is the joints; in juvenile-onset diabetes, it is the pancreas cells that produce insulin.


CHRONICLE
RINGO STARR has been appearing on "Shining Time Station," a children's television series on PBS, but now the former Beatle is to be replaced.
RICK SIGGELKOW , a co-chairman of Quality Family Entertainment , one of the show's producers, said yesterday that Mr.
Starr was being replaced in a new series of 20 episodes of the show that is being filmed in Toronto; broadcast begins in October.
Mr.
Siggelkow said the reason was "scheduling problems." He declined to elaborate.


Sports People: BASKETBALL; Jazz Rookie Walks Out
ERIC MURDOCK , the first-round draft choice for the Utah Jazz, has walked out of the team's rookie free-agent camp.
Murdock, a 6-foot-2-inch, 190-pound point guard out of Providence, left on the advice of STEVE ZUCKER , his lawyer, the Jazz's director of player personnel, SCOTT LAYDEN, said Sunday.
"We're a little surprised and a little disappointed," Layden said.
"We were under the impression he'd be here the whole time. We furnished insurance for the whole period." (AP)


Extinct Hawaiian Birds
A husband-and-wife team from the Smithsonian Institution has discovered at least 34 species of extinct birds that flourished on the Hawaiian Islands before the first humans arrived.
Biologists have long known that many species were wiped out, but the diversity and unusual nature of the birds reported by the two scientists this month exceeded expectations.
"The discoveries left some people on the islands agog," said Dr.
Storrs Olson, an ornithologist with the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History in Washington.
"There are all these birds that people would have never guessed existed. Big flightless ducks? Flightless ibises?"
Dr.
Olson and his wife, Dr.
Helen James, have spent the last 15 years sifting through sand dunes, diving into remote pools, and exploring lava tubes in the archipelago for the remains of birds.
Their findings were published in two monographs by the American Ornithologists' Union.
Perhaps their most unusual discovery was that of a huge flightless duck.
The squat animal was about the size of a barnyard goose but had stubby little wings, sturdy legs and a big bill.
They also found new species of ibises and rails, which like the duck, became flightless after they arrived on the islands.


Technology Hits Cuba, By Land, Sea and U.S.
The 32-year reign of ex-pitcher Fidel Castro has made Cuba a nation long on Communism and short on modern technology.
Case in point: the Pan American Games, which will take place in Cuba from Aug. 2-18.


A President At American Express
Harvey Golub, the 52-year-old vice chairman of the American Express Company and head of one of its best-performing subsidiaries, was given the additional title of president of American Express yesterday, making him a strong contender for the chairmanship.
Mr.
Golub will remain chairman of IDS Financial Services, which provides financial planning.
Yesterday, IDS reported the highest rate of profit growth of any American Express unit in the second quarter.


Jersey City Mayor Indicted as Embezzler of Investment Funds
One of the state's most prominent Democrats, Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City, was indicted today by a Federal grand jury and accused of defrauding a Florida savings and loan company of its investment in a plan to build a marina and hotel at Liberty State Park in Jersey City.
The charges are not related to Mr.
McCann's official duties.
Instead, the indictment said, they involve "a substantial portion" of the Florida company's $300,000 investment in a development company in which Mr.
McCann was a shareholder and director.


'Catastrophic' Cholera Is Sweeping Africa
CHOLERA is sweeping through several African countries at "a catastrophic pace," the World Health Organization said yesterday, killing people at a much higher rate than in South America, where the first epidemic in 90 years struck in Peru last January.
The African total of more than 45,000 cholera cases for the first seven months of this year exceeds the total for all of 1990.
Although fewer cases of the diarrheal disease were reported from Africa than from South America, the death rate is higher in Africa, said the organization, an agency of the United Nations.
Death rates range from 6 to 10 percent in some African countries and are as high as 30 percent in some areas.


Australian Rivalries Produce Competitors
Once again, Royal Birkdale played impartial host and refused to usher home a native son -- or any European for that matter -- through its gnarled sand dunes and even gnarlier greens to a British Open championship.
At four of the six previous championships on the Lancashire coast, Americans had taken home the top prize, and this year four players from the United States -- Mark O'Meara, Fred Couples, Bob Tway and Jodie Mudd -- were among the top seven finishers with strong final rounds on Sunday.


General Dynamics In Japan Jet Deal
The General Dynamics Corporation has received $110.7 million in contracts from Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Inc. for work on Japan's FS-X fighter.
The new fighter is patterned on General Dynamics's F-16 jet fighter.
The latest contract includes developing part of the fuselage and other portions of the jet, the company said.
The work will not be completed until 1994.


Baseball; Yankee Farmhand Pitches a No-Hitter
Rafael Quirico pitched a no-hitter Sunday night as the Greensboro Hornets, the Yankees' Class A farm team in the South Atlantic League, beat the Charleston Rainbows, 2-0.
Quirico (10-5), a 21-year-old left-hander who started the league All-Star game last month, had tossed a no-hitter in high school in the Dominican Republic.


Stanford to Alter Its Accounting Of Overhead on Research Grants
Stanford University announced yesterday that it would change the way it accounted for Federal research grants to keep inappropriate items, like cedar closets and maintence of a yacht, from being included in research-related costs billed to the Government, as they were in the past.
The changes are designed to clear Stanford's reputation and give the university a more precise level of accounting for the millions of dollars in research grants and overhead costs it receives from the Federal Government.


Panel Divides On Changing Council Maps
Even as members of the New York City Districting Commission remained sharply split on how to amend the Council districting plan for Federal approval, dozens of Council candidates spent the final day collecting petitions yesterday in anticipation of an election that may never take place.
The plan for 51 new districts was rejected on Friday by the Justice Department.
The department formally cited three districts that it said caused Hispanic voters to be unfairly represented.
Some of the 15 commissioners interviewed yesterday were still debating whether the plan should be changed only to answer the objections about those three districts or more extensively.


New Loss Is Reported By Cummins
Losses continue unabated at the Cummins Engine Company as sluggish sales of big trucks have shrunk orders for the large engines that are its primary product and aggressive competitors have reduced its share of what market there is left.
Yesterday the company reported a second-quarter loss of $17.2 million, compared with a profit of $6.1 million, or 15 cents a share, in the 1990 period, and said it expected the losses to continue at least through the third quarter.
Sales in the second quarter rose only slightly, to $877.6 million from $871.3 million.


Quotation of the Day
"One criticism I hear is that we are different, as if we're all sipping mai tais on the beach and dancing in coconut shell bras. We have a lot of poor people in Hawaii. We have all the health problems of the rest of the states. But what makes us different is that we decided to do something about it." -- Dr.
John Lewin, director of health of Hawaii.  [ A1:2. ]


Baseball; For Viola, Money Pitch Is a Handful of Change
It was 1983 when Frank Viola realized that he had a dependency problem.
There had been too many long nights of too many fastballs.
Lacking a real repertory of other pitches, Viola had relied too much on his fastball, and he wasn't fooling anyone anymore, if indeed he ever had.
He decided to stop fooling himself.
"I had known in my heart all along that I was not a power pitcher," said Viola, who in his first major league season, in 1982, had compiled an unimpressive 4-10 record with the Twins.
"But management was convinced I had it in me. In reality, I was being asked to do more than I was capable of doing. I at last said there had to be another way to go."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.65
5.75
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.58
7.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.75
5.73
7.43
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.13
8.13
8.43
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.46
8.47
8.55
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.50
9.52
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.14
7.14
7.41
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Edward First, 81, Dies; Lawyer and U.S. Aide
Edward First, a tax lawyer for 40 years and former special assistant to the United States Attorney General, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, his daughter said.


Brain Cancer Cases in Los Alamos To Be Studied for Radiation Link
The New Mexico Department of Health and the United States Department of Energy said today that they would seek to determine whether a cluster of brain cancer cases in Los Alamos are linked to radiation released into the environment by the nuclear laboratory there.
The first phase of the state's study, to end in September 1992, sets two goals: to evaluate the levels of radiation released from the Los Alamos National Laboratory, which opened in 1943, and to see if the rate of brain cancer found in the community of 18,000 people is excessive.


Sandinistas Shed a Bit of Their Past
The Sandinista Front took the first tentative steps toward giving up its leftist guerrilla past to create the structure of a democratic political party during a congress that ended on Sunday night.
But the existing leadership retained control and fought off the demands of dissidents for profound changes, both in the internal structure of the party and in its ideology and world view.


Henri Bourrelly Actor, 83
Henri Bourrelly, an actor who performed under the name Rellys in several films directed by Marcel Pagnol, died today in St.
Marguerite Hospital here.
He was 83 years old.
Mr.
Bourelly was a member of the Pagnol stock company that included Raimu, Fernandel, Pierre Fresnay and others.
His best-known role was that of Father Gaucher in Pagnol's "Lettres de Mon Moulin" ("Letters From My Windmill") in 1954.


Chess
The first thing to learn about hypermodern players is that they are not oblivious to what is going on around them.
The hypermoderns do seem to hide, to shy away from battle, to cedetheir opponents possession of the vital central terrain, to suffer in a cramped position.
But this is all part of a sometimes dangerous, yet often grand, ruse to lure their opponents on so that their supply lines can be cut and their spearhead legions decimated.
When hypermodern strategy fails, it usually falls on its face, but when it succeeds, one can appreciate the cunning underlying it.


CREWMAN IS LOST AS 2 SHIPS COLLIDE
A Japanese fish-processing vessel with 85 people on board sank off the Washington coast this morning after a collision with a Chinese freighter.
All but one of the crew members were rescued, the Coast Guard reported.
Two people from the Japanese ship, the 350-foot Tenyo Maru, were injured, with one suffering from second-degree burns and the other from upper-body fractures.
No other injuries were reported.


Israel Tells U.S. It Will Consider Mideast Conference; Shamir Says He Will Consider Mideast Conference
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir told Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today that because of Syria's agreement to attend a peace conference and negotiate with Israel, his Government would reconsider its opposition to the meeting and give Washington an answer soon.
After a second round of talks with Mr.
Baker, Mr.
Shamir told his Cabinet that judging from what the Secretary of State brought from Damascus, there appeared to be a "revolutionary change" in Syria's position, even if it was for only tactical reasons, Yossi Ahimeir, an important adviser, said.


Conrad Johnson, 71, A Retired Architect
Conrad A. Johnson Jr., a founding partner of the architecture firm of Ifill, Johnson &amp; Hanchard, died on Saturday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 71 years old and lived in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He died of pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Dow Off 3.35, to 3,012.97, as Trading Slows
Stocks weakened a bit yesterday in lethargic midsummer dealings as traders, investors and investment advisers grew increasingly perplexed and concerned about the high price of stocks at a time of economic uncertainty.
Investors were also worried that two huge Treasury refinancings now in the works could soak up billions of dollars that might otherwise go into the stock market.


Former BMC Chairman Assumes Posts at Case
Since April, when James K. Ashford resigned unexpectedly as chairman of the J. I. Case Company, the heavy-equipment unit of Tenneco Inc., analysts have wondered who would replace him.
And since last week, when Robert J. Carlson, 61, resigned as chairman of BMC Industries, analysts have wondered where he was going.
Yesterday, both mysteries were solved.
Tenneco named Mr.
Carlson as Case's new president and chief executive officer, effective immediately.
Election to the board is scheduled for the near future.


Controversy Building Over a Fine to Seles
Chris Boyer, director of the Westchester Ladies Cup tournament, which is being played here this week at Manhattanville College, has a better idea.
Instead of fining Monica Seles $20,000 for playing in an exhibition, the Women's Tennis Assocication should fine Seles $100,000 and give him the money.
"The fines aren't high enough," Boyer said today, as his Kraft General Foods World Tour tournament began its inaugural run.
"When you're paying somebody $200,000 in appearance fees, $20,000 is a drop in the bucket. And it's ludicrous to give the fines to the W.T.A. The money should go to the aggrieved party."


Review/Fashion; Versace Provides the Razzle And Lacroix the Dazzle in Paris
Gianni Versace and Christian Lacroix gave a jump start to the fall and winter couture openings over the weekend, and the shows may never be the same again.
In their very different manners, the two are determined to bring zest and relevancy to this most opulent end of the fashion business.
Farewell to the prim day dress, the severely tailored suit and the traditional ball gown, they are saying.
Luxury comes in other guises.
The Lacroix canvas is the broader one.
He dips suede, fur, jewels, braid, velvet, lace, plaids and almost any material he can get his hands on into the roiling caldron of his imagination and emerges with clothes that are exhilarating to look at, fascinating for the right person to wear and far from any fashion cliches.


Texas Instruments In Patent Fight
Texas Instruments Inc. and Fujitsu Ltd. confirmed that they had filed legal motions against each other in a Japanese court over a computer chip patent.
The companies said last week that they were fighting whether a Japanese patent Texas Instruments holds for the basic design of the integrated circuit applied to semiconductors made by Fujitsu.
The legal claims were filed on Friday.


The Judge and His Sister: Growing Up Black; Court Reversals
To the Editor:
I am baffled by the sudden reluctance of many to support a Supreme Court Justice based on the argument that the new Justice may overturn precedents, in particular, Roe v.
Wade.
Constant changes in science and medicine will continue to redefine the rights of privacy, choice and life.
New information could in the future necessitate a reversal.


Administration Errs on Taxes, Kemp Says
Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp said today that the Bush Administration was wrong in predicting that tax breaks for businesses that locate in poor areas would lose revenue for the Government.
"It is my opinion that enterprise zones will actually increase Government revenues by spawning new business and by putting unemployed people and resources back to work and back on the tax rolls," Mr.
Kemp told the Senate Small Business Committee.


Yankees Are Home But Have Far to Go
The race might be slowly running away from the Yankees, but they aren't prepared to dismiss it from their minds.
They look at the calendar, see that it's only July, and dream.
They keep winning, but so do the Toronto Blue Jays.
But now that they have reached .500 and are home again, they are rejuvenated and not yet ready to count themselves out.


Sports People: BASKETBALL; Off-Court Flop
LARRY JOHNSON , STACEY AUGMON , GREG ANTHONY and GEORGE ACKLES , who were teammates last season at Nevada-Las Vegas, will probably be earning big bucks in the National Basketball Association this season.
But they didn't make much money from a recent business venture.
The players formed a company to market lithographs with their pictures on it, but sales didn't approach their success on the court.
GEORGE LUSTER , a partner in Final Four Incorporated, said each player made about $6,000 to $7,000 from the venture. (AP)


Music in Review
Orchestra of St. Luke's  Caramoor Music Festival
There was nothing to do for the wilted sensibilities on both sides of the footlights here.
On this still and blistering night, listeners in shirtsleeves watched musicians, conductor and soloist in shirtsleeves fight for the energy and concentration this all-Mozart program demanded.
Andre Previn, now a neighbor of the Caramoor summer festival, conducted the Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
He also played the piano in Mozart's C-minor Concerto.
Joshua Bell brought his youthful muscle to the G-major Violin Concerto, and at the beginning there was Mozart's Symphony in A, the No. 29.
The last is a hot-weather friend.
It wastes no time on formal introductions or reluctant farewells.
With its wonderful grace comes a cheerful abruptness.
We are in its midst before we know it; its final cadences catch us by surprise.
Mr.
Bell is the second young American violinist to play Mozart in the New York area within the last few days.
His appearance made an interesting contrast to Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg's at Mostly Mozart on Thursday when she played the A-major Concerto.
In native talent, they are not that far apart.
In purpose and method, they are.
Ms.
Salerno-Sonnenberg is both buoyed and weighed down by her public persona, one in which extravagant stage mannerisms have their precise musical equivalent.
So often on Thursday, it was her idiosyncratic feeling for Mozart that we heard.
Mr.
Bell's path is more direct.
At Mostly Mozart, one thought, "What a striking personality she is." On Saturday, one thought, "How simply Mozart's music speaks."
Did Mr.
Previn give us an eventful evening?
It depends on what you mean by "event." He is as scrupulous and caring a pianist as he is a conductor.
He also wrote his own cadenzas, handsome ones.
His gestures invite a natural legato from his players and yet insure their precision.
It doesn't take long for listeners to realize that they will neither be dragged into excess nor be led off on some heaven-storming charge.
Mr.
Previn is above all a civilized musician.
He does not shake the earth.
Professional to the bone, he gives an aura of informed and deeply felt respect for everything in front of him.


Spectrum of Choice for Home Offices
PERSONAL computers have enabled millions of Americans to operate businesses out of their homes.
According to recent market surveys, some 20 million people will earn all or part of their household income from a home-based business next year.
Finding the right computer at the right price is a goal of most of these workers.
Link Resources Inc., a market research company in New York that tracks the home office market, found that home office workers spent an average of $1,830 for their latest computer.


Unusual Star Cluster
AN international team of astronomers in Australia has observed 11 dense objects emitting rapid pulses of energy in a single cluster of stars.
The surprising discovery almost doubles the number of such fast-spinning pulsars known to exist.
Pulsars are the collapsed cores of massive dead stars, remnants of stellar explosions known as supernovas.
They rotate rapidly, flashing bursts of radio energy at regularly spaced intervals.
Some spin so fast that they appear to blink at intervals measured in thousandths of a second, and so are called millisecond pulsars.


Business and Health; Rating Hospitals For Employers
HOPING to learn how to shop for high-quality health care, employers are working with hospitals in several Midwestern cities to develop systems that compare the results and fees of local hospitals.
Fifty of Cleveland's largest companies, including units of Nestle, General Electric, BP America, LTV Steel, Ohio Bell, Sherwin-Williams, Parker Hannifin and Reliance Electric, plan incentives for employees who use the hospitals rated highest.
The 9,000 companies in Cleveland's Council of Smaller Enterprises plan to do the same.


Police Chief Gates Plans to Quit in April
Thirteen days after an independent commission urged him to step aside as the chief of police here, Daryl F. Gates said today that he would retire in April if a replacement was found by then.
Chief Gates, who has held the position for 12 years, gave his decision in a letter to the president of the City Council, John Ferraro, and in a videotaped message that was played at police roll calls across the city today.
"I have chosen the month of April 1992 to retire," the 64-year-old Chief Gates told his officers, adding, "Maybe that will stop all the nonsense that's going on."


Nature Gets Even
After four days of swallowing critical abuse from a pampered public that can no longer tolerate heat waves, Nature got its chance to retaliate on the East Side of Manhattan yesterday when the lights went out at lunchtime.
Elevators stopped running, so did air-conditioning, high-rise stairwells were revealed as critically dim and women at the hairdressers' found themselves with too little light for Vogue.
Civilization was humbled as a power substation on 63d Street suffered a malfunction unrelated to the weather.


Braves Join Pennant Race As Smoltz Beats Pirates, 7-3
The Atlanta Braves trailed Los Angeles by nine and a half games at the All-Star break just two weeks ago.
But John Smoltz certainly isn't the same pitcher he was for the first half of the season.
Greg Olson's two-run double and two Pittsburgh errors helped Atlanta score seven runs in the fourth inning, stopping the Pirates pitching staff's 20-inning scoreless streak and giving the Braves and Smoltz a 7-3 victory tonight.


New Fighting Erupts as Yugoslav Leaders Confer
Fighting erupted across Serbian-populated counties of the secessionist republic of Croatia today as leaders of Yugoslavia's six republics began a new series of talks aimed at reconstituting the country and heading off civil war.
In the fiercest fighting, as many as 20 people were reported killed in the village of Mirkovci in eastern Croatia.
Serbs and Croats are the two largest groups in this country torn by ethnic rivalries.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Surgery for Dave Smith
Chicago Cubs relief pitcher DAVE SMITH will undergo exploratory arthroscopic surgery on his right knee Thursday, the team announced yesterday.
Smith, 0-5 with 16 saves and a 5.06 e.r.a., met yesterday with the team physician, Dr.
MICHAEL SHAFER , said Cubs spokesman CHUCK WASSERSTROM .
Smith, a 36-year-old reliever with a $1.9 million contract, will be operated on at Northwestern Memorial Hospital.
His ailing knee has limited his recent appearances.
Wasserstrom also said that the team had no comment about remarks by pitcher RICK SUTCLIFFE that he was considering retiring.
Sutcliffe, the 35-year-old starter, has been on rehabilitation assignment in the minor leagues.
After his third consecutive rough outing Saturday, he said he was "tired of stinking the place up" and might retire. (AP)


Hawaii Shows It Can Offer Health Insurance for All
Residents of the Hawaiian Islands, more than 2,400 miles from the American mainland, have long complained that they are left out of major debates that ripple across the nation.
But on at least one big issue -- how to provide adequate medical care to all citizens -- health policy analysts say Hawaiians are well ahead of the rest of the country, and their state is being studied in Congress and by other state governments as a potential national model.


Mideast Momentum for Peace
Like a rare conjunction of planets, nine of the parties that can bring a just peace to the Middle East have orbited into single plane; the world waits for a tenth.
And yesterday, Israel gave signs that it, too, may fall into line.
For Syria to agree to attend a peace conference with Israel, says Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel, is a welcome change in Syrian policy.
That is more than words; he knows how eager Israelis are to embrace certified signs of progress.
Even the conservative Police Minister, Galei Zahal, sees the verge of a dramatic breakthrough in relations with Syria.


Sniper Is Sought in a Series Of Central Park Shootings
A gunman firing from the bushes in the Ramble in Central Park is responsible for three, and possibly four, shootings of men over the last nine months, the police said last night.
They said they have stepped up nighttime patrols of the area and are warning people to avoid it after dark.


Auditing Was Split Between Firms
How did the purported fraud by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International escape detection for so long?
For one thing, the bank long had split the auditing of the group between two auditors, Price Waterhouse and the former Ernst &amp; Whinney, so neither had a complete view of its activities.
After both accounting firms and regulators from several countries put pressure on the bank to have one auditor, it chose Price Waterhouse in 1987, which assumed the job in 1988.


Treasury Issues Little Changed
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed in light trading yesterday, as dealers awaited the two-year and five-year note auctions scheduled for today and Wednesday.
"The market is quiet and complacent," one government bond trader said.
"But the true test will be how we do after all of these auctions."


Boxing; Savarese No Big Name But the Money Is Fine
Can Lou Savarese fight?
Ken Weiss thinks the undefeated heavyweight from Greenwood Lake, N.Y., can and he is backing the opinion with serious money.


Cutbacks and Heat Wilting the Elderly
Budget cuts and the recent days of grueling heat have conspired to make life harder for some of New York City's elderly residents.
As part of the city's efforts to cut spending, responsibility for 346 city-financed centers for the elderly has been transferred from the Human Resources Administration to the Department of Aging.


Ratings Dip for 3 Insurers
Continuing a general trend to downgrade the rating of life insurers' ability to pay claims, the A. M. Best Company, said yesterday that it had lowered its ratings on three of the nation's largest life insurance companies -- New England Mutual, Mutual of New York, and the leading insurance company within the Travelers group of insurers.
The companies had carried Best's top rating of A+.
They now have been downgraded to "contingent A+." The new rating, while still technically A+, is considered by most insurance agents and brokers to be lower than a pure A+ rating.
Indeed, the "contingent" in the new ratings has often meant that Best is close to removing the A+ rating entirely.


Germany Planning to Put on Trial Five Former East German Spies
German prosecutors announced today that they intended to bring to trial five former officials of the old East German spy network, including its last director, on espionage charges.
But they said the group did not include East Germany's legendary master spy, Markus Wolf.
Describing the trials as a "pilot project," a spokesman for the Federal Prosecutor's office, Hans-Jurgen Forster, said the last director, Werner Grossmann, 62 years old, would be tried in Berlin on charges of high treason, which carries a maximum sentence of life imprisonment.
He said that four other officials, all of them responsible for foreign intelligence gathering, would go on trial for espionage, which carries a maximum 10-year sentence.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Signed Mike Kelly, outfielder.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Optioned Mike Remlinger, pitcher, to Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  UTAH JAZZ -- Released Alan Pollard, center, and Kelly Love and John Cooper, forwards.
World Basketball League  ERIE WAVE -- Signed Roscoe Patterson, center.
Waived Anthony King, center.
Football  National Football League  CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Jim Harbaugh, quarterback, to a two-year contract.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Shane Garrett, wide receiver.
DETROIT LIONS -- Rescinded contract offers to Keith Ferguson, defensive lineman, and Terry Greer, wide receiver.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Ray Donaldson, center, to a four-year contract.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Signed Mark Dusbabek, linebacker.
Agreed to terms with Randall McDaniel, guard; Carlos Jenkins, linebacker; Jake Reed, wide receiver; Gerald Hudson, running back.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Agreed to terms with Kevin Haverdink, tackle.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Named Ron Brown coaching intern.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Announced the retirement of Brad Henke, defensive end.
Agreed to terms with Michael Zordich, safety and Jeff Alexander, fullback.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Waived Jake McInerney, kicker.
Placed Derrell Robertson, defensive lineman, on injured waivers.
Announced that Terry Bagsby, linebacker, had left camp.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Released Shane Elliott and Matt McCartin, tackles; Brian Johnson, linebacker; Jeff Pearson and Dan Beatty, centers; and Gary Willingham, defensive end.


The Judge and His Sister: Growing Up Black; Justice and Smoke
To the Editor:
The possession and use of an illegal drug is a crime or it is not.
Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg's nomination to the Supreme Court was derailed not because he had hidden his use of marijuana, as claimed by Marlin Fitzwater (news article, July 12), but because even junior posts at the Justice Department were barred to those who admitted any past use of any illegal drug.
The double standard that held past drug use a bar to Justice Department employment but not to a seat on the Supreme Court did not hold up to public scrutiny.


Lincoln Savings Official Pleads Guilty to Fraud
A former chief executive of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association pleaded guilty today to Federal and state securities-law charges, marking another advance for prosecutors in the criminal investigations into the California institution's collapse.
The former chief executive, Robin S. Symes, pleaded guilty in United States District Court here to two counts of securities fraud in connection with the sale through Lincoln branches in 1988 of high-risk junk bonds issued by the institution's parent company, the American Continental Corporation.
Lincoln subsequently failed and was seized by Federal regulators, forcing American Continental into bankruptcy proceedings and causing millions of dollars of losses among the individuals who bought the bonds.


Foote, Cone Loses Account With Nintendo
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, yesterday lost its $20 million account for two Nintendo video game products -- the Nintendo Entertainment System and Game Boy -- 14 months after winning it.
Nintendo of America Inc. of Redmond, Wash., has started a review and will announce a new agency next month.
Bill White, Nintendo's director of advertising and public relations, attributed the move to "philosophical differences," but declined to give further details.


Review/Dance; Lar Lubovitch and Mozart, Mozart, Mozart
Nothing seemed more apt than the inclusion of the Lar Lubovitch Dance Company in the Mostly Mozart Festival at Lincoln Center.
Mr.
Lubovitch has presented his choreography at the festival in the past and in this special season, celebrating the 200th anniversary of the composer's death, the program included a New York premiere as well as two other works set to Mozart's music.
One of these was "Concerto Six Twenty-Two," which has swept audiences to their feet since its premiere in 1986 with a mix of spirited ensembles and a tender male duet.
To mention Lubovitch in the dance world is to think Mozart.


New York's Bayou Digs: 3 Rooms and a Jail View
New York City jail officials are renting a $1,620-a-month duplex apartment in a New Orleans suburb to oversee the construction of an overdue prison barge.
A city Correction Department spokesman, Vito A. Turso, said yesterday that the agency had leased a furnished, three-bedroom "corporate suite" since February for officials who are sent to inspect the vessel, which is being built at a Louisiana shipyard.
Mr.
Turso maintained that the apartment plan would save the city about $8,000 because it would not have to pay hotel costs of about $75 a night a person.


Delta Insists That Its Bid Is Better
Delta Air Lines confronted the joint bid by T.W.A. and American for much of Pan Am by standing pat and calling its own $260 million offer a better one.
Delta executives said that if Pam Am accepted a separate United Airlines offer of $190 million for its South American and Caribbean operations, the total price with Delta's bid works out to the same $450 million that T.W.A. and American would pay for virtually the same assets.


Bringing Database Power Home
PERSONAL R:BASE is a largely successful attempt to bring the power and flexibility of a relational database to the individual and small office.
A database is just an organized collection of information.
The telephone book is a database, as is the library card catalogue, and both are organized alphabetically.
They are what are known as flat-field databases.
All the information on a particular person is on a single line in the phone book; all the information on a particular book is on a single card (ignoring, for analogy's sake, that each book may have more than one card).


Director to Step Down At Morgan Stanley
Lewis W. Bernard, who as the chief conceptual strategist at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company helped lead the firm in its huge growth in the 1980's, plans to step down as a managing director at the end of this year, the investment firm announced yesterday.
But Mr.
Bernard is not severing his ties with the firm.
In its announcement, the firm said that Mr.
Bernard would become an advisory director focusing on client relations and other areas.


CHRONICLE
RUSTY STAUB , the former Mets star, is closing Rusty's Restaurant at Third Avenue and 73d Street, of which he is the founder and majority owner.
Mr.
Staub said through a spokesman that he had to close the uptown restaurant, which he has run for 15 years, because "the demands of an unrealistic landlord, coupled with bad economic times in the city and escalating taxes, have given me no alternative but to not renew the lease." He said through a spokesman that he would continue to operate its sister restaurant, Rusty Staub's on Fifth.


Music in Review
'Nosferatu': Art Zoyd
Alice Tully Hall
Silent films have been accompanied by theater organists, pianists and orchestras, so why not by high-tech rock bands?
Gerard Hourbette and Thierry Zaboitzeff, members of the French band Art Zoyd, have composed a vivid sound track for F. W. Murnau's silent horror classic "Nosferatu," and on Saturday evening the group accompanied a clean print of the 1922 film as part of the Serious Fun festival.
Art Zoyd is a quartet, but its instrumental arsenal yields a sound with an orchestral heft.
The group's main components are electronic, and include synthesizers, samplers, tape machines, keyboards, percussion and bass.
But there are also parts for amplified violin, viola, two cellos and saxophone interspersed through the score.
Like any good silent-film soundtrack, the Hourbette-Zaboitzeff score moves with the screen action.
There was not much subtlety in it: the scene that introduces Dracula's eventual victims, the Harkers, has a gentle music-box quality; morning scenes draw on either the tintinabulations of church bells or layers of bird calls; country scenes are set to a bagpipe timbre, and of course, scenes that show or even allude to Count Dracula have music that is hazy, bass-heavy and ominous.
The sounds of wind and distant howling figure prominently in the blend.
Beneath the obvious coloration, the music brings together a standard Minimalist vocabulary of repeated melodic figures and a strong rhythmic pulse, and the crunching, mildly dissonant textures of industrial rock.
It suited the film as well as, and often better than, a conventionally melodramatic organ score might, and in its best moments it gave an extra sense of eerie dimension to Max Schreck's marvelously decrepit, zombie-like portrayal of the vampire.
The band's members are Patricia Dallio, a keyboardist; Andre Mergenthaler, a cellist and saxophonist, and Mr.
Hourbette and Mr.
Zaboitzeff, who divide the rest of the instruments between them.


Telescope on Sea Floor Will Peer Through Earth at Black Holes
DRILLERS began work last week on a revolutionary astronomical telescope that will operate three miles beneath the surface of the Pacific Ocean.
If the telescope works as planned, it will give scientists their first unobstructed views into the enigmatic hearts of distant galaxies.
Conventional telescopes form images from electromagnetic radiation, which includes visible light, infrared, radio, ultraviolet and gamma rays, and X-rays.
The underwater telescope, by contrast, will observe streams of neutrino particles of the type thought to be emitted by black holes.


On My Mind; The Course for Israel
The Bush Administration and its Arab allies have strewn the field with traps.
Just the same, the best available course for Israel seems to be to move toward direct talks with the Arab states, walking with exquisite care every step of the way and ready to cut out at the first sign of betrayal.
Israel, deliberately and outrageously being isolated and squeezed by Washington, faces one of the most difficult decisions in its lifetime of difficult decisions.
Those who wish Israel well owe it to her and themselves to separate out the ingredients of the Middle Eastern stew -- hope from hypocrisy, truth from lie, opportunity from suicide.


Industry's Earnings Running in Circles
New York ran its 612th and final race of the summer season at Belmont Park yesterday and headed for five weeks of racing at Saratoga with the gnawing news that attendance at Belmont had slipped 6.2 percent and betting 6.5 percent during the 68-day meeting.
The racing scene will switch to Saratoga tomorrow afternoon for a five-week run before returning to Belmont on Aug. 28.
But the horses will be accompanied by the hard facts of racing life: fewer people betting fewer dollars at the track and placing their bets instead at offtrack locations.


Children Of Divorce: Steps to Help Can Hurt
WITH two children in five now growing up in divorced families, researchers who have studied the long-term effects of marital dissolution are raising serious questions about the value of popular measures that are widely believed to ease the burden of divorce on children.
In fact, some steps long thought to be helpful, including no-fault divorce, delaying divorce until the children are older and court-ordered joint custody, may actually add to the already severe trauma many children suffer in the wake of divorce and sometimes for a decade or more after their parents' marriage ends, the studies suggest.


Bankers Trust Reports Higher Profit
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation reported yesterday that its earnings rose more than 6 percent, to $185 million, or $2.16 a share, for the quarter that ended in June.
Those figures represented a return on equity of 26 percent and a return on average total assets of 1.27 percent.


Silencing Teens About Sex
The United States is a country that's still shy about talking about sex.
But it is also a country in which 15-year-old mothers are common, and thousands of young men are dying of a sexually transmitted disease contracted in their teens.
A five-year nationwide study to determine the causes of behavior in adolescents that puts them at risk of unwanted pregnancy and AIDS sounds -- quite literally -- like a lifesaver.
But not to Gary


Rape Suspect Tied to Prior Incidents
Prosecutors in the rape case against William K. Smith said today that they had uncovered three previous incidents in which Mr.
Smith either raped or attempted to rape women and that they would seek to use these accounts as evidence against him.
In papers filed in Palm Beach County, Assistant State Attorney Moira K. Lasch asserted that Mr.
Smith had raped a woman in Washington, D.C., in the spring of 1988.
Ms.
Lasch said she intended to use the incident as evidence that Mr.
Smith, the 30-year-old nephew of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, had committed acts similar to the rape he is charged with here.


Hewlett Sets Cutback Plan
The Hewlett- Packard Company said today that it planned to cut as many as 2,000 of its 91,500 employees through voluntary-retirement and severance packages to try to trim expenses.
The plan could cost the computer maker up to $49 million to implement.
The company did not say how much it would save once the cuts take effect.


A Scramble on Giants For Tight-End Spots
The tight ends may be different this season, but the Giants' offense will be the same.
"We haven't changed the role or the philosophy," Coach Ray Handley said today.
"We will keep three tight ends and they will do the same things."


Suzy ('There's Only One') Switches Papers
Even as New York's social whirl calms down, the movements of the journalists who chronicle it quicken.
Yesterday, Aileen Mehle, the society writer known as Suzy, said she would leave The New York Post to write for Fairchild Publications, which publishes Women's Wear Daily and W, beginning in October.
Recently, Liz Smith, the Daily News columnist, left to work for Newsday.
Bill Norwich, a Daily News columnist, resigned this month.
The world of glitter and glamour (and a little bit of gush) will probably never be the same.


Coca-Cola Product
The Coca-Cola Company is reintroducing its Cherry Coke and Diet Cherry Coke after two years of flat sales for the cherry-flavored versions of its two most popular soft drinks.
The new "fountain-style" colas have stronger cherry taste than their predecessors, which came out in 1985.
The revamped products are being advetised in newspapers, on billboards and in radio commercials as "Now cherrier than ever." McCann-Erickson is the Cherry Coke agency.


Creating New City Council Districts: Minority Concerns vs. Incumbency
From a Brooklyn enclave nicknamed "Miller's finger" to an expanse of Staten Island the shape of Texas, New York's proposed City Council map is a political quilt of curling, bending and looping threads.
The city's Districting Commission forged that now-disputed map in a process touted as the most open in New York's history.
But behind the drawing of that map was a constant battle to satisfy two often competing masters: a public, court-ordered mandate to empower minority groups, and a private one, to protect incumbents.


Benetton Stirs More Controversy
THERE are members of the Benetton family named Luciano, Giuliana, Gilberto and Carlo.
But it always seems that the most popular Benetton is the one called Controversial, as in "Controversial Benetton Does It Again."
Once more, the Italian clothing retailer has traded hemlines for headlines, introducing a provocative print advertising campaign intended to stimulate media coverage as much as store sales.
After making its debut in Europe earlier this month, the company's fall and winter campaign, which appears under the continuing "United Colors of Benetton" umbrella theme, is starting to run in American magazines.
Or, more accurately, it is running in some while being rejected by others, as well as coming under fire from the Anti- Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.


Global Investing -- A special report.; In World Markets, Loose Regulation
Seeking lush profits, investors have invaded foreign stock markets with a vengeance, but international regulators and stock-exchange officials have made scant progress toward developing uniform rules and standards to bring order to an expanding global marketplace.
The regulatory lag is ominous given the huge sums that are landing overseas, the increased importance multinational companies place on these markets for raising capital and the higher investor risks that come with loosely regulated markets.
Already, some professional money managers have backed away from some stock markets and others are scrutinizing companies to try to avoid greater risks.


Bush Returns to Prepare for Moscow
President Bush returned to Washington today to prepare for a summit meeting in Moscow next week.
Officials say Mr.
Bush wants the session to mark the start of an era in which economics and cooperation on regional issues dominate Soviet-American relations.
The formal purpose of the meeting is to sign the first treaty that would reduce long-range nuclear missiles, which Mr.
Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev concluded at their meeting in London last week after nine years of negotiations.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9
Israel may reconsider its opposition to a peace conference in light of Syria's agreement to attend a peace conference and negotiate with Israel.
Prime Minister Shamir said he would respond soon.
Page A1


Four Are Convicted of Murder in 'Cotton Club' Slaying


Film Society To Honor Gregory Peck
The Film Society of Lincoln Center has announced that Gregory Peck will be the honoree at its next annual tribute, on April 13 at Avery Fisher Hall.
A compilation of excerpts from his films will be shown, colleagues and friends will offer reminiscences, and the evening will end with a black-tie supper at Tavern on the Greeen.
Tickets to the film program are $25, $50 and $150.
Tickets that include the supper start at $1,000 for two.
Previous Film Society honorees include Fred Astaire, Charlie Chaplin, Bette Davis, Federico Fellini, Alfred Hitchcock, Audrey Hepburn, John Huston, Barbara Stanwyck, James Stewart and Billy Wilder.


Earl Robinson, 81, a Composer Of Labor Movement Songs, Dies
Earl Robinson, who wrote the music for "Joe Hill" and other songs about the American labor movement, died on Saturday night in Seattle.
He was 81 years old and had returned to Seattle, the city of his birth, four years ago.
He was killed when his car was struck by a four-wheel-drive vehicle, the King County medical examiner's office said.
The Seattle police department said it was investigating the accident.


Bank Tie Spurs Ad Contest
The merger of the NCNB Corporation and the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation to form the Nationsbank could offer a multimillion-dollar windfall to a fortunate advertising agency.
One likely contender is the Dallas office of Bozell Inc., which handles the estimated $35 million NCNB account.
Bozell became NCNB's sole agency in October, after NCNB decided to consolidate its marketing operations.
Before that, Bozell handled the NCNB Texas National Bank, an account valued at $20 million, while the rest of NCNB's account, valued at $15 million, was at McKinney &amp; Silver in Raleigh, N.C.


Baseball; Mets Run Off to the West to Play Catch-Up in East
The Mets left for California without illusions.
"It traditonally has been a tough trip for us," Manager Bud Harrelson said.
"Earlier in the season we started out great out there and then died in our arms at the end of it."


U.S. Rules Will Let Employers Reject Disabled Over Safety Issues
In a setback for the disabled and their advocates, the Bush Administration says it will allow employers to reject job applicants with disabilities if the companies believe that the applicants' conditions might pose a threat to their own safety.
But under the Federal regulations, which are scheduled to be published Friday in The Federal Register, the employers must show there is a "high probability" that the applicants' physical or mental conditions would place them in jeopardy.


Bertrand J. Foley, Executive, 83
Bertrand J. Foley, a retired senior vice president of Dean Witter &amp; Company, died on Sunday at the Hunterdon Medical Center in Flemington, N.J.
He was 83 years old and lived in Pennington, N.J.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Helen Meany Gravis Diver, 86
Helen Meany Gravis, who won the gold medal in women's 3-meter springboard diving at the 1928 Olympic Games in Amsterdam, died Sunday at her home in Old Greenwich, Conn.
She was 86 years old.
She died of pancreatic cancer, according to her sister, Louise Holmes of Riverside, Conn., her only surviving relative.


ABB Will Build 2 Nuclear Plants
Asea Brown Boveri Inc. said today that it had received contracts for two new nuclear power plants in South Korea.
The deal, worth more than $200 million for ABB's combustion engineering unit, calls for ABB to design and provide equipment for two 1,000 megawatt nuclear steam-supply systems in Ulchin, South Korea.
The plants are expected to be operating in 1998 and 1999.


William F. Florio, Design Consultant, 50
William Francis Florio, a self-employed design consultant from Hartford who was the brother of Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey, died of cancer on Sunday at the New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 50 years old.
John Shure, the Governor's spokesman, said Mr. Florio had been ill "for quite a while."


The Judge and His Sister: Growing Up Black
To the Editor:
Your July 7 article about Judge Clarence Thomas's intellectual journey on the path of self-help reports his oft-repeated quotation about his sister, then on welfare: "She gets mad when the mailman is late with her welfare check. That's how dependent she is." The rest of the quotation condemns her children: "What's worse is that now her kids feel entitled to the check, too. They have no motivation for doing better or getting out of that situation."


Order in the Market
Seeking lush profits, investors have invaded foreign stock markets with a vengeance, but international regulators and stock-exchange officials have made scant progress toward developing uniform rules and standards to bring order to the expanding global marketplace.
A special report, page D1.


Books of The Times; Of Three Unlikely Allies and Their Conflicts
The Big Three  Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin in Peace and War  By Robin Edmonds  608 pages.
Illustrated.
W.
W.
Norton. $27.95.
The Juggler  Franklin Roosevelt as Wartime Statesman  By Warren F. Kimball  304 pages.
Illustrated.
Princeton University Press. $19.95.


Fannie Mae Plans Two Redemptions
The Federal National Mortgage Association, taking advantage of favorable market conditions, said yesterday that it planned early redemptions in August and September of two debenture issues totaling $600 million and not due until 1995.
Both series were issued last year.
Better known as Fannie Mae, the shareholder-owned company is the largest insurer of home mortgages in the nation.


Kuwait Welcomes Its Conquering Hero, Again


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about Armina Marshall, an actress and playwright, misstated her connection with the Theater Guild.
She was a co-administrator, not a co- founder.


Dollar Is Mostly Higher; Gold Down $3 in New York
The dollar rose against the major currencies yesterday in thin, uninspired trading.
Gold prices fell.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery dropped $3 an ounce, to $367.60.
The Republic National Bank quoted a late bid of $367.35, off $3.05 from late Friday.


Mutual Benefit Bonds
The State of New Jersey today temporarily blocked investors from redeeming $638 million in revenue bonds guaranteed by the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company of Newark.
State regulators seized Mutual Benefit, the nation's 18th-largest life insurer, after it experienced financial trouble from real estate investments.
With the takeover, the state stopped policyholders from redeeming policies, and today the moratorium was extended to holders of bonds backed by Mutual Benefit.
The insurer will still be able to make interest payments on the bonds.


Wanted: Jet Linebackers to Knock Opponents Down
Last season, Kyle Clifton, the Jets' middle linebacker, had 199 tackles, 104 more than the team's second-leading tackler, free safety Erik McMillan.
But no name in the Jets' linebacker corps really jumped out at anybody -- especially not in a television market where the champion Giants have an LB with the initials L. T.
This was something that Dick Steinberg, the Jets' general manager, tried to address over the off season, by every means.
From the Plan B free-agent market, he took Bobby Houston from Atlanta, a third-round Green Bay pick in 1990.
In the draft, he took Mo Lewis out of Georgia on the third round and Rocen Keeton out of U.C.L.A. on the 11th round.


Trade Surplus in Britain
Record exports pushed Britain's widest measure of trade into a surplus last month for the first time in more than four years, the Government said today.
The current account had a surplus of $39 million in June, in contrast to a deficit of $877 million in May, the Central Statistical Office said.
The current account includes trade in goods as well as in services, overseas investment earnings and official transfer payments.
It was Britain's first current-account surplus since February 1987.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Culver City, Calif., tax-exempt revenue bonds have been priced to yield 4.75 percent for bonds due in 1992, to 6.7 percent for those due in 2006, by Prudential Securities.
The issue due 2016 is priced at 98 for a 6 3/4 percent coupon.


EXECUTIVES
*
Bank of Tokyo Trust Co., New York, a subsidiary of the Bank of Tokyo Ltd., named John Valentino executive vice president. *
Fleet Bank of Maine, Portland, Me., a subsidiary of Fleet/Norstar Financial Group, named Anne Szostak chairman and chief executive.


Mouse Models Created for Alzheimer's Disease
USING genetic engineering, scientists have created mice whose brains accumulate the same fibrous deposits that characterize Alzheimer's disease in humans.
Scientists studying the disease have been frustrated because it does not occur in animals.
Although they could watch the disease gradually wipe away the memories and learning ability of its victims, they could not observe its effects in the brain except at autopsy.


The Judge and His Sister: Growing Up Black; Marshall to Robinson
To the Editor:
Judge Clarence Thomas's disdain for affirmative action is born of naivete or arrogance.
Does he truly believe that in 1935, when Thurgood Marshall entered the civil rights battle, he would have been considered for the office of assistant attorney general of Missouri or that he would have been hired as in-house counsel by Monsanto Chemical Corporation?
Does he realize how much he owes to Justice Marshall and others who literally laid their lives on the line in a fight that made it possible for him to reap the benefits of his hard work?


Global Investing -- A special report.; In World Markets, Loose Regulation
Seeking lush profits, investors have invaded foreign stock markets with a vengeance, but international regulators and stock-exchange officials have made scant progress toward developing uniform rules and standards to bring order to an expanding global marketplace.
The regulatory lag is ominous given the huge sums that are landing overseas, the increased importance multinational companies place on these markets for raising capital and the higher investor risks that come with loosely regulated markets.
Already, some professional money managers have backed away from some stock markets and others are scrutinizing companies to try to avoid greater risks.


Global Investing -- a special report: FRANCE; An Old Club Transformed
A series of blockbuster scandals and a dash of French pride have helped the Bourse transform itself from a club with rules dating from Napoleon's time into a dynamic market ready for the 21st century.
But it still lags behind the aggressiveness and resources of American market regulators.


For Shoreham, New Last Gasp At High Court
Responding to a final appeal by supporters of the Shoreham Nuclear Power Station, a member of the United States Supreme Court agreed yesterday to ask the full Court to consider whether to keep the moribund plant alive a little longer by granting an emergency stay of its new license.
The new license, known as a "possession only" license, went into effect at midnight Friday.
It essentially means that Shoreham's owner, the Long Island Lighting Company, can begin taking the plant apart.


CHRONICLE
ROSE FITZGERALD KENNEDY spent her 101st birthday yesterday with her daughter Jean Kennedy Smith and some grandchildren in the family compound at Hyannisport, Mass.
"She is as well as can be expected at 101," said Melody Miller, a spokeswoman for the Kennedy family.
"Still a dynamic spirit in the household."


The Judge and His Sister: Growing Up Black; Lighten Up, Louis
To the Editor:
Prof.
Louis Michael Seidman's silly letter ("Call Him Judge Thomas," July 14) criticizes my occasional public reference to Judge Clarence Thomas by his first name.
I have known the judge very well for over 10 years, long before he became a judge, and I am proud to be his friend.


Carol Rubinstein, Lighting Designer And Producer, 51
Carol Rubinstein Schickel, a television producer and theatrical lighting designer, died on Saturday at Century City Hospital in Los Angeles.
She was 51 years old.
She died of cancer, said her husband, Richard Schickel, the film critic. .


Market Place; When the Merely Broke Try to Buy the Bankrupt
It is as if there were no end to the late 1980's, a period in which the lack of cash was not viewed as a serious impediment to buying a company.
Carl C. Icahn was announcing yesterday that his Trans World Airlines, a carrier that cannot pay its bills, wanted to buy a large part of Pan American World Airways.
Pan Am, which was once T.W.A.'s principal American competitor to Europe, is in bankruptcy court.
T.W.A. is not, but that distinction has more to do with strategy than financial condition.


INSIDE
Yugoslavs Fight and Talk Up to 20 people died in new fighting in Yugoslavia while leaders began talks aimed at changing the country and heading off a civil war.
Page A3.


Unease Grows Under the Ozone Hole
THERE is no sign of panic here.
In fact, the only health warnings in this wind-blown, 19th century port in southern Chile are how to prevent the spread of cholera.
But there is reason for low-grade uneasiness.
For the last four years, residents have known that from late August through early December, the heavens open upon them, exposing them to increased amounts of ultraviolet radiation.
This happens as an ozone hole over Antarctica stretches toward Punta Arenas, and its thinning outer reaches cover this city of 120,000 people.


U.N. Journal; Will Stalin's Luck at Yalta Backfire in New York?
Amid the stacks of press releases scattered throughout the United Nations headquarters, the statement assailing the Kremlin might easily have been ignored, as if it were just another pronouncement by this or that obscure committee or delegation.
But to some diplomats, the letter from the Ukrainian Mission in January stood out, for it criticized the Soviet Union over its crackdown in Lithuania.
Underlying the guarded language was a message: the Ukrainians, the long-obedient stepchildren of the Soviet delegation, seem to be trying to set off on their own.


Judge Says Bridgeport May Seek Bankruptcy
A Federal bankruptcy judge ruled today that Bridgeport was authorized to seek bankruptcy protection despite the state's objections, but it remains undecided whether the city's petition will be approved.
The judge, Alan H. W. Shiff, found there was no state law prohibiting Bridgeport from filing for bankruptcy protection.
He also said a state panel that oversees Bridgeport's finances cannot deny the city that right.


Accounts
*
The French and British commission overseeing construction of Eurotunnel, which will link Britain and France, to BMP DDB Needham Worldwide, London, and DDB Needham Worldwide S.A., Paris.
The account, which has billings of more than $45 million, is for public relations, sales promotion, direct marketing and other communications programs to start in the fall and run for three years. *
The New Jersey Devils National Hockey League team to Gillespie Advertising Inc., Princeton, N.J.
Billings were not disclosed.


Women With AIDS Virus: Hard Choices on Motherhood
Dina M. had always envisioned a family of her own.
But shortly after learning that she was going to have a baby, the 19-year-old nursing student, from Hackensack, N.J., was also told that she had the AIDS virus.
Ten days ago, she had an abortion.
The teen-ager was four and a half months pregnant and had spent most of that time struggling to make a decision.


Our Towns
Like many places in the state, Long Lake has been ordered to close its landfill, and officials here are up in arms.
But it's not because they do not know where else to put the trash, or how to pay for the change.
They are worried about losing a major tourist attraction.
Every summer evening in this Adirondack village for as long as anyone can remember, people have come to the dump to watch the black bears, who lumber in from the woods in search of a meal.
The other night there were 80 people at the dump, armed with binoculars, video cameras, lawn chairs and coolers of beer.
Some brought marshmallows for the bears.


New Head of Nuclear Commission Seeks Change
Declaring that he was not content to "watch industry stagnate as it has for the last dozen years," the new chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said today that he wanted to lay the groundwork for resuming construction of nuclear power plants, with safer and more economical plants.
But the chairman, Ivan Selin, an engineer and management expert who took office at the beginning of this month, said in his first extended meeting with reporters that much, including the industry's public image, would have to change before a utility could order a new reactor.


Amendments Delay a Vote on China Trade
Several senators said today that they planned to introduce amendments to a bill imposing conditions on the renewal of China's trade access to the United States.
The amendments delayed a vote on the legislation.
Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, said that the amendments, if adopted, would make it even less likely that the bill would ever become law.
Administration officials have indicated that President Bush would veto any bill attaching conditions to the renewal of most-favored-nation status.


Northwest Air in Pact for Shuttle
Northwest Airlines signed an agreement in principle with the Trump Shuttle and its bankers today that outlines how the big carrier will manage and market the Northeast shuttle service, named after Donald J. Trump, who bought it from Eastern Airlines a few years ago.
Northwest, the banking group and the Trump Organization will negotiate a final agreement under which Northwest would manage the shuttle service for up to 10 years, the airline said in a news release.
Details about the proposed management relationship were not released, and it remained unclear whether the shuttle's name would be changed.Northwest had said previously that it was in negotiations with the Trump group over the shuttle, which serves the Washington-New York-Boston market, one of the country's busiest.
Northwest is owned by NWA Inc., which went private in a leveraged buyout some years ago.


Corn and Soybeans Surge; Damage From Heat Feared
Prices of corn and soybean futures rose sharply on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday amid fears of heat-related crop damage and hopes for increased export sales.
Wheat futures also advanced.
Wheat futures settled 4 1/2 cents to 6 3/4 cents higher in Chicago, with the contract for delivery in September at $2.78 1/2 a bushel; corn was 3 3/4 cents to 8 1/2 cents higher, with September at $2.36 3/4 a bushel; oats were 3 cents to 3 1/2 cents higher, with September at $1.29 a bushel, and soybeans were 12 1/2 cents to 14 cents higher, with August at $5.35 1/2 a bushel.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 23


North Koreans Are Coming; North Koreans Are Coming
For the first time since the Korean peninsula was divided nearly 40 years ago, North Korea has agreed to participate in athletic events in the United States.
In response to an invitation from the United States Soccer Federation, the North Korean sports ministry said its national men's team would play the United States national team in Washington in a game tentatively scheduled for the third week of October at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium.


Braves Join Pennant Race As Smoltz Beats Pirates, 7-3
The Atlanta Braves trailed Los Angeles by nine and a half games at the All-Star break just two weeks ago.
But John Smoltz certainly isn't the same pitcher he was for the first half of the season.
Greg Olson's two-run double and two Pittsburgh errors helped Atlanta score seven runs in the fourth inning, stopping the Pirates pitching staff's 20-inning scoreless streak and giving the Braves and Smoltz a 7-3 victory tonight.


Seized Bank Reportedly Hid Loss From British Officials for Years
In a scheme that went back almost to its beginning in 1972, the Bank of Credit and Commerce International tried to conceal losses that totaled several billions of dollars, according to the first detailed evaluation of the institution, released here today by banking regulators.
The regulators said this was done through a pattern of bribery, phony loans, unrecorded deposits and rapid transfers of funds from one part of the bank to another.


Louisiana Executes Murderer
A man who was convicted of raping and murdering an 11-year-old girl in 1984 was executed today in the Louisiana electric chair.
The man, Andrew Lee Jones, 35 years old, declined to make a final statement, smiled at his lawyer and his spiritual adviser and was then strapped into the big wooden electric chair at the state prison here.
He was pronounced dead at 12:10 A.M.


Music in Review
'Empty Bottle'  The Amato Opera 319 Bowery (at Second Street) Manhattan
Martin Kalmanoff's "Empty Bottle" is a three-act exercise in love and bloodshed set in Depression-era Little Italy.
Thanks to coherent staging by Richard Leighton in this tiny downtown house, 32 characters make their various ways on and off stage with a minimum of crowding.
The singing ranges from occasional excellence to blustering adequacy to bare competence.
Elizabeth La Torre's conducting does the best it can with a small, somewhat wheezing, ensemble of piano and winds.
User-friendly -- that happy new term bestowed upon us by technology -- describes Mr.
Kalmanoff's music.
There is little to discourage the consonance-craving ear, no uncomfortable jolts of originality, rather a stream of smoothly conceived allusions to known worlds: Puccini, minor-key Italian ballads, modal folk song, Debussyan parallel harmonies, a trace of barroom Americana, even the occasional wisp of an old-fashioned valse triste.
Mr.
Kalmanoff has the melodist's gift for stacking phrases into sequential patterns and then making their aggregate assume a single shape.
So many of his lyrical ideas begin with great promise, then reach the juncture where they might blossom into something further.
They almost never do, falling back instead on formula.
The set pieces do have their moments, though, especially when sung by convincing singers like Deborah Faw (Maria), Helen Van Tine (the Mother) and Daniela Sikora (Antonia).
Ms.
Faw's soprano was the most interesting: secure, intense and with a focus and concentration that made its excess of power acceptable in this small space.
Michael Pafford's Silvio, on the other hand, seemed loud because it didn't know what else to do.
More suitable to the surroundings, and quite pleasing, were Ms.
Van Tine and Ms.
Sikora.
Mr.
Kalmanoff's collection of gangsters, policemen and Prince Street neighbors included Sophia Diapoulis, Mark Franco-Filipasic, David Bosch, David Kantey, Andrew Costello, Robert Shaffer, Philip Carroll, Steve Taylor, Bernard Goldberg and Andrew Costello.
Richard Figueroa, a stocking-masked representative of death, stalked the proceedings.
Further performances are Friday, Saturday and Sunday.


Hatched And Wild Fish: Clash Of Cultures
TO millions of true believers, there is nothing more beautiful in all of nature, nothing to make the heart beat faster, than the aristocratic trout and its royal cousin, the salmon.
Brilliantly spotted, pink-flanked or simply and elegantly silver, they linger in the mind's eye as paragons of sleek grace and primitive power.
In pursuit of that vision, and to replenish commercial salmon stocks, fisheries biologists over the last half century or so have released billions of hatchery-reared fish in American streams, rivers and lakes.
For years, no one thought much about the ecological and genetic consequences of turning them loose.


Observer; Not So Pure A View
The New York Times and The Washington Post seem to be trying to outdo each other in efforts to give plagiarism a bad name.
I have this from the Media column of The Post's Style section.
The Times must have published it somewhere too, but after coming across it in The Post I became too shaky to check The Times closely for fear I'd read that the plagiarism police were on my trail too.
According to The Post -- an admirable paper, let me credit it fully and gratefully! -- The Times has disciplined one veteran reporter while The Post, not to be outdone in the rectitude department, has gone all the way and fired one.
Both offenders, says The Post, my source for this column, and a splendid one too -- both offenders had sent their home offices stories that included several paragraphs lifted almost verbatim from articles written by other reporters in other newspapers.


Q&amp;A
Fainting and Dreams
Q.
Do you dream when you faint?
A.
"The short answer is no," said Dr.
Daniel R. Wagner, assistant professor of clinical neurology at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, Westchester Division, White Plains, N.Y.
Dr.
Wagner explained that the simple faint is due to a lack of blood flow to the brain, which temporarily shuts down; consciousness is lost until the blood flow is restored.
Dreaming, on the other hand, occurs largely during rapid eye movement sleep, when blood flow to the brain is about the same as the flow when you are awake, Dr.
Wagner said.
During a dream, he said, the brain is active in its own way and is metabolizing at about the same rate as during wakefulness.
Singers' Accents
Q.
Why don't you hear a regional accent when people sing?
A.
Many people do show regional accents when they sing, said Dr.
Charles C. Diggs, a speech-language pathologist with the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association in Rockville, Md., but there may be psychological and physical reasons for using standard speech instead.
Dr.
Diggs suggested that the accent used might involve a cultural rather than a regional manner of speech.
Many speakers from one cultural background do a lot of what is called code-switching when talking to those of another background, he explained.
They may subconsciously or consciously choose a different language and rhythm to make themselves more clearly understood, much as an adult often uses slower, simpler speech when talking to a child.
Thus, a singer might subconsciously or consciously choose general American dialect to reach a wider audience.
It may also be that like stutterers, singers face less physiological stress when they are singing than when they are conversing, Dr.
Diggs said.
"With singing, you already have words and a rhythm and rate of speech provided," he said.
"If you already have the words, you can concentrate more on the manner in which you are saying them."
Another possible factor in stuttering and perhaps singing, a division of function between the left and right hemispheres of the brain, is highly speculative, Dr.
Diggs said.
He also suggested that with recorded sound, certain aspects of speech could be modified to make it more acoustically perfect.
"There's probably not much they can do about prolonged Southern vowels," he said, "but excessive nasality can be toned down through a filtering process."


Most of the Kuwait Economy Is Still in Suspension
At the Shamlan docks on the edge of Kuwait's business district, the traditional wooden dhows that Persian Gulf fishermen and merchants have sailed for centuries cram the piers every day, bringing fresh fruit, vegetables and fish to a market thronged with eager customers.
But across town, at the immense, modern commercial port of Shuwaik, the piers are empty, the cranes are still, and the harbor is desolate, awaiting the completion of dredging work to reopen the port.
It was shut when the Iraqis sank vessels in the channel and wrecked the port's heavy machinery during the Persian Gulf war.


Music in Review
Goldman Memorial Band  Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center
The wind, brass and percussion band started by Edwin Franko Goldman in 1911 has been giving free concerts in New York's parks every summer since 1918, first as the New York Military Band, then as the Guggenheim Band, and since 1984 as the Goldman Memorial Band.
Band music is hardly as fashionable now as it was in Goldman's day, but a large and enthusiastic audience braved threats of a thunderstorm on Sunday evening to hear the band's concert of mostly Russian and American band works and transcriptions.
The transcriptions were particularly fascinating because the most skillful of them -- Johann Strauss's "Fledermaus" Overture, offered as a built-in encore at the end of the evening -- filled out the textures so well that one hardly missed the strings.
Two movements from Tchaikovsky's "Pathetique" Symphony and the last two sections of Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition" were less convincingly arranged but were given vivid readings.
The works composed with concert band in mind included a lovely Andante in a richly chromatic Wagnerian idiom by Douglas Townsend and works by Leroy Anderson and Prokofiev.
Gene Young, the band's director since 1989, led the group in polished, well-balanced, enegetic performances and offered folksy spoken introductions to each of the works.
The cornetists, Frank Hosticka, Bill Rohdin and Marshall Farr, and the trumpeter, Bruce Engel, gave virtuosic performances of Anderson's "Bugler's Holiday" and "Trumpeter's Lullaby."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Chiron will buy Cetus in a stock transaction valued at about $600 million.
In a related move, Hoffmann-LaRoche said it would pay $300 million plus royalties to acquire Cetus's coveted polymerase chain reaction technology.  [ Page D1. ]


Patterns
Hot Times
A subtropical shroud covered the city like a dirty old coat, turning fashionable people into human puddles.
These are the horse latitudes of fashion, when it's O.K. not to think about clothes, if only for 15 minutes.


Joseph Dorfman, 87, Specialist in History Of Economic Mind
Joseph Dorfman, emeritus professor of economics at Columbia University, died on Sunday at the Keteri Residence in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


The Judge and His Sister: Growing Up Black; Let the Debate Begin
To the Editor:
African-American protest has had a history of competing ideas, rather than solidarity, with the themes of militancy versus pragmatism and integration versus nationalism gaining and losing favor in different generations.
In the last 20 years a new debate has evolved between those who believe in individual accomplishment and those who advocate compensatory government programs.


Corrections
A chart on June 15 that listed leading recipients of speaking and writing fees among members of Congress misstated the amount earned in 1990 by Representative Les AuCoin, Democrat of Oregon.
He received $38,750 (of which $11,900 went to charity), not $50,650.
He was not among leading recipients in the House.


Global Investors -- a special report: BRITAIN; Trying to Stay Abreast of Rules
If the challenge facing investors in Tokyo is to decipher the market's unwritten rules, the difficulty in London is to simply stay abreast of the constantly rewritten rules.
Yet for all the changes, the task of policing serious stock market abuses remains highly fragmented.
For example, corporate takeovers are still monitored by a private, nongovernmental panel.
The prospectuses and other paperwork connected with new stock issues are reviewed by the London Stock Exchange.
The Bank of England, the nation's central bank, remains a powerful but somewhat shadowy influence on the market.


A Collector Creates A German Museum
Peter Ludwig, one of the world's most prolific art collectors, has turned a former umbrella factory here into what he calls "a new kind of museum," a showplace for the visual and performing arts.
It is an unusual place to display art, but Mr.
Ludwig is one of the most unusual figures in the art world.
He is a compulsive collector who, over the last 40 years, has bought tens of thousands of paintings, drawings, statues, collages, ceramic pieces, illuminated manuscripts and other artworks.
His influence extends far beyond Germany and Europe and beyond the boundaries of traditional art.


France Drops Plans to Build New Nuclear Missile System
In a significant change of military policy brought on by the end of the cold war, France announced today that it had scrapped plans to build a new system of mobile nuclear missiles to replace a 20-year-old battery of ballistic missiles fired from fixed silos.
The step marks the first time that France's carefully nurtured independent nuclear force has been affected by spending cutbacks resulting from the decline of Communism.
Until now, France had announced plans only to reduce its troop strength in Germany.


Protests by Camp Survivors Undo a German Supermarket
The German authorities and a food market chain agreed today to scrap a nearly completed supermarket on the edge of Ravensbruck, the former Nazi concentration camp, after protests from Jewish groups and camp survivors that the market would profane the site.
Premier Manfred Stolpe of the state of Brandenburg announced that his government would provide an alternative site for the store.


Global Investing -- a special report: Japan; Informal Code Rules Markets
Japan is going through a major financial scandal, with four major brokerage houses accused of compensating big clients for losses and making loans to underworld figures.
But for the savvy investor, Japan is also offering the world an extraordinary tutorial in a shadowy subject: how its financial markets really work.
The laws here are modeled on American financial statutes.
But in these markets, informal market practices are far more important than written market regulations.
And by that measure, this is alien financial terrain, one in which the market's culture -- more than its laws -- defines what is tolerated and what is punished.


Claiborne Net Up in Quarter
Liz Claiborne Inc., a designer of clothing, accessories and fragrances, said yesterday that second-quarter profits rose a record 13 percent, to $39.5 million, or 46 cents a share, from $34.9 million, or 40 cents a share, a year earlier.
The company said second- quarter sales rose a record 22.3 percent, to $416 million, from $340.3 million a year earlier.


Cuomo on 'Ethnic Types'
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that it would help the Democratic Party to nominate a Presidential candidate who is "nonthreatening," then added that "distinct ethnic types are always threatening to somebody."
Mr.
Cuomo, the son of Italian immigrants, has often spoken about the discomfort of some voters with politicians who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups.
He has expressed anger at periodic suggestions that his lack of interest in running for President might be related to his heritage, a phenomenon he calls the "Mafia syndrome."


Knee Surgery for Bills' Smith
Bruce Smith, the All-Pro defensive end for the Buffalo Bills, underwent knee surgery yesterday, but it was not immediately clear how long he would be sidelined.
The arthroscopic surgery, performed by Dr.
James Andrews at the Alabama Sports Medicine Orthopaedic Center in Birmingham, Ala., removed cartilage chips and smoothed the surface of the bone in Smith's left knee.
Smith underwent surgery on his right knee in February 1990.


Pentagon Contract To Tera Computer
The Pentagon's Defense Advanced Research Project Agency said it would announce today a $7.5 million contract to a small Seattle-based computer maker to help finance the development of a massively parallel supercomputer.
The company, the Tera Computer Company, was founded two years ago to try to develop a new approach to massively parallel computing, a technology in which hundreds or thousands of small processors could do computations simultaneously.


PLAN WOULD LET BAGHDAD SELL OIL
The Bush Administration is drawing up a plan to allow the Security Council to remove some sanctions against Iraq to allow Baghdad to sell petroleum, senior Administration officials said today.
The profits would be used to pay for food and medicine, war reparations and the destruction of weapons.
The plan, which was drafted by the State Department, is being circulated for review within the department and at the Pentagon, the White House and the Central Intelligence Agency.
Officials said that Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d was expected to approve it.
It would also need President Bush's approval before it could be presented to the United Nations Security Council as the basis for a resolution.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about an I.B.M. venture to build a memory chip using an experimental X-ray machine understated the storage capacity of the planned chip, a 256-million-bit dynamic random access memory, or D-RAM, chip.
It will store 64 times the data that can be held by the current 4-million-bit D-RAM chips.
That is the equivalent of 16,000 double-spaced typed pages, or about 32 copies of the novel "Moby- Dick."


New Models From Sun
Sun Microsystems Inc., the leading computer work station maker, announced two new desktop models and enhancements to existing models.
The new models are the Sparcstation IPX, a midrange graphics machine, and the entry-level black-and-white Sparcstation ELC.
The new models are priced at $4,995 to $6,295 for the two versions of the entry-level machine offered, and $11,995 to $13,495 for the two versions of midrange machine.


Possible MGM-Pathe Deal
Chargeurs S.A., the French textile and leisure group, said today that it was interested in buying the assets of MGM-Pathe Communications Inc., depending on the price.
Thierry Dettloff, controller in Paris of Chargeurs, said that rumors that Chargeurs might buy some MGM-Pathe assets from the Pathe Communications Corporation were "an old story." Pathe Communications owns 98.8 percent of the California-based film and television company.


Appeals Court Returns Case in Agent's Slaying
The United States cannot kidnap someone from a foreign country and prosecute that person over the other country's objections, a federal appeals court ruled today in teh case of the torture slaying of a Federal drug agent.
The ruling, by the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, would require a Federal judge to reverse the murder conviction of Rene Verdugo-Urquidez if the judge decided that the kidnapping of Mr.
Verdugo-Urquidez in Mexico was arranged by United States agents and that the Mexican Government objected.


Banco de Santander C.D.'s Are Rated AA by S.&amp; P.
Banco de Santander, the Spanish bank that recently purchased a large financial interest in New Jersey's largest bank, has been given an AA rating on its long-term certificates of deposit from the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, the rating agency.
The agency also affirmed the A-1+ rating on the bank's commercial paper.
At the same time, the subordinate debt of the bank's wholly owned subsidiary, Banco Santander Puerto Rico, has been raised to a AA- from an A+.
The certificates of deposit of the Puerto Rican subsidiary also were raised to AA/A-1+ from AA-/ A-1+, affecting about $40 million of the subsidiary's debt.


Bondholders Near Farley Action
Farley Inc., the main holding company of William F. Farley, could be forced into involuntary bankruptcy by tomorrow, according to a statement released yesterday by a committee representing holders of the company's bonds.
The statement from the Farley Inc.
Noteholder Committee, which represents holders of the majority of the $172 million in company bonds, declared that talks between the bondholders and the corporate empire builder had stalled.
The committee recommended that the bondholders file an involuntary bankruptcy petition against Farley Inc. if the situation did not change by tomorrow.


Telephone Unit Of Nynex Plan
The New York Telephone Company today proposed a reorganization plan under which it would be barred from doing business with virtually every other subsidiary of the Nynex Corporation, its parent company said.
The move is intended to avoid the types of situations that led to wild parties involving Nynex employees and potential vendors.
The New York Telephone plan would expand the 11-member board of directors by adding two non-company people.
That would create a 13-member board with 10 members from outside the utility.


Happy to Be on the Outside Looking In


Rape Suspect Tied to Prior Incidents
Prosecutors in the rape case against William K. Smith said today that they had uncovered three previous incidents in which Mr.
Smith either raped or attempted to rape women and that they would seek to use these accounts as evidence against him.
In papers filed in Palm Beach County, Assistant State Attorney Moira K. Lasch asserted that Mr.
Smith had raped a woman in Washington, D.C., in the spring of 1988.
Ms.
Lasch said she intended to use the incident as evidence that Mr.
Smith, the 30-year-old nephew of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, had committed acts similar to the rape he is charged with here.


Rape Suspect Tied to Prior Incidents
Prosecutors in the rape case against William K. Smith said today that they had uncovered three previous incidents in which Mr.
Smith either raped or attempted to rape women and that they would seek to use these accounts as evidence against him.
In papers filed in Palm Beach County, Assistant State Attorney Moira K. Lasch asserted that Mr.
Smith had raped a woman in Washington, D.C., in the spring of 1988.
Ms.
Lasch said she intended to use the incident as evidence that Mr.
Smith, the 30-year-old nephew of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, had committed acts similar to the rape he is charged with here.


NBC Supports Bid for Earlier Prime Time
NBC announced yesterday that it would allow its station in Sacramento, Calif., to begin carrying the network's prime-time programs one hour earlier, if the Federal Communications Commission grants a special waiver to the station.
It would be the first time a television station would change the hours of prime-time programming and it could, NBC executives said, presage a move to start prime time at 7 P.M. instead of 8, in all areas of the country.
Currently, prime time runs from 7 to 10 P.M. in the central and mountain time zones.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 19
July 12
July 20
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.1
2.9
2.9
Gasoline stocks
213.9
214.2
216.3
Distillate stocks
119.0
117.1
117.1
Crude imports, daily
6.9
5.8
6.6
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.5
2.0
Crude stocks
348.6
349.7
383.7
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
88.8
86.4
93.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Tennis; New TV Pacts At Tennis Open
Nine months after negotiating an oral agreement with CBS for coverage of the United States Open tennis tournament through 1995, the United States Tennis Association will sign the formal contract today.
The tennis association also expects to sign a six-year cable television deal today with the USA Network.
"It's taken this long to tie all the loose ends together," said David Bagliebter, a vice president of ProServ, the company that negotiated the deals for the tennis association.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Optioned Keith Brown, pitcher, to Nashville of the American Association.
Recalled Freddie Benavides, shortstop, from Nashville.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Placed Don Slaught, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Jeff Banister, catcher, from Buffalo of the American Association.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Named Allan Bristow, vice president of player personnel, coach.
Named Gene Littles, coach, vice president and special assistant.
Named Dave Twardzik director of player personnel.
Continental Basketball Association
LACROSSE CATBIRDS -- Traded Eddie Hughes, guard, a 1991 second-round draft selection; a 1992 first-round draft selection, and future considerations to Tri-Cities for Pat Durham, Peter Thibeaux, and the rights to Kenny Battle, forwards.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Signed Dwayne Bryant, guard.
TULSA ZONE -- Changed their nickname from the Fast Breakers to Zone.
World Basketball League
FLORIDA JADES -- Placed Eric Brown, forward, on the injured list.
HALIFAX WINDJAMMERS -- Fired Ian MacMillan, coach.
Named Mickey Fox coach for the remainder of the season.


Results Plus
TRACK AND FIELD


D'Amato Offers Testimony Before Senate Ethics Panel
In his first opportunity to defend himself before his peers, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has testified in two closed-door sessions of the Senate Ethics Committee, which is examining whether he improperly used his office to help family, friends and political supporters.
Neither the Ethics Committee nor Mr.
D'Amato's office would provide details of the sessions, which took place today and on Monday.


BUSH NAMES PANEL FOR ENVIRONMENT
Seeking to tap the expertise of groups that have historically been at odds, President Bush today named 25 members to a panel to advise him on how to slow the destruction of the environment but not at inordinate expense to business.
The panel includes top executives from some of the nation's largest industrial companies, like Dow Chemical, Ford and General Electric, as well as from prominent conservation groups like the Environmental Defense Fund, the World Wildlife Fund and National Geographic Society.


About New York
Philip Copp found himself in the unusual position of being above ground last Saturday.
Normally, Saturdays find him prowling subway stations in search of beauty, history and few more paragraphs for his ever more endless opus.
But there he was strolling down Joralemon Street in Brooklyn Heights, praising the Belgian cobblestones and tall shade trees.
His attention was resolutely focused on the mid-years of the first decade of the 20th century.


Vocal Arts Competition
The University of Maryland International Marian Anderson Vocal Arts Competition has announced second, third and fourth winners in its first season.
A first prize was not awarded.
The jury, with the baritone Sherrill Milnes as chairman, awarded a $10,000 second prize to Sigute Stonyte, a 36-year-old Lithuanian soprano.
A $5,000 third prize went to Lauren Wagner, 37, a soprano from Ann Arbor, Mich.
Bonita Hyman, a 35-year-old Brooklyn mezzo-soprano, and Mette Ejsing, a Danish contralto, 36, tied for fourth place and received $2,500 each.


Soviets Seek to Join Big Lending Agencies
In a move that puts new pressure on Western governments to help the Soviet Union, Moscow has applied for full membership in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
The action comes less than a week after the leaders of seven industrial democracies endorsed a more limited "special association" with the agencies for the Soviet Union.
Full membership would allow Moscow, whose economy is severely shrinking, to borrow from both institutions.
Article, page A3.


Don't Ease the Squeeze on Iraq
Should Iraq be allowed to resume limited oil exports in order to pay war reparations and finance compelling humanitarian needs at home?
Not as long as Saddam Hussein continues to flout the U.N. cease-fire resolution that requires him to disclose all details of Iraq's secret nuclear, biological and chemical weapons programs.
To accept human suffering as a diplomatic lever is tormenting -- but preferable to leaving the Persian Gulf allies with no credible way to compel Iraqi compliance except resuming military attacks.


ZULU-BASED GROUP TO RETURN MONEY
The Zulu-based political movement Inkatha announced today that it would pay back 250,000 rand -- about $87,000 -- that the South African Government secretly provided to subsidize two political rallies.
The funding of Inkatha, which The Weekly Mail, a leading anti-apartheid newspaper, disclosed last Friday, has undercut Inkatha's claim to political independence and caused the country's biggest scandal in more than a decade.


BUSINESSES AVOID SOUTH AFRICA TIES
Despite President Bush's recent decision to lift economic sanctions against South Africa, most American companies that once owned businesses there say they have no plans to return soon, if at all.
Some companies that sold their businesses in South Africa, like the Coca-Cola Company, moved important operations to neighboring countries like Swaziland, and say they can serve the South African market from there.


Savannah Electric In 30-Year Issue
Savannah Electric &amp; Power Company's $30 million issue of 30-year bonds was won yesterday by Lehman Brothers and promptly reoffered with a 9 3/8 percent coupon at a price of 99.5, to yield 9.424 percent.
That is about 95 basis points above the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond, a Lehman spokesman said.
A basis point is one hundredth of one percent.
Moody's Investors Service Inc. has rated the bonds A1 and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation has given an A rating.
The bonds are nonrefundable for five years.


Book Notes
Muscle Books
It is an old adage of publishing that 75 percent of books are bought by women.
But current trends suggest that this maxim, like most others in a myth-ridden industry, is false.
Books about men and masculinity are selling to men at an extraordinary rate.


Cracks Found Developing in F-16's
The Air Force said today that its F-16 fighters were developing cracks under the stress of flight and that it would spend $250 million to fix the problem in the next few years.
Air Force officials said that so far they had found cracks on about a dozen of the nation's 1,600 F-16's, although not all have been inspected.
They added that they expected cracks to be discovered on many more planes as inspections continue.
And they said more F-16's were likely to develop cracks in the future.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Soviet Union is planning to sell a large stake in one of its major industrial corporations to a foreign investor, advisers to the Soviet Government said.
The Government intends to sell at least 30 percent of the Volga Automotive Plant Association, which makes Lada sedans.  [ Page A1. ]


State Street Boston Hires An Executive From Chase
Marshall N. Carter yesterday was named president, chief operating officer and director of the State Street Boston Corporation, the country's largest custodian and trustee of mutual and pension funds.
Mr.
Carter, 51, spent the last 15 years at Chase Manhattan.
In his last three years at Chase, he was head of the global securities services division, which holds and processes more than $500 billion in domestic and foreign investment assets.
Under Mr.
Carter's leadership, the operation doubled its earnings, as well as its custody of global assets, increasing Chase's lead as the world's largest global custodian.


Taxes Due? Charge It!
The Administration endorsed a bill today that would allow individuals and corporations to pay taxes with credit cards.
The provision is part of a big tax-simplification measure that has the support of senior Congressional tax-writers of both parties.
But the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Dan Rostenkowski, Democrat of Illinois, expressed doubt that the measure would become law this year.


Perfect Ingredients For a Bad Dream
YOU wouldn't believe the perils of restauranting.
Lost reservations and orders of supplies that never arrive are so commonplace that they are not the stuff of unforgettable nightmares.
But employees who bar the entrance to the leadership of the United States Congress, 100 spoiled quail served to a room full of restaurant critics and a diner who propositions an owner, is rebuffed and keeps coming back: those are the events indelibly printed on the brain circuits of restaurateurs.
Their most embarrassing moments, told in their own words.
More or less.
"Nine months ago," as Tom Wilkinson remembers it, "a woman came into the restaurant for a drink about 11 o'clock. The restaurant was pretty much closed." She struck up a conversation and asked Mr.
Wilkinson, who owns Wilkinson's Seafood Cafe in New York, if he could walk her home, a few blocks away.


New York's Bureau of Nutrition Died Too Soon, a Budget Victim
To the Editor:
The Bureau of Nutrition of the New York City Department of Health died too young, sentenced to death before the age of 50 by a failing municipal fiscal system.
With its premature death, who will take over its function?


Manor Offers Lessons On the Lives of Slave
For the fifth graders, it was an eye-opening discovery to learn how slaves lived and labored in New York's colonial era.
"Slaves were not treated like humans, even though they worked hard and were skilled in many ways," said 10-year-old Jeanne Marie Vinchiarello, after a visit to Philipsburg Manor, a restored 18th-century farm here.
"They prepared all the food but were not permitted to sit down and eat."


BRIEFS
Debt *
K Mart Corporation, Troy, Mich., has filed a $500 million shelf offering of debt securities with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The securities are to be offered periodically


Baseball; Mariners' Johnson Tames Yanks' Youth Brigade
It could have been another one of those evenings when kids were the featured attraction for the Yankees, what with rookie Scott Kamieniecki stifling batters and the newest father on the field, Don Mattingly, lashing a pivotal double that he would have loved to tell his infant son about someday.
Then Randy Johnson entered the scene, all 6 feet 10 inches of him, and the Seattle pitcher obscured the pretty picture New York was hoping to paint by muzzling New York on four hits through eight innings and powering the Mariners to a 6-1 victory at Yankee Stadium.


Jurors Say Complainant Didn't Seem Believable
Jurors in the St.
John's University trial said last night that they had acquitted three lacrosse players of all charges of sexual assault against a female student because they did not believe much of her testimony.
"There were just so many inconsistencies and too many lies in everyone's testimony," said the jury foreman, Michael Fahid, a 44-year-old telephone company employee.
"There were just too many doubts."


LOS ANGELES TRIAL ORDERED TO MOVE
A state appeals court today ordered a judge to move the trial of four white police officers who were videotaped beating a black motorist out of Los Angeles County because of the publicity and political turmoil the case had aroused.
The order, which could be appealed by the prosecution, further complicates a long-running case that has raised nationwide questions about police brutality, caused a political upheaval in Los Angeles and led to the announcement Monday by Police Chief Daryl F. Gates that he would resign by next April.


A. Raymond Brooks Is Dead at 95; The Last U.S. Ace of World War I
A.
Raymond Brooks, the last surviving ace among American fighter pilots in World War I, died on July 17 at his home in Summit, N.J.
He was 95 years old.
Military aviation was still in an embryonic stage in 1916 when Mr.
Brooks, then a 21-year-old student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, joined a small group of Americans in Toronto being trained by the Royal Flying Corps.


House Panel Supports Base Closings
A House panel voted today to uphold the recommendations of a Federal commission on military base closings in spite of complaints from some lawmakers that the closing process was flawed.
The most vigorous opposition to the recommendations of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission came from members of the New Jersey and Pennsylvania Congressional delegations who objected to the decision to close the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard.


Review/Television; A Tribute to the Past in New Rob Reiner Series
Television's embracing of the past threatens to become a stranglehold these days.
On one level, there is an element of nostalgia (although broadcasts of "The Best of Ed Sullivan" and reruns of "All in the Family" have done quite well financially for CBS, thank you).
On another, there are purely business considerations (HBO's "Dream On" was developed by MCA as a vehicle for clips from its musty vaults of Universal films).
One thing is clear: The past is hot on many programming fronts, perhaps because it offers audiences an opportunity to escape a present that many find troubling.
A good many producers are obviously convinced that the nation needs a laugh (get a load of next season's sitcom glut) and the uses of the past are getting more ornate.
On the Comedy Central cable service, for instance, "Mystery Science Theater 3000" lets the comedian Joel Hodgson and his robotic friends watch some of the worst movies ever made, in their entirety, and simply make endless wisecracks about the content.
For the repackaging business, the concept is fiendishly clever.


Japan Arrests Are Reported
Former top executives of an Osaka-based trading house were arrested today on charges of pocketing profits from inflated art purchases and dealing in their own company's stocks, news reports said.
The Osaka District Public Prosecutors Office, which is handling the case, refused to confirm the reports.


Giants Sign Receivers; Cross Replaces Bavaro
Two pieces of the puzzle came together for the Giants today when they signed Howard Cross, now their No. 1 tight end, and Ed McCaffrey, a potential standout at wide receiver.
Cross, who will be starting his third professional season, signed a two-year contract for $400,000 this year, $450,000 next year and a $25,000 signing bonus.
The 6-foot-5-inch McCaffrey, who was this year's third-round draft choice out of Stanford, signed a three-year contract.


Sematech Policies Assailed
Sematech, the Pentagon-backed research consortium of 14 leading computer and electronics companies, was attacked in Congress today as an "exclusive corporate country club" that had done little to improve the competitiveness of the American semiconductor industry.
Executives of two companies not in the consortium told the House Science Committee's Technology and Competitiveness Subcommittee that the group, which is based in Austin, Tex.,was not supporting the innovative end of the industry.


Lyme, a Decade Later
NEARLY a third of a group of children who are believed to have had Lyme disease in the late 1970's but who received no antibiotic treatment were still suffering from eye inflammation, intermittent pain of the joints or chronic neurological problems years later, a new study has found.
The study, reported in the current issue of The New England Journal of Medicine, involved 46 children from the ages of 2 through 15.
They were followed over a 10- to 13-year period and received no antibiotic treatment for at least the first four years of illness.
When they were infected, doctors did not realize that antibiotics could help cure the disease.


Workers Find It Tough Going Filing Lawsuits Over Job Bias
John Henry Smith Sr., a black employee of the Dougherty County Health Department, wanted to sue his employer with a claim of racial bias when he was passed over for a promotion.
But, like an increasing number of people who want to file such suits, he could not afford the up-front cost of a lawyer and could not find one willing to take his case on a contingency basis.
He tried several lawyers in Albany.
Then he tried in Athens, Atlanta, Columbus and Macon.
The last one turned him down two weeks before the statute of limitations on his case was to run out.  'You Educate Yourself'
Frantic, Mr.
Smith decided to represent himself, though he is a high school dropout with a General Educational Development certificate.
So far, by spending late nights in the local courthouse library, reading law books, Mr.
Smith has managed to file the necessary court papers.


The Guess on Ewing Case: Knick Position Is Stronger
Lawyers who sat through seven hours of testimony Monday in Patrick Ewing's arbitration case said yesterday that they believed the Knicks would emerge the winner when Daniel Collins, the arbitrator in the dispute, renders his decision.
Although no one at the hearing would speak for the record, several lawyers -- representing the Knicks, the National Basketball Players Association and the league -- said Ewing's lawyer lacked a stong case in the 7-foot center's efforts to become a restricted free agent.


Fighting Wrinkles With Fat
COSMETIC surgeons have developed a new technique for making older faces look younger: filling wrinkles with the patient's own fat.
"It's the epitome of recycling," said Dr.
George Brennan, a plastic surgeon who offers the service at his offices in Beverly Hills and Newport Beach, Calif.


Not Eclipse, but Blindness, Stirred Milton
To the Editor:
Regarding "Dark Amid the Blaze of Noon" your July 11 editorial celebration of eclipses:


Safety Belts Continue To Save Lives
To the Editor:
In "Old-Fashioned Safety Belts Were Safer" (letter, July 2), Jerome Kurshan states that auto manufacturers "piously advise" that air bags should be supplemented by fastening a safety belt.
This is not true.


Kinshasa Journal; A Country Is Plucked Clean, and the Feathers Fly
Here in one of Africa's poorest countries, tens of thousands of people have suddenly found their pockets even emptier than usual.
As it happened, they were tricked into practically giving their money away.
They were among those who placed their faith -- and the equivalent of millions of dollars in savings -- in an investment swindle that promised returns of up to eight times their original money.


Panel Members Seem Ready To Vote on Revised Districts
Members of the New York City Districting Commission appeared to be ready to vote today to amend five districts in order to get Federal approval of a revised districting plan for the City Council, several commissioners said.
The districts include three that were formally rejected by the Justice Department last week.
The two others likely to be changed are a Queens district where the number of Hispanic voters was reduced by a last-minute boundary change and a Brooklyn district where a white councilwoman has charged that she was the victim of reverse discrimination.


Ciba-Geigy Pricing Plan
Ciba-Geigy Pharmaceuticals said yesterday that it would sell a new hypertension drug at a price that would remain fixed for the lifetime of customers who begin using it during the next year.
The company said the move was an attempt to hold down health-care costs.
Ciba-Geigy, which is based in Summit, N.J., and owned by Ciba-Geigy A.G. of Switzerland, said it was introducing the high-blood-pressure drug, Lotensin, to the United States after marketing it in France and Denmark.


U.S. Airlifting Food Supplies To Ease Albanian Shortages
American military cargo planes are transporting tons of emergency food supplies to Albania in the first such airlift into that one-time Communist nation, the Pentagon said today.
Air Force C-5 aircraft began shipping the food from military stocks in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, on Saturday, and the operation is scheduled to end Wednesday, said the Pentagon spokesman, Pete Williams.


Man Indicted In the Rape Of 3-Year-Old
A man accused of raping his 3-year-old niece in a Manhattan park has been indicted, even as the element that catapulted the crime to national attention -- a report that many people watched the attack without helping -- appeared to be melting.
Leroy Saunders, 29, of 115 East 119th Street, was named in the indictment as the attacker.
A tow-truck operator, credited with capturing the suspect, was widely quoted as saying that motorists caught in slow-moving traffic on the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive near 115th Street saw the incident on July 12 but did not try to stop it.


Computer Images Stake Out New Territory
One of the biggest stars of this summer's movie season is the creation of a computer.
It is the liquid-metal killer in "Terminator 2: Judgment Day," a menacing cyborg that changes its shape at will.
Its arms turn into lethal blades, it pours itself into a helicopter and heals itself when its head is split open by gunshots.
The creature is the work of the illusion makers at Industrial Light and Magic , the special-effects shop owned by the film director George Lucas.
Since it was founded in 1976 to work on Mr.
Lucas's first "Star Wars" film, the shop has weaved its magic for more than 50 movies, including "E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial," "Ghost," "Who Framed Roger Rabbit" and the "Indiana Jones" trilogy.
This summer its handiwork can also be seen in "Backdraft" and "The Rocketeer."


Baseball; Late Rally By Mets Fizzles at Candlestick
Frank Viola's night ended early.
The offense's late, great threats fizzled prematurely.
And so for the Mets, their trip through California began tonight with a 4-2 loss to the Giants.
Viola, alone and hunched against the cold, was walking to the clubhouse with the game barely half over.
Before entering the door in right field, Viola gestured obscenely to the fans in Candlestick Park.
It wasn't much of an exit, but then it hadn't been much of a start.


Littles Replaced
GENE LITTLES was replaced as coach of the Charlotte Hornets by the team's vice president and player personnel director, ALLAN BRISTOW, in a major front-ofice shakeup yesterday.
Littles will become a vice president and special assistant to the club president, SPENCER STOLPEN.
DAVE TWARDZIK, formerly director of scouting for the Hornets, becomes player personnel director in place of Bristow.


A Women's Chain Beckons to Men
When Sara Lee bought the Coach Leatherware Company in 1985, there were 6 company-owned stores selling mostly traditional sturdy handbags.
The company has opened 48 more stores and stocked them with added luxuries like silk scarves and leather luggage.
Now, with some gentle prodding from its parent, which knows a thing or two about building brand names, Coach is moving to conquer the market for expensive accessories and extend the Coach appeal to younger consumers.
At the same time, it has opened its first stores intended specifically to woo the affections of men.


Dollar Ends Mostly Lower After Day of Light Trading
The dollar slipped against most major currencies yesterday in a second day of light, uneventful trading.
Gold prices rose domestically after falling overseas.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery gained 50 cents, to $368.10 an ounce.
Republic Bank of New York quoted a late bid of $367.50, up 15 cents.


Nynex Names Vice President
The Nynex Corporation yesterday named former Representative Thomas J. Tauke as vice president for government affairs and executive vice president of the Nynex Government Affairs Company unit, effective Sept. 1.
Mr.
Tauke, 40 years old, an Iowa Republican who served in Congress from 1979 to 1991, will develop public policy strategies for Nynex, a regional telecommunications company based in New York.
He will be in charge of the company's Washington office and relations with Congress, the Federal Communications Commission and other agencies.


Holyfield Divorce
Heavyweight champion EVANDER HOLYFIELD's former wife, PAULETTE, will receive a divorce settlement that takes into account Holyfield's future earnings.
Fayette County Superior Court Judge PASCHAL ENGLISH signed the final divorce decree Monday in Fayetteville, Ark. . . .
GEORGE FOREMAN will fight BOONE PULTZ Sept. 7 in Nassau, the Bahamas, and not in Las Vegas, Nev., BOB ARUM, president of Top Rank, said yesterday.
The 10-round match will be part of an HBO-television doubleheader in which RAFAEL PINEDA of Colombia will fight ROGER MAYWEATHER of Las Vegas in a 12-round bout for the vacant International Boxing Federation junior welterweight title. (AP)


Accusations Against Kennedy Nephew Detailed
Prosecutors in the rape case against William K. Smith today released detailed statements from one woman who says Mr.
Smith raped her in Washington in 1988 and two others who say he sexually assaulted them.
The release of 77 pages of sworn accounts, obtained under questioning by the Florida police and judicial authorities, came a day after the Palm Beach County State's Attorney disclosed the new allegations against Mr.
Smith.
Legal experts here said the new accusations indicate an aggressive approach by the prosecution and are likely both to complicate and to delay the judicial proceedings against the 30-year-old nephew of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.


BRIEFS
*
Allied Products Corp., Chicago, a maker of agricultural machinery, said it had reached a basic agreement with its senior secured lenders on a $165 million debt arrangement. *
Boots Co., Nottingham, England, said its Boots Pharmaceuticals Inc. unit, Shreveport, La., had signed an agreement with Warner-Lambert Co., Morris Plains, N.J., to jointly promote cardiovascular drugs.


Terrorist Tie of Bank Cited in '88
The Bank of England, Britain's chief banking regulator, was told more than three years ago that terrorists kept accounts at the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the central bank's governor said today.
The governor, Robin Leigh-Pemberton, testifying before the Treasury committee in the House of Commons, said the central bank was told of the terrorist accounts in March 1988 and that Scotland Yard and secret services were brought in to investigate.


Michael Duncan, 60, Tax and Trial Lawyer
R.
Michael Duncan, a tax lawyer and senior partner in the Washington office of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, died on Friday at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation in Cleveland.
He was 60 years old and lived in Washington.
He died of complications after heart surgery, a family spokesman said.


Glitches Gone, Shuttle Faces Threat of Storms
After mastering a series of small problems, space agency engineers said today that weather remained the only major concern as the space shuttle Atlantis prepared to loft a giant communications satellite designed to bounce scientific data across the skies.
Atlantis and its crew of five astronauts were to blast into space on the 42d space shuttle flight on Wednesday, provided that threatening thunderstorms and showers stayed clear of the launching area long enough for the mission to get off.Weather forecasters said there was only a 50 percent chance of good weather at the time of the scheduled 10:55 A.M. liftoff, but predicted that chances could improve to 60 percent by mid-afternoon, the end of the day's window for launching.
Satellite Network


A Photo Said to Show 3 Lost Fliers Jogs Congress on Vietnam Missing
The release of a photograph supposedly showing three lost Vietnam War fliers has stirred new moves in Congress to examine the Administration's efforts to account for thousands of Vietnam War servicemen, even though some members express doubt about the picture's authenticity.
The wave of publicity surrounding the grainy photograph of three men with mustaches standing in a woody setting has caught the Administration off guard and produced an awkward response.
Several Government officials expressed reservations about the photograph, saying it might have been a hoax by Southeast Asian bounty hunters seeking monetary rewards from American groups that cling to the hope that American servicemen are still alive in Southeast Asia.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.71
5.81
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.60
5.57
7.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.74
5.75
7.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.16
8.13
8.47
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.48
8.46
8.58
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.46
9.50
9.68
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.14
7.14
7.42
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Oregon to Stress Job Training In Restructuring High School
Oregon has approved an education plan that would be the first in the nation to establish a statewide apprenticeship program and would make students choose between job training or a college preparatory curriculum after 10th grade.
The plan for Oregon's high schools, the most radical component in an extensive state effort to overhaul public education, grew out of increasing concern among legislators and some educators that public schools have done a poor job of serving students who do not go to college.


3 G.I.'s Killed in Explosion Near a U.S. Camp in Kuwait
Three American soldiers died today in an accidental explosion near the United States military camp at Doha, Kuwait, the United States military said.
The soldiers were clearing ammunition remaining from a fire and explosion that occurred at the camp on July 11 when some of the ammunition detonated, said a statement from the Joint Information Bureau in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.


60-Minute Gourmet
CHICKEN with rice is undoubtedly the most widespread staple in Latin America and Spain.
Different cooks may have their own twists, but the elements of this hearty and tasty combination are as inextricably linked as hot dogs and mustard in this country.
In this easy one-pot meal, I used cumin and smoked ham.
Other variations could include sausage, red peppers, pine nuts, almonds, okra, eggplant, shrimp, eggs -- almost anything you fancy.


Officials Give Mixed Reviews To D'Amato Gun-Crime Plan
A national anti-crime bill that would put many gun crimes under Federal jurisdiction for the first time has drawn responses ranging from praise to outrage from prosecutors, criminal-justice officials and judges in New York City and the state.
The bill, as amended by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, would also restore the death penalty for murders committed with guns in states like New York that have banned capital punishment.
To wide surprise, the measures easily won passage in the Senate on July 11, though their fate in the House is less certain.


Weicker Veto Withstands Vote in House
The Connecticut legislature failed tonight to override Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s veto and pass a budget for the fiscal year that began 23 days ago, shattering the two-party coalition that had backed the plan.
With no new budget plans in the wings, the outcome of the vote also pushed the state toward what some lawmakers described as a degree of chaos and turmoil that had not yet been seen in the state's budget struggles.


The Pop Life
Jukebox With a Difference
One of the fastest-growing cable television operations in the country is the Jukebox Network, which uses no on-air personalities and whose programming is largely determined by the viewing audience.


Saudis Won't Ditch OPEC for Our Sake
To the Editor:
The suggestion by Edward L. Morse, publisher of Petroleum Intelligence Weekly, in "How to Make OPEC Obsolete" (Op-Ed, July 1) that the United States enter into a bilateral agreement with Saudi Arabia on oil for "reciprocal security" is highly unlikely, to say the least.


To Reagan We Owe A Catastrophic Debt
To the Editor:
Edwin Meese 3d credits President Reagan with producing "the longest peacetime economic expansion in modern history" (letter, July 9).


BUSH VETO LIKELY
The Senate voted today to impose conditions on trade relations with China, but sponsors of the legislation failed to muster the two-thirds majority needed to overcome a likely Presidential veto.
As a result, the day's action was a victory for the Bush Administration.
The 55-to-44 vote for trade restrictions was a setback for the Senate Democratic leadership.
The legislation was sponsored by Senator George J. Mitchell, Democrat of Maine, the Senate majority leader.


Study Shows a Drop in Industrial Pollution
The nation's manufacturers reduced their emissions of pollutants by 18 percent in 1989, according to Federal figures compiled in a report released today by Citizen Action, an environmental group.
But officials of the group expressed doubts that pollution truly fell, saying that most of the reductions appeared to reflect the companies' revised interpretations of Federal reporting requirements.


MGM Grand Sells Casino to Tracinda
After spending two months searching for a higher bidder, MGM Grand Inc. said today that it had sold its Desert Inn Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas for $130 million to the Tracinda Corporation.
Tracinda is owned by the investor Kirk Kerkorian, who also owns 86 percent of MGM Grand.


Artificial Heart Program Given Strong Backing
The Federal program to develop fully portable, permanent artificial hearts and mechanical assist devices, which has run a rocky course in recent years, received a strong endorsement yesterday in a study by the National Academy of Sciences.
The academy, in the first independent assessment of the 27-year-old program, said the two types of devices could eventually be implanted in up to 70,000 of the 700,000 Americans who would otherwise die each year of heart disease, the nation's leading killer.


Rutgers Aide Promoted
MARTY BARRETT, who served last year as an assistant football coach, was named administrative assistant to Rutgers University Athletic Director FREDERICK E. GRUNINGER, the school said yesterday.
Barrett, a 1984 graduate of the State University of New York at Buffalo, will focus on off-the-field football operations, including secondary school recruitment, Gruninger said. (AP)


Improving Minds and Diets: Cookbooks That Can Be Read
WHEN the mere thought of lighting the oven threatens to raise the kitchen temperature another five degrees, cooking decidedly lacks charm.
It's time then to emulate dedicated food-lovers who read cookbooks like novels and hardly bother to cook at all.
Fortunately, the new crop on the kitchen bookshelf offers several books that are what more literary reviewers call a good read.
And if a cool breeze comes along to lift the kitchen window curtains, there are still enough good new recipe books to entice one back to the pots and pans.


Baseball; Goals for Once-Lowly Mariners No Longer So Modest
After Harold Reynolds scanned the standings in the newspaper the last time the Seattle Mariners were in New York, he cut them out and saved them.
"I don't know what happened to it," the veteran second baseman said at Yankee Stadiuum last night.
"I guess I lost it. But I held onto it for a while. It was nice, real nice. I can't remember when we were in first place since I've been here. We'd lose on opening day and go from there."


Voucher Plan Ignites a Debate on Risk to Public Schools
A proposal to give parents of children in New York State's worst public schools a state-financed $2,500 voucher to pay for alternative private or parochial schooling has provoked a fierce debate here over whether the plan would help or hurt public education.
The proposal before the State Board of Regents, the panel charged with setting broad educational mandates for the state's 3 million schoolchildren, would involve an experimental program affecting about 5,000 students -- most of them in the poorest neighborhoods of New York City -- and would require legislative approval.


Topics of The Times; Two Voices on Salvador
When Congress voted last year to cut new military aid to El Salvador in half, it added incentives to end the civil war.
The aid could be restored or reduced to zero depending on the behavior of the rebels or the Government.
But Congress erred by leaving the final decision up to President Bush -- a defect the Senate can remedy when it takes up the foreign aid bill today.
An amendment to the bill would also apply the 50 percent formula to $150 million in arms authorized but undelivered.
Mr.
Bush could still decide to release the aid if the rebels failed to negotiate in good faith or otherwise transgressed.
But his finding would be subject to the concurrence within 15 days of Senate and House appropriations and foreign affairs committees.


Adding Lanes to Data Highways
Employees of Bell Communications Research Inc. who wander into the snack room at a research center in Morristown, N.J., casually trade grins, waves and suggestions with their counterparts in Navesink, N.J., even though Navesink is 50 miles away.
Sometimes the employees swap water-cooler chit-chat; other times, they hold formal conferences.
The 8-foot-high Video Windows that virtually bring these distant groups into the same room are a product of a new technology intended to expand drastically the amount of data that optical fibers can carry.
Optical fibers, the thin strands of glass that transmit information using pulses of light, are like huge water mains with only a trickle of water flowing through them, according to Anthony S. Acampora, a researcher at Columbia University.


Sports of The Times: Cricket; World's Best Captivates Small Town
WE go to Wales every July right after Wimbledon, to take a vacation.
We visit Roman ruins and hike in the hills and spend long glimmering evenings eating in pubs.
The meter is off.
No press box.
No locker rooms.
No telephones.
They could tell me Magic Johnson was playing Michael Jordan one-on-one in the sheep pasture below my window, and I'd find an excuse.


U.S. DEFENDS PLAN ON IRAQI OIL SALES
The White House acknowledged today that it was considering whether to allow Iraq to sell some of its oil to buy food and medicine, but denied that such a move would represent a removal of United Nations-mandated sanctions.
President Bush's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said that sanctions enacted as part of the April 3 Security Council resolution calling for a cease-fire in the gulf war would allow Iraq to sell oil to meet its humanitarian needs.
But he emphasized: "There has been no recommendation that has come to the President. There has been no consideration of any of the specifics."


Pepsico Earnings Up 8.8% in the 2d Quarter
Pepsico Inc., the soft-drink, restaurant and snack-food giant, said yesterday that its second-quarter profit rose 8.8 percent over the quarter last year.
Earnings were $318.3 million, or 39 cents a share, compared with the net income of $292.5 million, or 36 cents, in the comparable quarter last year.


Global Scandal, Ragged Response
The vast criminal and fraudulent activities of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International may well constitute the biggest banking scandal in history, but you wouldn't know it from the sluggish reaction of Attorney General Dick Thornburgh and his Justice Department.
The B.C.C.I.'s American banking operations were limited but there is increasing evidence that this global giant was involved in all kinds of drugs, money laundering, bribes and even terrorism.
The C.I.A. is said to have funneled funds through the bank for its own secret purposes.


Weight Watchers Ads To Earle Palmer Brown
Weight Watchers International Inc. yesterday named Earle Palmer Brown as the winner of the three-month-long review of its classroom weight-loss programs account.
The Bethesda, Md., agency won the review over Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago; the review was narrowed this month to those two agencies from five finalists.
The incumbent, DDB Needham Worldwide, dropped out of the review last month, citing the "pressure of other business."


Golf; Straub Off to a Good Start Before Rain Postpones Play
As far as area golf tournaments go, this one could qualify as a heavyweight fight.
The best professional and amateur players in New York are here for three days to take on The Monster, the Concord Hotel course known as one of the more intimidating layouts in the Northeast.
But as the 14th Michelob New York State Open began today, thunder and lightning stopped the round for good at 2:25 P.M.
Before play was suspended, only 69 of the 144 players had completed the round and only one had done so with a score lower than par.


Girl's Decayed Body Found in Picnic Cooler
Construction workers found the decomposed body of a small girl in a picnic cooler yesterday afternoon near the Henry Hudson Parkway in Manhattan.
A police spokesman, Detective Joseph Gallagher, said that because of the condition of the body, the department's Missing Persons Squad could not immediately determine if the child had been reported missing.
A spokeswoman for the city medical examiner's office, Ellen Borakove, said an autopsy would be performed today.


Removing Those Age Spots
The age spots that exposure to the sun's ultraviolet rays causes in an estimated 75 percent of Caucasians can now be effectively removed with a laser.
The Candela Laser Corporation of Wayland, Mass., said its Pigmented Lesion Laser targets the darker pigments just under the surface of the skin without damaging nearby skin or removing normal pigmentation.


New Campaigns
*
The National Spa and Pool Institute, in its first-ever national television campaign, transforms Nike Inc.'s "Just do it" slogan into "Just undo it." Spots for the industry association, created by Oxtoby Smith Inc., New York, show people relaxing in hot tubs and swimming pools. *
Three commercials for Honeywell Inc., Minneapolis, present images of factories, schools and airports in chaos.
The 30-second spots, created by Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Minneapolis, demonstrate how Honeywell control systems can end such disarray.


Clara Parker, 74, Dies; Hotelier and Rancher
Clara Parker, who was the daughter of the founder of the Concord Resort Hotel in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y., and who took an active part in its development and interior design, died on Sunday at her home in Kiamesha Lake.
She was 74 years old.
Mrs.
Parker died of the effects of a stroke suffered a year ago, a family spokesman said.


Bridge
A decade ago computer programming was the most popular occupation among young bridge experts.
Today, options traders seem to be the largest group, and four of them captured the Knockout Team Championship during the weekend at the New York Summer Regionals.
Barry Goren of Chicago, Phillip Martin of Bronxville, N.Y., and Michael Rosenberg and Steve Zolotow, both of Manhattan, won the final by 11 imps against Seymour Reich, John Soloday, Ira Ewen, all of Manhattan, and Gene Prosnitz of Brooklyn.
The dramatic deal shown in the diagram could have changed the result.
At both tables East opened with a slightly eccentric weak two-bid in spades.
This could have made it difficult for the opponents to bid hearts, although, as it happened, it did not.
The danger of missing a minor-suit fit is perhaps a greater disadvantage than the lack of the normal sixth spade.


People
*
Stephen Hayman, executive vice president and general manager of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Los Angeles, has resigned, according to a memo issued there yesterday.
Succeeding him as executive vice president and managing director is Rich Edler, who had been executive vice president and managing director of McCann-Erickson, Los Angeles.
Succeeding Mr.
Edler as managing director in Los Angeles will be Rona Pashkin-Boyer, general manager of McCann-Erickson, Paris. *
Sue Shipman has been promoted to senior vice president and senior producer at Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, from vice president and senior producer.


Ruling on Maradona
A judge in Buenos Aires yesterday ordered preventive detention for DIEGO MARADONA, but it's unlikely the soccer star will spend time in jail.
The ruling by judge AMELIA BERRAZ DE VIDAL was technical.
Earlier, she freed Maradona on $20,000 bail.


Accusations Against Kennedy Nephew Detailed
Prosecutors in the rape case against William K. Smith today released detailed statements from one woman who says Mr.
Smith raped her in Washington in 1988 and two others who say he sexually assaulted them.
The release of 77 pages of sworn accounts, obtained under questioning by the Florida police and judicial authorities, came a day after the Palm Beach County State's Attorney disclosed the new allegations against Mr.
Smith.
Legal experts here said the new accusations indicate an aggressive approach by the prosecution and are likely both to complicate and to delay the judicial proceedings against the 30-year-old nephew of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.


Prices Are Up 3.7% On '92 Ford Cars
The Ford Motor Co. said it would raise its pre-introduction prices an average 3.7 percent on its 1992-model cars, and its truck prices by 3.9 percent.
Pre-introduction prices, a summertime rite in Detroit, are used for large fleet purchases, like those by car-rental companies.
Dealers may take orders on vehicles at pre-introduction prices, which gives an auto maker an idea of initial production runs for the vehicles.


Harrison Plans Tour Backed by Clapton and Band
George Harrison, ending a long absence from the road, plans to tour Japan in December with Eric Clapton.
Roger Forrester, Mr.
Clapton's manager, said yesterday that the performances would feature Mr.
Harrison as the headliner, with Mr.
Clapton and his touring band as his backing group.
Mr.
Forrester said that if the Japanese tour went well, Mr.
Harrison and Mr.
Clapton might also tour the United States and Europe together.


Missouri Aide Cleared
RICH DALY, an assistant basketball coach at Missouri, was cleared of unethical conduct charges yesterday by the N.,C.A.A.
Infractions Committee, which had accused Daly of the conduct because he was unable to recall events surrounding an alleged recruiting trip to Detroit.


Democrats Use a Hearing To Berate Bush Economist
Sounding what is sure to be a campaign theme next year, Democratic lawmakers today berated Michael J. Boskin, the Bush Administration's chief economist, accusing the Administration of ignoring the nation's economic problems and of being callous to the plight of the unemployed.
While Mr.
Boskin sat mostly silent before the Congressional Joint Economic Committee, looking somewhat like a teen-ager being dressed down by the high school principal, one prominent Democrat after another criticized especially the Administration's policy of opposing unemployment benefits for people out of work more than six months.


4 Big Agencies Will Share Work for Northwest Airlines
NORTHWEST AIRLINES joined the ranks of giant marketers using more than one large advertising agency when it announced yesterday that it would create a four-way "communications partnership" for worldwide advertising, marketing and promotional campaigns.
Northwest is hiring this shop quartet: the J. Walter Thompson Company, New York; Ogilvy &amp; Mather, New York; FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York, and McElligott Wright Morrison White, Minneapolis.


Soviets Plan to Sell 30% Interest In Big State-Owned Auto Maker
In a step toward capitalist reform, the Soviet Union is planning to sell a large stake in a big industrial corporation to a foreign investor, advisers to the Soviet Government said yesterday.
The state-owned company, the Volga Automotive Plant Association, is the country's dominant producer of passenger cars.
Its no-frills Lada sedans, sold throughout Europe and Canada but not in the United States, are the Soviet Union's leading manufactured export.
The Government intends to sell at least 30 percent of the company, a holding that recent Soviet press reports have speculated may be worth more than $1 billion.


Big Brokers' Profits Rise
Salomon Inc. and the Morgan Stanley Group, two of the world's biggest financial-services firms, yesterday reported higher-than-expected earnings in the second quarter as the revival in the stock market this year helped profits on Wall Street.
Salomon said its net income rose 48.3 percent largely on the strength of its securities business.
Morgan Stanley reported a 74 percent gain in net income, and announced a 2-for 1 stock split.


Review/Music; Puerto Rico Offers Class As Style
Los Pleneros de la 21 work hard to revive two Puerto Rican traditional styles, the bomba and plena: songs that chronicle the life and opinions of the working classes.
Earnest as that sounds, Los Pleneros are also an irresistible dance band, a side that takes over when the band plays a club like S.O.B.'s, where the group performed on Monday night.
It took only one song to fill the dance floor.
The 10-member group, named after a neighborhood in San Juan, was dressed entirely in white, and all of its instruments except a piano were hand-held and portable, befitting down-home music.
Juan Gutierrez, one of the group's percussionists, prefaced each song with a short explanation for the English-speakers in the audience, noting which part of the island the song came from.
Even when the lyrics were sad, the music was buoyant.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT MAXWELL, chairman and publisher of The Daily News, has been elected chairman of the board of Polytechnic University, which has campuses in Brooklyn, Farmingdale, N.Y. and Hawthorne, N.Y.
"I am proud to assume the leadership of a university that in its 137-year history has quietly made many contributions," Mr.
Maxwell, who has been a trustee of the university for six years, said through a spokesman.


Market Place; Down-Under Star On the Big Board
THE most active stock on the New York Stock Exchange late last week was not an American one, but the Telecom Corporation of New Zealand, the country's telephone company.
In that burst of activity, which followed a hugely successful initial public offering, is a tale of cooperation among international equity markets, and an indication that the United States may not have to drastically lower its reporting and regulatory requirements to get foreign stocks to trade in New York.


Two Die of Heat Exhaustion
Two residents died of heat exhaustion at a state-financed housing complex while waiting for their air-conditioning to be fixed, officials said today.
Margaret Lontka, 70 years old, died on Saturday, and William Lauterette, 86, died on Sunday in Felicity Tower, where weekend temperatures were as high as 120 degrees, said the Essex County Prosecutor, Herbert Tate Jr.
The state ordered the malfunctioning air-conditioning unit shut off more than three weeks ago, fearing its vibration would structurally damage the building.


As Leader Climbs Well, LeMond Loses Hope
Miguel Indurain showed off all his climbing strength today and demonstrated that he will be a tough man to beat in the Tour de France.
In the first, and presumably easier, of two major daily stages in the Alps, Indurain, the overall leader, finished a close second to Gianni Bugno and picked up time on most of his rivals in the three-week bicycle race.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Prices were higher today on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues had gained 538.49 points, or 2.37 percent, to 23,297.47.
The index gained 53.69 points on Tuesday.


Money Funds Keep Too Much Cash Idle
To the Editor:
A market economy requires customers with money to buy its products.
Too many potential customers have reduced spending and investing, and are putting their surplus income into money funds.
A money fund is like an idle checking account or demand deposit in a bank.
It buys no goods and provides no employment.


If Girth Is Worth, White Is All Right
Dwayne White was spotted in the vicinity of the cafeteria at lunch today, but the guard, the team's heaviest player at 300 pounds-plus, insisted it posed no danger to the weight-loss program the Jets have imposed on him.
"Right now I'm at kind of a standstill, because I'm not out there on the field," White said.
White injured his right ankle on Sunday and will miss the next couple of days of practice.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Albert Fisher Group, London, a food corporation, named Lenny Pippin chief executive for its North American operations. *
Dillon, Read &amp; Co., New York, a subsidiary of Travelers Corp., named Anthony Helfet managing director.


Fighting Wrinkles With Fat; Other Remedies at Issue
THE two most commonly used materials for filling in wrinkles and acne scars, injectable silicone and collagen from cattle, have devoted adherents and angry critics.
Injectable silicone has been around the longest and, when used improperly, can maim or kill people.
When injected freely into the body, it tends to travel to vital organs, causing severe toxic reactions.
These include autoimmune diseases, blindness and death of tissue at the injection site.


Greek Church Suspends Ties to National Council
Distressed over the "extreme liberties" that several Protestant churches have taken regarding abortion and homosexuality, the Greek Orthodox Church has suspended its ties to the nation's largest ecumenical organization, the National Council of Churches.
While a vote on a permanent withdrawal from the council will be considered in the fall, Archbishop Iakovos, primate of the Greek Orthodox Churches of North and South America, made his displeasure clear over the weekend, in his first public comments on the split.
"We cannot play anymore with 'Christianity' -- in quotation marks," he said in an interview with The Salt Lake Tribune while visiting Utah.
"Christ is not a playboy."


Parts of Many Bodies Found In a Milwaukee Apartment
For weeks, the residents of the Oxford Apartments, a beige cinderblock low-rise in a weathered North Side neighborhood, knew something was terribly wrong in their building.
The stench of rotten meat wafted through the corridors.
There was the occasional hum of a buzz saw, and cursing and rumbling in one of the second-floor apartments.
What the residents did not know and could not have imagined was that the tenant in Apartment 213 had been storing the body parts of as many as 15 men in his one-bedroom apartment.


Review/Film; William Hurt as Doctor Whose Spirit Heals When He Falls Ill
William Hurt has an exceptionally wide range on the confidence scale, an ability to move from utter self-assurance to quiet terror that such superiority might crumble.
He shows this off to exceptionally good effect in "The Doctor," the story of a once-impervious physician who makes a critical 90-degree shift.
Dr.
Jack MacKee, a prominent heart surgeon, is first seen presiding over an operating room team with the brash, cowboy arrogance of a seasoned expert.
The film follows the events that leave Jack lying helpless in the same setting, about to experience a taste of his own medicine.
"The Doctor," which greatly resembles the current "Regarding Henry" in its tale of a rich, cavalier professional who is made to face his own frailty, has a more realistic outlook and a more riveting figure in its central role.
Mr.
Hurt, making the most of his sleek good looks and stately bearing in the film's early scenes, presents Jack MacKee as a charming, cocksure doctor who specializes not only in difficult surgical procedures but also in careful, deceptively breezy intimidation.


Goodyear Reports Fuel-Saving Tire
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said it had developed a new automobile tire that would help the environment by reducing fuel consumption and related exhaust emissions.
Goodyear said the new tire, called the "Invicta GFE," for greater fuel economy, employed a new rubber chemistry that allowed a 4 percent reduction in gasoline usage by cutting rolling resistance.


Reuters's Net Is Up 5.5%
Reuters Holdings P.L.C., the news agency and information services group, said today that its net profit rose 5.5 percent in the first half of the year.
The company said its growth was constrained by continuing problems in the financial-services industry and the strength of the British currency.


Matrix and Monica Seles Will Still Be Partners
Matrix Essentials, a hair-care-products company, will proceed with plans to feature Monica Seles in new ads, a spokeswoman said, after evaluating the tennis star's explanation of why she withdrew from Wimbledon.
"We are moving forward," Kim Chapman, a spokeswoman, said in a telephone interview from Matrix's office in Cleveland.
Last week, Ms.
Seles discussed the injuries that she said had prevented her from playing.
"We felt good" about her remarks, Ms.
Chapman said, "and we are very glad she is back in action."


Salomon Hires Author of Options Theory
Nineteen years ago, two academics, Myron S. Scholes and Fischer Black, published their now legendary formula for determining the value of options.
Their timing was perfect: Options traders were just coming into their own, and they seized on the formula as an indispensable tool.
By 1984, Mr.
Black had migrated to Wall Street to work his skills first-hand.
And now Professor Scholes is taking the same step.


3 Media Companies Report Lower Profits in 2d Quarter
Three big media companies, the Washington Post Company, Knight-Ridder Inc. and McClatchy Newspapers, reported lower second-quarter earnings yesterday, partly because of the soft advertising market.
Following are details of the companies' results:


2-Year Note Auction Goes Well
The first of a series of auctions that will probably dominate traders' attention in the fixed-income market over the next few weeks went fairly well yesterday, as the Treasury sold $12.5 billion worth of new two-year notes.
The notes were sold at an average yield of 6.94 percent, almost exactly what market participants had anticipated, and down from the 7.06 percent average yield at the last two-year note sale in late June.


B.P. Weighs Bids For Tex/Con Unit
The British Petroleum Company said it was selecting top bids for one of its American subsidiaries, which analysts said was worth $700 million to $800 million.
But John Browne, head of B.P.'s exploration unit, would not say how many companies bid on its Tex/Con onshore oil and gas unit, which accounts for almost half of B.P.'s oil output in the continental United States and 40 percent of its natural gas production.


Artificial Heart Program Given Strong Backing
The Federal program to develop fully portable, permanent artificial hearts and mechanical assist devices, which has run a rocky course in recent years, received a strong endorsement yesterday in a study by the National Academy of Sciences.
The academy, in the first independent assessment of the 27-year-old program, said the two types of devices could eventually be implanted in up to 70,000 of the 700,000 Americans who would otherwise die each year of heart disease, the nation's leading killer.


Farewell to Cincinnati As Rose Moves On
In his first news conference in Cincinnati since pleading guilty one year ago to felony charges of cheating on his taxes, PETE ROSE said goodbye yesterday to the city in which he grew up, played and managed, and added that the defending World Series champion Reds were overrated.
Rose, who led the Reds to four consecutive second-place finishes from 1985-88, said his former team was lucky to still be in contention the way it has played in losing 11 of the last 12 games.
"I just don't think the Reds are as good as we all thought they'd be," Rose told a news conference, shortly before leaving for his new residence in Boca Raton, Fla.


Talks Reported on Sale of Honfed
The BankAmerica Corporation is in serious talks to buy the Honfed Bank, the largest savings and loan in Hawaii and the state's third-largest financial institution, senior banking officials said today.
"It's just about a done deal," said one official, who asked not to be identified.


David M. Reeves, Executive, 73
David M. Reeves, a former secretary of the National Association of Manufacturers, died on Saturday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 73 years old and lived in Stamford, Conn.
He died of cancer, said his son David.


Helping the Army March on Its Stomach Without Bicarb Breaks
GOOD news for the troops.
Their gripes have been heard.
Next time there's a war, there will be steak (sort of).
As well as pizza, burritos, hot dogs, fried chicken, potato chips, waffles and pork chow mein.
"We learned from the war that they don't like all these casseroles," said Daniel Berkowitz, a senior food technologist at the Army's Natick Research, Development and Engineering Center, which dreams up the various dishes the men and women of the armed services eat around the world.


Supreme Court Nominee Visits Capitol Hill


Personal Health
EACH year, 1.2 million children see their parents split up.
If current rates of divorce continue, 40 percent will become children of divorce by the age of 18.
Countless others live for years in intact but hostile families where anger and sometimes physical as well as verbal abuse dominate their parents' marriage.
Yet little is done to help them.
Even families that can afford private counseling for children usually do not seek it until behavioral, emotional or academic problems reach frightening proportions.


Thornton Is Injured
ANDRE THORNTON, who played 14 years in the major leagues, mostly with the Indians, was injured yesterday when a tree fell on the car he was driving in the Cleveland suburb of Moreland Hills.


Commuter Yachts Assemble at South Street Seaport


Accusations Against Kennedy Nephew Detailed
Prosecutors in the rape case against William K. Smith today released detailed statements from one woman who says Mr.
Smith raped her in Washington in 1988 and two others who say he sexually assaulted them.
The release of 77 pages of sworn accounts, obtained under questioning by the Florida police and judicial authorities, came a day after the Palm Beach County State's Attorney disclosed the new allegations against Mr.
Smith.
Legal experts here said the new accusations indicate an aggressive approach by the prosecution and are likely both to complicate and to delay the judicial proceedings against the 30-year-old nephew of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.


Monsanto Posts a Loss; 3M Off and Grace Is Up
The Monsanto Company, a leading chemical producer, yesterday reported a net loss of $52 million for the second quarter because of extraordinary charges related to cost-cutting measures.
The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company, a leading producer of industrial and commercial products and specialty chemicals, said its income also fell, slipping 12.5 percent in the second quarter.
But W. R. Grace &amp; Company, another chemical producer, reported a 12.3 percent increase in earnings.
Monsanto
Monsanto said its loss was the result of a $325 million after-tax restructuring charge related to the elimination of 2,500 jobs and the closing of three plants.
Without the charge, Monsanto said, its income for the quarter would have been $273 million, the highest in its history.
It reported net income of $247 million in the second quarter of last year.
Sales for the quarter rose 4 percent to $2.47 billion, from $2.37 billion a year earlier.
Analysts said Monsanto's results were more impressive than they had expected.
"They have gone through a large-scale restructuring in the second quarter," said Anantha K. S. Raman, who heads an investment research firm.
"They're biting the bullet, containing costs, and that will help them during the rest of this year."
The company's agricultural business had a gain of $30 million from the sale of its animal feed ingredients business, and its operating income was helped by higher volumes of its Roundup herbicides.
The company's chemical division, which accounts for 44 percent of sales, had an operating loss, including the charge for restructuring.
Demand for chemicals declined, which it attributed to a slowdown in industrial production during the recession.
Earnings in the company's Searle division doubled during the quarter, thanks to gains from the company's Cytotec ulcer preventive drug and strong sales of its Calan drug for hypertnsion.
On the New York Stock Exchange, Monsanto's shares were up $2.375, closing at $72.50.
Minnesota Mining
Net income at 3M, which makes industrial and electronic equipment, information and imaging products and consumer products, fell to $299 million, from $342 million in the corresponding 1990 quarter, although sales increased to $3.35 billion, from $3.23 billion.
Allen F. Jacobson, chairman and chief executive, said the results reflected a decline "in United States economic activity and slow growth abroad," as well as investments in new products and manufacturing processes.
The company said that it expected "product pressures to continue in the second half" and that it expected third-quarter income to "show a decline at least as large as that of the second quarter."
Michael Reilly, an analyst with Piper Jaffray, said that the company's performance was "basically in line with what I had expected," but that the prediction of continued pressure on earnings for the second half "is certainly something of a surprise." He added: "It seems that the recovery is going slower than expected and that the stronger dollar is working against them now."
On the New York Stock Exchange, 3M stock was down $3.375, closing at $89.625 yesterday.
W.
R.
Grace
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Company said its earnings rose to $57.6 million, or 66 cents a share in the second quarter, from $51.3 million, or 60 cents a share, a year earlier, while sales rose 4.9 percent to $1.71 billion, from $1.63 billion.
Grace, based in New York, said operating income at its specialty chemicals business fell 2 percent, to $68.4 million.
The company attributed the slide to general weakness in the industry.
The company said its energy business had a 66 percent gain in operating income, to $4.8 million, and its National Medical Care unit had a 25 percent increase in income, to $19.9 million.
On the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Grace's shares rose 87.5 cents, to $34.375.


Pennsylvania's Leader Acknowledges Illness
Gov.
William P. Casey announced at a news conference in Harrisburg today that he had a rare blood disease that was not life threatening.
The Governor and two of his doctors disclosed the details of his health to squelch rumors that had been circulating in recent months about Mr.
Casey's weight loss and general appearance.


CHRONICLE
Two NBC newswomen gave birth to daughters yesterday.
MARIA SHRIVER, the host of "First Person with Maria Shriver," and ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER announced the birth of their second daughter, who has not been named.
The infant was born in an undisclosed hospital in Los Angeles.
Their first child, Katherine Eunice, was born in December 1989.
"Katherine is just thrilled about her new baby sister," Mr.
Schwarzenegger said.


Sudden Change In the Weather Wreaks Havoc
Heat-tortured residents of the New York metropolitan area certainly wanted relief, but they didn't expect it to come with such fury.
But that is what they got late yesterday afternoon and into the evening as a squall line raced out of the northwest, causing temperatures to plummet from a high of 99 into the low 70's within hours and dropping torrents of rain that flooded low-lying areas.
Lashing winds and lightning blew down hundreds of trees, branches and power lines.


CHRONICLE
A real-life criminal or criminals stole an estimated $15,000 worth of fake jewelry being used in filming the latest "Columbo" television film, an assistant to PETER FALK, the actor who plays the fictional detective, said yesterday.
When Mr.
Falk, who is also executive producer of the two-hour film, "Death Hits the Jackpot" for Universal, was told about the crime, "He said, 'Are you kidding?' He thought it was funny," his assistant, Janet Saunders-Raein, said.


N.A.S.D. Votes to Oppose a 9 A.M. Start
The controversy about opening the nation's securities exchanges a half hour earlier, at 9 A.M., intensified yesterday as the board of governors of the National Association of Securities Dealers voted to oppose plans by other exchanges to open at that time.
The plans, put forward earlier this month by the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange, are part of a larger effort to begin 24-hour trading in the nation's securities markets by the end of the decade.


Books of The Times; Many Visions of the Vietnam War
The Vietnam War and American Culture Edited by John Carlos Rowe and Rick Berg  Illustrated. 275 pages.
Columbia University Press. $34.50.
Re-Writing America Vietnam Authors in Their Generation By Philip D. Beidler 333 pages.
University of Georgia Press. $35.
Who owns the history of the Vietnam War?
Put another way, whose vision or revision of the war will remain in the minds of Americans who weren't there?
Does the war belong to the antiwar novelists, film makers, documentarians, journalists, poets -- and the memories of the veterans themselves?
Or is it the property of Washington officials in and out of uniform who have declared that the Vietnam syndrome -- the lingering distaste for military action -- was overcome by victorious military actions from Grenada to the Persian Gulf?


Columbia Gas Debt
The Columbia Gas System Inc. said it had missed a payment on $10 million in short-term debt that matured today.
Columbia, based in Wilmington, has now missed a total of $83.5 million in short-term debt payments since the company said last month that it might seek bankruptcy protection because of costly long-term gas-purchase contracts.
Earlier this month, the utility said it had made arrangements to pay accrued interest on its interest-bearing notes and pay post-maturity interest on its short-term debt.
Other discussions on financing are continuing, Columbia said.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
An elderly-sounding woman with a strong Brooklyn accent called my office at Columbia University's department of astronomy to ask about a bright glowing object she had seen "hovering" outside her window the night before.
I knew that the planet Venus happened to be bright and well placed in the west for viewing in the early evening sky, but I asked more questions to verify my suspicions.


Daimler Acquiring 34% Sogeti Stake
Daimler-Benz A.G., the German industrial conglomerate, said it would buy 34 percent of Sogeti S.A., the French computer services group, with an option to take majority control in a deal worth about 2.4 billion French francs, or about $400 million.
Sogeti is the parent of Cap Gemini Sogeti S.A., Europe's largest computer services concern.
The companies had been in talks since earlier this month.


Salvador Aircraft Grounded By Fear of the Rebels' Missiles
Skimming breathtakingly low over a landscape of water and volcanoes, two small helicopters dropped into this army outpost on a patrol flight that has become rare since El Salvador's leftist guerrillas acquired surface-to-air missiles.
"We are practically limited to using our aircraft at night, and then only for supply runs," said Col.
Ciro Lopez Roque, commander of the army base at nearby San Miguel, where the two helicopters stopped en route.


Economic Scene; The Truths About Welfare
TO paraphrase Will Rogers, only one person in 1,000 knows how to untangle the welfare mess -- and you meet him every day.
Most Americans, it is safe to say, have strong views about the system that supports impoverished single parents and their children.
But only in the last decade have social scientists generated hard evidence about what works in getting the poor off the dole, and what does not.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13
The Administration's China policy gained a victory as the Senate voted to attach conditions to the renewal of China's trade status, but not by a large enough margin to overcome a likely Presidential veto.
Page A1


Bridgeport Bankruptcy Plea Focuses on Solvency Dispute
A hearing on Connecticut's effort to block Bridgeport from going to bankruptcy court concluded today with one important issue resolved in favor of Connecticut's largest city and no answer yet on a second major point: whether it can pay its bills.
On Monday, Federal Bankruptcy Judge Alan H. W. Shiff ruled that state laws give Bridgeport, which has 141,000 residents, the authority to file a bankruptcy petition, and that a state financial review board established in a fiscal crisis in 1988 cannot block it.


Quotation of the Day
"You don't know about it until you get in. It's really shallow, and then all of a sudden, it's really deep and it's pulling you in." -- Angela Frazier,
discussing the riptide at Jones Beach on Long Island.  [ A1:3. ]


Russians Get Reader's Digest
A Russian-language edition of Reader's Digest was introduced in the Soviet Union yesterday.
It is the 40th edition of the magazine, which is now published in 16 languages around the world.
The magazine will be available on newsstands in Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev and Kharkov.
The Reader's Digest Association, based in Pleasantville, N.Y., plans to expand distribution to other markets in the Soviet Union and to offer subscriptions.


Majority Rejects Race Preference
To the Editor:
To Tom Wicker's question in "Riding the Quota Wave" (column, July 4) -- "in the face of a history of discrimination, is rigid evenhandedness to be the test of a candidate's or party's devotion to American values?" -- the answer from the overwhelming majority of the American public seems a resounding yes.


Mideast Talks: Peace Might Be an Incidental Result
As Israelis and Arabs seem to be moving closer to agreement on a peace conference it is becoming apparent that they are primarily doing it either to gain the favor or avoid the wrath of the United States, which has emerged as the pre-eminent power broker in this part of the world.
That in itself is not unusual.
Adversaries rarely come to the bargaining table because they suddenly decide that they want reconciliation.
President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt decided to deal with Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel in 1977 because that was the only way to get back the Israeli-occupied Sinai Peninsula and to gain friendship and large-scale aid from the United States.


Central Park Shootings Labeled Anti-Gay
Police officials have classified as bias-related three, and possibly four, shootings of men in an area of Central Park known as a gathering place for gay men.
The Police Department's Chief of Detectives, Joseph R. Borrelli, said he considered the situation extremely dangerous, though no one has been killed.
The victims have been hit in the buttocks, arm, leg, hip and wrist.


In Golan Heights, Doubts Plus a Bit of Confidence
Does she worry that Kibbutz Natur, her home, might have to be abandoned now that negotiations between Israel and Syria may become possible and ownership of the Golan Heights could be Topic No. 1?
"It goes through my mind a few times ---- " Avital Green replied.


Public &amp; Private; Global Warning
The most tiresome thing about the heat is that you have to listen to people tell stories about it, all of which have been told before: the story about how you couldn't even get a spot on the beach, the story about how the air-conditioning broke down, the old stories about blowing fans over blocks of ice in luncheonettes.
But there is always something new under the sun, and this summer it's global warming.
People are talking about the weather as an act of man, not of God.
Just 10 years ago the ozone layer was largely the purview of the tofu-and-Birkenstock crowd.
Now scientists who study this stuff say that as sure as the beaches will fill with bodies on the first 100-degree day, their phones will begin ringing with questions about the slow cooking of planet Earth.


Wine Talk
REMEMBER the last time you picked up a numbingly expensive bottle of French, or Italian, or German wine and asked yourself: "How can they get away with this?"
The answer is, they don't always.
Impact, a respected newsletter for people in the wine and spirits business, recently came out with figures that, it says, explain why.


White House and Congress Seek to Revise Ethics Rule for Elections
As politicians prepare to put their players in place for the 1992 elections, the White House and Congress are seeking to adjust a Government ethics restriction to insure that their moves will be workable.
The restriction, which covers Congress and the executive branch, bars official contact for one year between high-level Federal employees and their offices after they leave the Government.
That means if Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher left to become President Bush's campaign chairman, as is widely expected, he would be barred from contact with his former Cabinet colleagues or his former department.


Gorbachev Presses Proposals To Stop Hard-Line Challenge
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev worked today to blunt a fresh challenge from the Communist Party hierarchy by pushing for a final power-sharing agreement with republic leaders and by reportedly preparing a new party platform to reflect his social and political programs of change.
The timing of his private meeting over the proposed new union treaty with the republic representatives recalled a similar situation in April, when the Soviet leader, on the eve of a challenge by disgruntled party hard-liners, surprised the nation by forming a new political alliance with the leaders of 9 of the 15 Soviet republics.


Topics of The Times; The Keating Zero?
The Senate Ethics Committee would be yielding to its worst instincts if it reneges on its vote four months ago to request that the Senate punish Alan Cranston on the Senate floor.
That would reduce the Keating Five -- Senators who shamelessly toadied to the big political contributor Charles Keating -- to the Keating Zero.
It was bad enough when the committee only mildly reproved the four other players on the team that intervened with Federal savings and loan regulators at Mr.
Keating's behest.
Letting Mr.
Cranston off would be outrageous.
The notion is that it would be unfair to single him out for Senate censure.
True, punishing only Senator Cranston was wrong.
But that hardly justifies turning his case around.


States Check Truck-Route Crimes After Arrest in New York Slaying
Investigators in several states are reviewing unsolved crimes to see if there are any links to a Michigan trucker who has been arrested in the rape and slaying of a New York woman whose car had run out of gas on the highway.
The suspect, Alex Manuel Vega, 27 years old, of Lansing, Mich., was arraigned in Michigan today on a charge of being a fugitive from justice.
Investigators originally identified him as Lauro Quintanilla Garcia because he had a driver's license with that name.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 24


Gumbo Makings From Carolina
ON a sunny afternoon two weeks ago, Clara Davidson was sorting through a pile of broad green butter beans at the Greenmarket at 125th Street and Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard.
Mrs.
Davidson, a native of Lawrence, S.C., who has lived in New York since 1942, bought several pounds.
"I never see these things up here and I do miss them," she said.
Her comment was typical of the shoppers at the display, which also included field peas, sweet and hot peppers, ripe tomatoes, squash, corn, okra, watermelons and cantaloupes -- a down-home harvest that two farmers from the Sea Islands in South Carolina had trucked to New York.
In the North, the butter beans are better known as lima beans.


Cycle Magazines Joined
Hachette Magazines Inc. is merging Cycle, its monthly motorcycling magazine with a circulation of 300,000, into Cycle World, whose circulation is 240,000.
The move will save the printing costs of Cycle and will eliminate several editorial positions, Hachette said on Monday.
The advertising and sales departments have been merged for some time.
Larry Little, vice president and publisher of both magazines, said the merger would create a stronger publication.


CROATS TURN DOWN A NEW PEACE PACT
Leaders of the Yugoslav Republic of Croatia said today that they had refused to sign a three-month peace accord that was reportedly reached in talks between republican and federal leaders Monday night.
The collapse of the agreement, reportedly reached in the Macedonian resort town of Ohrid, has spawned fears of further outbreaks of large-scale violence between Croatian police and National Guard units and members of the republic's Serb minority.


Review/Theater; Spiritual Ties in 'Home and Away,' a Monologue
In the second act of his gripping autobiographical monologue, "Home and Away," Kevin Kling tells of journeying to the Australian heartland where he experiences a spiritual awakening that is connected to aboriginal tribal beliefs in sacred ground and family ties.
"The aborigines' family tree," he remembers an Australian friend explaining, "is like vines running horizontally around the earth." When a pregnant woman feels the first kick of her unborn child, the spot on which she felt the kick is believed to be a point on a trail that extends latitudinally around the world.
After the child is born, everyone else who kicked on that trail is considered a relative.


Japan Loan to Mexico
The Export-Import Bank of Japan said today that it had signed a contract to give Mexico's state development bank up to 64.2 billion yen, or $468 million, in loans to develop electric power plants.
The loans will go to buy Japanese goods and services to build two more units at the Petacalco thermal power plant at Lazaro Cardenas in southwestern Mexico.
The loans have a fixed interest rate of 7.6 percent, with a maturity of 10 years.


Allan C. Wilson, Biochemist, 56, Genetic Researcher on Evolution
Allan C. Wilson, a biochemist whose provocative genetic approach to the study of evolution led to a theory that all humans descended from a single woman who lived in Africa 200,000 years ago, died on Sunday in Seattle.
He was 56 years old and lived in Berkeley, Calif.
He died while undergoing treatment for leukemia at the Fred Hutchinson Memorial Cancer Center in Seattle, said the University of California at Berkeley, where Dr.
Wilson was a professor of biochemistry and molecular biology.


Gephardt Wants to Pay Bounty for Good Pupils
Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House majority leader, today introduced legislation to have the Federal Government pay the states a bounty for every child sent to first grade ready for school and for every high school senior whose mathematics and science test scores matched the highest international standards.
The Missouri Democrat, who conceded that he did not know what the program would cost, proposed raising $16.2 billion in corporate income taxes to pay for five years of the plan.
If it cost more, he said, he would support more tax increases or budget cuts to pay for it.


Saratoga Extends Offer to Spend An Extra Week in the Country
The 124th season of racing in the countryside will open on Wednesday at the Saratoga Race Course and will continue for five weeks in an experiment to test the curative powers of this famous old spa for the ailments troubling thoroughbred racing.
The Saratoga season normally runs four weeks, but was extended by a week to lengthen the most successful part of the racing year in New York State in the continuing search for answers to the recession that has stalked the sport in recent years.


Anti-Japan Din in France Softens a Bit
Having upset Japan with repeated gibes and alarmed French fashion houses that sell to Japan, Prime Minister Edith Cresson made a point of asking to sit next to the wife of Japan's Ambassador to France at the first haute couture show of the season here this week.
As a public relations gimmick, it was a bit obvious.
As a political insight, it was more telling.
For the first time since taking office nine weeks ago, Mrs.
Cresson seemed to recognize that her penchant for speaking her mind was the source of her growing troubles.


Food Notes
Single Portions
There are a number of new sources for prepared foods in and around the city.
And what is striking about them is their emphasis on serving sizes for singles.
One shop sells salads and such in small containers only by the portion, not the pound.


Sylvia Scribner Dies;Psychologist Was 67
Sylvia Scribner, a psychologist on the faculty of the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Dr. Scribner died of cancer, a family spokeswoman said.


Mobil and Phillips Drop; Occidental Profit Rises
The pattern of lower second-quarter profits from depressed natural gas prices and weak demand for chemicals and refined products in the United States was reflected again in earnings reports from the Mobil Corporation and the Phillips Petroleum Corporation.
Mobil said today that its net income fell 10.6 percent, and Phillips reported a plunge of 84.8 percent.
However, the Occidental Petroleum Corporation, recording big gains from asset sales, posted a 65.2 percent increase in profits, although its operating income fell by 20.7 percent.


Cracks Found Developing in F-16's
The Air Force said today that its F-16 fighters were developing cracks under the stress of flight and that it would spend $250 million to fix the problem in the next few years.
Air Force officials said that so far they had found cracks on about a dozen of the nation's 1,600 F-16's, although not all have been inspected.
They added that they expected cracks to be discovered on many more planes as inspections continue.
And they said more F-16's were likely to develop cracks in the future.


Killing of 4-Year-Old Is Linked to Dispute at Pool
A 4-year-old girl who was shot to death in a blaze of gunfire that left three others injured was the innocent victim of a feud that may have started at a swimming pool, the police said yesterday.
The child's pregnant mother, Eva Cade, and two other people were wounded in the drive-by shooting Monday night at 154th Street and Frederick Douglass Boulevard in Harlem.
The shooting came the same day that Mayor David N. Dinkins announced plans to deploy extra police officers in neighborhoods plagued by shootings of children.


Bills and Eagles Arrive in London
The Buffalo Bills and Philadelphia Eagles arrived here three hours apart tonight in preparation for the American Bowl exhibition game at Wembley Stadium on Sunday.


Cliffhanger Down Under: A Soap Opera Huff
If there was the need for any additional evidence of television's effect on the conduct of foreign affairs, it was to be found here today, as Australia and Malaysia sought to end a diplomatic crisis prompted by the plot line of a television soap opera.
The soap opera, "Embassy," is in its second season on Australia television.
The plot centers on the diplomatic and romantic goings-on at the Australian Embassy in the strife-torn, fictional nation of Ragaan, depicted in the series as a predominantly Muslim country in Southeast Asia, south of Thailand.


CHRONICLE
The history teacher credited by the actor ROBIN WILLIAMS with inspiring his performance as a teacher in the 1988 film "Dead Poets Society" has lost his job.
Patricia Hockstein, a spokeswoman for the Detroit Country Day School in Beverly Hills, Calif., declined to say exactly why the school is not renewing the contract of JOHN CAMPBELL, 55 years old, who has taught there 28 years.


3 St. John's Students Acquitted Of Sexually Assaulting a Woman
In a case that cut to the heart of a growing debate about sex crimes at colleges across the country, three St.
John's University students yesterday were acquitted of sexually assaulting a female student in an encounter at a house near the university's Queens campus.
The trial was the first stemming from an episode last year that rocked the 19,000-student school, the nation's largest Roman Catholic university, and led to charges of criminal sodomy, sexual abuse and other crimes against six male students.


Inmates Protest Building of Execution Table
About 400 inmates at the Louisiana State Penitentiary at Angola laid down their work tools Monday and today to protest an order that some of them help build a new table to be used in executions.
The protest began Monday when 2 of the 5,200 inmates at the prison refused to work on a table that is being built for giving lethal injections, said a lawyer for Department of Corrections.
Injections are to replace the state's electric chair beginning Sept. 15.


Correction
Israel's Police Minister was misidentified in an editorial yesterday.
He is Ronnie Milo.


10,000 Jobs To Be Cut By Unisys
The Unisys Corporation, reeling from a weak economy and moribund demand for its computers, announced yesterday that it would lay off 10,000 of its 70,000 employees and that it was taking an unexpected $1.2 billion charge against its second-quarter earnings.
The company reported a quarterly loss of $1.3 billion, compared with a small profit a year earlier.
Several industry analysts said the loss confirmed their doubts that Unisys could recover.
They said the company's problems illustrated the difficulty of selling large computers in a market in which smaller machines and software are having the most rapid growth.
Restoring Profitability
But James A. Unruh, Unisys's chairman and chief executive, said he expected the cutbacks to help restore the company's profitability by the end of 1991.


Net Up 15% At Johnson In Quarter
Johnson &amp; Johnson, the world's largest health-care-products company, said yesterday that profits rose 15 percent in the second quarter, to $406 million, or $1.22 a share, from $353 million, or $1.06 a share, in the corresponding quarter in 1990.
Worldwide sales were up 8.5 percent, to $3.03 billion, from a year earlier.


Review/Fashion; Couture as Laboratory: 3 Designers' Experiments
Emanuel Ungaro has mixed patterns from the Far East with Victorian high style for his contribution to the new age of the haute couture.
Claude Montana has continued his preoccupation with future shock in his clothes for Lanvin, but toned down the intergalactic air and made his styles more accessible.
And as the couture shows continued here today Karl Lagerfeld, with a smile and a wink, knocked some of the stuffiness out of this oldest and most tradition-bound branch of fashion.
His weapons were masses of tulle, carloads of accessories and even skeletal corsets to give curving minidresses their super-feminine shape.
What is the fashion world coming to?


Computer as Accessory to Photo Fakery
If the recent photographs purporting to depict missing American servicemen in Indochina prove to be forgeries, they will take their place in a tradition of fakery almost as old as photography itself.
The retouching of photographs to produce bogus images may be sophisticated or crude.
Until recently, the tools of the forger were the double exposure, in which elements of one picture can be transplanted into another by exposing one print to two or more separate negatives, and the airbrush, used to spray a very thin layer of pigment on a very small area.
G.
Howard Poteet, an expert retoucher, says the photo manipulator also needed a mechanical pencil, retouching medium, an etching knife and tubes of spotting colors.


New Portrait: Python in Red
The pantheon of celebrities who have posed for the American Express Company's "Portraits" campaign now includes a 6 feet 5 inch man wearing a short red dress, matching high heels and pearls.
The British humorist John Cleese, of "Monty Python" fame, is the latest subject of Annie Leibovitz's portraits series.
The ad, by Ogilvy &amp; Mather, London, is appearing in magazines in Britain and the United States, where it has been placed in The New York Times Magazine, New York magazine and L.A.
Style.


Corn and Soybeans Surge After Report of Crop Woes
Corn and soybean futures prices soared yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after a Government report of faltering crops and a forecast for more hot, dry weather in the Midwest next week.
Wheat and oat futures also rose sharply.


Relief From the Heat Comes With a Fury (and It Won't Last Long)


Boy Shot by Sister in Bronx
A 4 1/2-year-old Bronx boy was accidentally shot in the leg yesterday by his 5 1/2-year-old sister, the police said.
The gun was found in their mother's bedroom, said Sgt.
Peter Sweeney, a police spokesman.
The boy was listed in stable condition at Union Hospital.
The shooting took place about 1:30 P.M. in the University Heights section.
To protect the children's identities, the police did not release the exact address.


Baseball; Dibble Returns For a Quick Exit
Cincinnati Reds reliever Rob Dibble, coming back after serving a three-game suspension for throwing at Houston's Eric Yelding, was involved in another ball-throwing episode tonight as the Cubs beat the Reds, 8-5.
Dibble was ejected one out into the eighth inning after fielding a bunt and flinging the ball at the batter, Doug Dascenzo.
Dibble was thrown out by the plate umpire, Joe West, who had also given the heave to Andre Dawson and Cubs Manager Jim Essian in the seventh.


CBS to Buy Midwest Broadcaster
CBS Inc. has agreed to buy Midwest Communications Inc., a television station and radio station company in Minneapolis for about $50 million in CBS common stock and the assumption of about $150 million of Midwest's outstanding debt.
CBS plans to issue new shares of common stock to complete the transaction under which it will receive one television station and two radio stations in Minneapolis and one television station in Green Bay, Wis.
Also included in the deal are the company's Midwest Cable and Satellite division and a regional sports channel.


David F. Feingold, 47, City Aide in Bushwick
David French Feingold, director of the Bushwick office of the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development, died of a heart attack last Wednesday while playing racquetball, a family spokesman said.
Mr.
Feingold was 47 years old and a lifelong resident of Brooklyn.
In 1986 he received the Public Service Award of the Fund for the City of New York for service as architect of the Bushwick Neighborhood Preservation Plan.
He joined the housing office in 1976 and was appointed director in 1987.
While he was with the office, 3,000 apartments were built or rehabilitated.


Digital Plans to Buy Philips Computer Unit
The Digital Equipment Corporation, the United States' No. 2 computer maker and one of the world's largest, said today that it planned to buy most of the computer systems division of Philips Electronics N.V., the troubled Dutch electronics giant.
Digital would be acquiring a unit that makes minicomputers, computer networks and automated bank tellers and systems.
Philips, Europe's largest electronics group, will retain its personal computer business, which comes under another division.


Down by 3-0, Pirates Rally To Trounce the Braves, 12-3
Gary Redus hit a grand slam and Mike LaValliere drove in three runs, powering the Pittsburgh Pirates to a 12-3 romp over the Atlanta Braves tonight in a meeting of two of the National League's hottest teams.
Doug Drabek (10-9) recovered from an early three-run deficit, allowing three hits over seven innings as Pittsburgh won for the 10th time in 13 games.
Atlanta, which trimmed seven games off West Division-leading Los Angeles's lead in 12 days, lost for the third time in 12 games.
The Braves won here Monday night, 7-3.


Trade Official Leaving
S.
Linn Williams, the senior American trade official in the recent trade negotiations with Japan, will resign on Friday, the United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, said today.
Mr.
Williams, 45 years old, a deputy trade representative, joined the office in 1989 from a law firm.


Newmont's Net Falls 30%
The Newmont Mining Corporation, a leading gold producer, has said its second-quarter profits fell 30 percent.
Newmont Mining also said on Monday that Sir James Goldsmith, the British-French financier, had been elected to the board of Newmont Mining and the Newmont Gold Company.


Dow Off 29.74 in Heavy Program Trading
Heavy waves of program selling by professional traders toppled stock prices yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average slid 29.74 points, or just a little less than 1 percent, to 2,983.23.


Atlanta Committee Concerned By Steinbrenner Appointment
Not for the first time, the name of George Steinbrenner overshadowed a significant sports event when the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games met here today.
The group of genteel Southerners organizing the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta confessed to culture shock when the former managing general partner of the Yankees was appointed to their board this weekend.


Scheduled to Close, Fort Opens $9.3 Million Store
Army officials at Fort Devens opened a $9.3 million commissary today even though the store's life is almost sure to be brief.
The fort is scheduled to be closed.
"Some weird things have happened over a 31-year career in the military," said Larry Parretti, a veteran of World War II, Korea and Vietnam.
"I don't know that this compares with anything else."


Schools Redesigning Themselves Get a $2 Million Grant
The Coalition of Essential Schools, an organization of nearly 200 schools committed to radically redesigning themselves, has received $2 million from the DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund, one of the largest amounts received by the coalition in its seven-year history.
The three-year grant will help establish up to 15 regional centers to work with the schools that have joined the coalition, said Theodore R. Sizer, the group's founder and chairman.
It will also pay for a research project at three coalition schools to study how they transformed themselves and thus make it easier to replicate their success.


Bids on Mutual Benefit Unit
The Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, the largest insurer ever seized by Federal regulators, is negotiating the sale of its profitable group life and health insurance business, a New Jersey insurance department spokesman said yesterday.
The spokesman, who spoke on the condition that he not be identified, said he could not reveal the names of specific bidders, "but five or six companies are interested." He added that Samuel F. Fortunato, the state's insurance commissioner "hopes a sale can be completed soon."


New Chief Executive Selected at Alex. Brown
Alvin B. Krongard yesterday was elected vice chairman and chief executive of Alex.
Brown Inc., the parent concern of Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, the nation's oldest investment banking firm.
Mr.
Krongard, 54, has been with Alex.
Brown for 20 years and was previously chief operating officer.
Mayo A. Shattuck 3d, who had been co-head of corporate finance based in San Francisco, was named president and chief operating officer, the parent company said.


The Three O'Reillys Walk Alike, Talk Alike
Terri O'Reilly had her turn on the court today, and she did more than her one-third share.
She pinned Chanda Rubin to the baseline with an aggressive topspin game, drubbing her 15-year-old opponent in the first round of the Westchester Ladies Cup at Manhattanville College, 6-2, 6-0.
O'Reilly walked off the court and met two more of herself, Patty and Christine.
Together again.
Identical triplets, Team O'Reilly, making their way in this very individual sport.


First Interstate
The First Interstate Bancorp's Texas unit is seeking to buy distressed financial institutions, said Linnet F. Deily, the president of the First Interstate Bank of Texas.
The operation recently bought a failed savings and loan association in Houston.
Mr.
Deily refused to comment when asked if a possible acquisition target was the First City Bancorporation of Texas.
First City has said it is seeking a cash infusion or a buyer.
In June, First Interstate Bank of Texas bought the defunct Commonwealth Federal Savings Association, which added 33 branches and $1.1 billion in deposits to the Houston-based company.


Correction
Because of a mechanical error, two pictures with Books of The Times yesterday were transposed.
Warren F. Kimball was at the left and Robin Edmonds at the right.


Will Twins Ride Into The Sunset?
The American League West teams are on a much shorter track now, and, to their lessening surprise, they are chasing a horse of a different color.
The Minnesota Twins, not the perennially favored Oakland A's, are now viewed as the team that must not be allowed to gallop completely out of sight.
The Twins have earned that distinction with their 55-39 record, a .585 winning percentage surpassed by only one team in the major leagues, the National League East's Pittsburgh Pirates.


Crackdown in Madagascar
President Didier Ratsiraka today declared a 15-day state of emergency in the capital, and security forces reportedly arrested at least two leaders of the opposition coalition seeking his ouster.
The crackdown came a day after opposition politicians, backed by thousands of supporters, marched into Government ministries in a symbolic seating of their own self-declared government in the island nation off Africa's east coast.


Robert B. Shields, 86, An Authority on Sugar
Robert H. Shields, former president and general counsel of the United States Beet Sugar Association, died Friday at Montgomery General Hospital in Olney, Md.
He was 86 years old and lived in Silver Spring, Md.
Mr. Shields died of intestinal bleeding, a spokesman for the family said.


Soviets, in Surprise, Apply for Full World Bank Status
In a move that surprised the White House and put new pressure on Western Governments to help the Soviet Union, the Soviet Government has applied for full membership in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
The Soviet action, which was taken late Monday and announced today by both lending agencies, came less than a week after the leaders of seven industrial democracies endorsed in London a more limited "special association" with the I.M.F. and the World Bank for the Soviet Union.


Foreign Affairs; Victory for Mr. Shamir
Would you believe that Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said no a month ago to the U.S. proposal for a peace conference because he knew that was the only way to trick President Hafez al-Assad into saying yes?
That he had to convince the Syrian strongman there was no chance of negotiations in order to trap him into face-to-face negotiations?
I don't believe it either.
But Mr.
Shamir should take credit for it anyway -- if that would help him say yes now to talks and keep his hard-line Government behind him.


Yields on Short-Term C.D.'s Show a Mild Drop in Week
Yields on short-term certificates of deposit took another mild decline for the week ended yesterday.
This followed a drop the week before.
The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest rate publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla., said the decline came despite an uptick in the rates on the Treasury's three-month bills.


Missouri Governor in Charge Even When Away, Court Says
Gov.
John Ashcroft retains his power even when he is outside the state, the Missouri Supreme Court said today.
The court ruled on a challenge by Lieut.
Gov.
Mel Carnahan, a Democrat who said that he should get the chief executive's power and perquisites when the Governor, a Republican, is out of state.


Artificial Heart Program Given Strong Backing
The Federal program to develop fully portable, permanent artificial hearts and mechanical assist devices, which has run a rocky course in recent years, received a strong endorsement yesterday in a study by the National Academy of Sciences.
The academy, in the first independent assessment of the 27-year-old program, said the two types of devices could eventually be implanted in up to 70,000 of the 700,000 Americans who would otherwise die each year of heart disease, the nation's leading killer.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW -- WORKING GROUP -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Topics of The Times; Seriously, No Parking
Car sales are slumping in Tokyo, and one reason may be the rise in parking fines.
Under Japanese law, a new car can't be registered until its owner can prove possession of a place to park it.
Owners have been getting around the requirement by renting a space until they register the new car and then canceling the deal, taking a chance on finding a spot on the street.
In January, a new law raised the fine for illegal overnight parking to $214.
That would be enough to get people's attention even in New York.
But not in Tokyo.
Starting this month, the fine went up again.
To $1,400.
Per night.
New car sales have plummeted.


Banking Bill Deadline
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley today set a deadline of Sept. 27 for a committee to take action on comprehensive legislation that would overhaul the banking system and replenish the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
The bill cleared the House Banking Committee on June 28 and Mr.
Foley's referral of the measure to four other panels virtually guarantees that Congress will be debating the sweeping revision of banking laws as the F.D.I.C. nears the brink of insolvency.


Cracks Found Developing in F-16's
The Air Force said today that its F-16 fighters were developing cracks under the stress of flight and that it would spend $250 million to fix the problem in the next few years.
Air Force officials said that so far they had found cracks on about a dozen of the nation's 1,600 F-16's, although not all have been inspected.
They added that they expected cracks to be discovered on many more planes as inspections continue.
And they said more F-16's were likely to develop cracks in the future.


Oron J. Hale, 88, Dies; Historian of Germany
Oron J. Hale, a historian and former professor of history at the University of Virginia, died Friday at the Medical College of Virginia Hospital in Richmond.
He was 88 years old and lived in Richmond.
Dr. Hale died of congestive heart failure, according to a former colleague.


INSIDE
Base Closings Are Nearer
A House armed services panel voted 17 to 2 to uphold a Federal commission's recommendations to close 25 military bases and consolidate 48 others.
Page A15.
Sex Allegations Detailed
In a move likely to complicate the judicial proceedings against William Kennedy Smith, prosecutors released three womens' statements that included assault accusations.
Page A14.
Still No Connecticut Budget
Shattering a bipartisan coalition, the legislature failed to override Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s veto and pass a budget for the fiscal year that began 23 days ago.
Page B1.
Fierce Voucher Debate
The New York State Board of Regents is considering a proposal to give parents of children in the worst public schools a $2,500 voucher for alternative schooling.
Page B1.


Business-Tax Zone For Times Sq. Area Is Signed Into Law
Times Square businesses were given the authority yesterday to tax themselves to raise money for everything from private security guards to promotional campaigns under a plan signed into law by Mayor David N. Dinkins.
The new local law created the Times Square Business Improvement District, paving the way for a special tax assessment on buildings, hotels, restaurants and other businesses in a 25-square-block area stretching roughly from 40th Street to 53d Street between the Avenue of the Americas and Eighth Avenue.


Off Jones Beach, Swirling Danger Lurks
Dangerous currents in an unusual trough on the ocean floor have sucked in hundreds of swimmers since Memorial Day at one of the busiest spots at Jones Beach.
No one has been seriously hurt, but lifeguards said they have had to rescue more people than at any season in memory, plucking some of them from beneath the water's surface.
Lifeguards said that over last weekend they had to rescue up to 200 people a day at the spot, on Jones Beach's central mall across from the landmark water tower.
At times, as many as 30 people were stranded in the swirling, churning waters and had to be rescued all together.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
CUTTING an opening in an exterior wall of a frame house to install a door or window is usually not too difficult for an amateur with moderate carpentry skills.
But it is essential to plan the job thoroughly.
First, calculate the size of the opening needed.
For a prehung door or window, which comes mounted in a frame, an opening about an inch wider and longer than the frame's outside dimensions is required.


Dykstra Case Delayed
LEN DYKSTRA'S arraignment on drunken driving and other charges from his May 6 automobile accident has been postponed until the Philadelphia Phillies complete their West Coast trip.
The court proceeding, which had been scheduled for today, will be held Aug. 8, according to the Delaware County District Attorney's Office. (AP)


With $25 Million Gift, Improved Cancer Unit Reopens
On a hospital floor where very young cancer patients are treated, a mother gets into bed to hold and comfort her frightened child in the privacy of a small cubicle.
In another area, a patient with a briefcase heads briskly for his office after his radiation treatment, a procedure lasting oly a few minutes.


Cuomo Is Said to Be Ready to Veto Police-Drug Bill
A bill that would have blocked police departments in New York State from summarily dismissing officers who test positive for drugs will be vetoed, officials close to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday.
The Governor's action would preserve a policy that is strenuously backed by the New York City Police Department and other police agencies in the state and that is opposed by many police unions although not the Patrolman's Benevolent Association, which represents the officers in the New York City Police Department.


Pop in Review
Wiseguys
The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Manhattan Through Aug. 9
In the age of metal rock, the image of the polished male harmony group crooning sanitized love songs has become an anachronism with enough nostalgic appeal to have spawned an entire cabaret sub-genre.
Leading the list is the popular revue "Forever Plaid," which affectionately spoofs cleancut 50's quartets and has generated several successful productions around the country.
Not far behind is Wiseguys, a musical-comedy trio from Dallas that is appearing at the Ballroom.


Dow Falls 17 Points, To 2,966.23
Deepening anxiety about corporate profits kept stock prices on edge yesterday.
Even favorable earnings were not enough to keep some investors from selling.
"The earnings-surprise stocks stood out today," said Robert H. Stovall, president of Stovall/Twenty-First Advisers.


Lutyens's Furniture From the Originals
CANDIA LUTYENS, in partnership with her husband, Paul Peterson, has reissued 16 pieces of furniture by her grandfather Sir Edwin Landseer Lutyens (1869-1944), the English architect known for his country houses and the Government buildings he designed in New Delhi.
Ms.
Lutyens, a stockbroker, has the designs made in United States, England and India, using hundreds of Sir Edwin's drawings that have survived.


In the Nation; A Feint or a Force?
At the London economic summit meeting, George Bush was impressed by the commitment of other leaders to aggressive action on environmental issues -- a commitment that appears to have been considerably stronger than the President's own.
His Administration, with the major exception of its support for a new and innovative clean air bill, has not been an active environmental advocate, either at home or abroad.
Yet the U.S., with its uncounted automobiles, its near-universal refrigeration and air-conditioning and its vast accumulations of toxic wastes, is one of the world's great polluters.


Sante Fe International Names a New Chief
The Sante Fe International Corporation has named Gordon M. Anderson president and chief executive.
Santa Fe International, an oil drilling company based in Alhambra, Calif., also has operations in South America, Asia, Africa, Europe and the Middle East.
The company was bought by the Kuwait Petroleum Corporation, a unit of the Kuwaiti government, in December 1981 for $2.5 billion.


Bondholders Want Farley To Liquidate
A bondholders group filed papers late yesterday in Chicago to force Farley Inc., the main holding company of William F. Farley, to liquidate under the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
Shortly after the creditors made the filing, the company said it would file for protection under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code as soon as possible but did not specify a date.


TOGO'S PRESIDENT BOWING TO CHANGE
A few years ago, Gnassingbe Eyadema held a referendum on his reign as President of this West African nation.
As soldiers stood guard, voters were obliged to hold up a card of one color for "yes" or another for "no."
Given these circumstances, there were visible few signs of discontent, and Mr.
Eyadema, the sole candidate, polled 99 percent of the vote.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Thermo Instrument Systems Inc., Waltham, Mass., placed $75 million of 6 5/8 percent convertible debentures in the European market.
The debentures, due in 2001, are convertible into common stock at $26.325. *
Westminster, Calif., priced $28.47 million of redevelopment tax-allocation bonds through Stone &amp; Youngberg, Princeton, N.J.
The issue, which carries a coupon of 7.3 percent, will yield 7.5 percent for the 2021 maturity.
It was rated BAA1 by Moody's and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Milken Opposes Drexel Bankruptcy Plan
Signaling a shift to a more aggressive legal strategy, Michael R. Milken, the financier who was at the center of the Wall Street scandals, yesterday filed an objection to a critical piece of the bankruptcy reorganization plan of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
Mr.
Milken, the former head of Drexel's high-yield "junk bond" division, pleaded guilty last year to six counts of securities fraud and is now serving a 10-year prison term.
The objection, which he filed as a creditor of the firm, was aimed at Drexel's settlement of securities litigation claims.
The firm filed for bankruptcy last year.


Open Positions on Short Sales Up 6.5% on Nasdaq
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that short interest in actively traded over-the-counter stocks had risen 6.5 percent in the four weeks ended July 15.
A total of 287.3 million shares in these active issues were held short and not yet covered in the period ending in mid-July, compared with 269.8 million shares in the four weeks ended June 14.


California's Governor Gets A Fast, Deal-Making Start
When he became Governor of California half a year ago, Pete Wilson brought with him a reputation as a pragmatic, moderate Republican, a politician singularly adept at forging compromises.
Since then, he has indeed demonstrated that skill, some say all too well.
In the long battle over bridging the state's $14.3 billion budget gap, Mr.
Wilson vowed never to raise the income tax but did just that.
He sought reform of workers' compensation laws as a price for his agreeing to new taxes, but settled for a minor change.
He tried to suspend a voter-passed initiative that reserves 40 cents of every state dollar for education, but retreated under lobbying by the teachers' union.


Shamir Is Unyielding on Makeup Of Palestinian Peace Delegation
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir stressed today that Israel should seize the opportunity to attend the American-designed peace conference, but only if no Palestinians from East Jerusalem or with any connection to the Palestine Liberation Organization will be there.
The Prime Minister said that if it turns out that no Palestinians are prepared to come to a conference on such terms, Israel would be willing to negotiate directly with any Arab country.
But he cautioned both Syria and Jordan that they must not expect to get any land for peace -- only peace for peace.


Man Is Put to Death In Virginia for Rape And Murder of Girl
A man who raped and killed a 13-year-old girl in 1983 was executed tonight in Virginia's electric chair.
The man, Albert J. Clozza, 31, became the 12th person to die in the electric chair since Virginia resumed executions in 1982 and the 150th executed in the nation since a ruling in 1976 by the Supreme Court allowed states to resume capital punishment.
He was pronounced dead at 11:07 P.M.


Ed Wiener, Designer Of Jewelry, Dies at 73
Ed Wiener, a New York jewelry designer, died on Sunday at Beth Israel Medical Center.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Wiener died of a heart attack, said his wife, Doris.


Peru's Ex-Leader Enmeshed In Scandal Over Failed Bank
This month's closing of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International has diverted the attention of Peru from its poverty, malnutrition and terrorism to a bizarre drama involving former President Alan Garcia, the mysterious financial network of the bank, and allegations that Mr.
Garcia looted the country with the bank's help.
Investigations led by a commission of the Peruvian Congress and involving two American private investigative companies have turned up preliminary evidence -- which Mr.
Garcia has rebutted -- that during his presidency he siphoned away as much as $50 million from the country and used B.C.C.I.'s Panama branch as a conduit for the funds.


In Hightops, on Blacktop -- They Come to Play
On hot summer nights in Rucker Park, at 156th Street and Eighth Avenue, across the street from the site of the old Polo Grounds, where project buildings cover the same earth that Willie Mays once did for the New York Giants, some of the best basketball players in the metropolitan area are competing under bright lights.
They perform in the Entertainer's Basketball Classic, a popular summer tournament in Harlem that has become a pastime each week for thousands of local residents.


Fund Reviews Nomura Role
The nation's largest pension fund said today that it was investigating the role of the Nomura Securities Company in Tokyo's brokerage scandal to decide whether to pull its money out of the Japanese brokerage.
Nomura's American unit, Nomura Capital Management Inc., manages about $400 million for the fund, the California Public Employees Retirement System, or Calpers, a spokesman said.


City Council Committee Approves Bill Outlawing Assault Weapons


Snag Blocks Vote on New York Districting
Pressed between increasingly bitter demands from Hispanic groups and the ticking of the election clock, the New York City Districting Commission came close to passing a revised Council district plan last night in the hope that quick Federal approval would save the elections this year.
But at almost the last moment, and perhaps typifying its volatile and complex history, the panel hit a snag.


For Some, the Money-Making Begins at 50
If it weren't for the Senior PGA Tour, Jim Albus, the head pro at the Piping Rock Club in Locust Valley, L.I., would have been playing in the New York State Open this week.
Instead, he is paired with Arnold Palmer and Harold Henning in Thursday's first round of the 12th United States Senior Open here at Oakland Hills.
"I've never played with him," Albus said about Palmer, who captured the second Senior Open, staged here in 1981.
"It'll be a pleasure to play with the man. I hope I play well because I haven't played enough lately. It's the time of year the pro shop and lessons keep me busy."


John K. Hanson, Ad Executive, 66
John K. Hanson, a retired New York advertising executive, died on Monday at his home in Rumson, N.J.
He was 66 years old.
Mr. Hanson died of cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Brooklyn Journal; Road Job: No Detour For Parade
No big ethnic parade in New York seems complete without a nice diversionary controversy.
By that standard, the annual West Indian-American Day parade, already one of the biggest, has arrived.
Just five weeks before the parade, the route for it -- Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn -- remains torn up, littered with debris and mired in construction delays.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The closing of B.C.C.I. has diverted Peru's attention from its poverty and terrorism to a bizarre drama involving the country's former president, Alan Garcia.  [ Page A1. ]  Attorney General Dick Thornburgh plans to investigate B.C.C.I. aggressively.  [ A17. ]


Quotation of the Day
"I hope this will open internists' eyes a little bit. Chest pain in women is as, or more debilitating than it is in men. Perhaps we can improve women's mortality rates by being more aggressive." -- Dr.
Sandra J. Lewis, an Oregon cardiologist.  [ A1:1. ]


Environmental Aide Accused of Polluting
A division head at the New York City Department of Environmental Protection has been accused of illegally dumping 1,000 gallons of battery acid into the city's sewer system.
The official, Riley Harrison, the department's director of fleet administration, pleaded not guilty Tuesday in Queens Criminal Court in Kew Gardens, to a charge filed by the state attorney general's office.


From London With Love
UNLIKE the usual floral centerpieces, those from an 80th birthday celebration a few months ago at the Helmsley Palace Hotel will have a life beyond the party.
They have been given anonymously to the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers, where there will be displayed in the lobby in December.
Called "Miniature Monuments," the centerpieces were a collaboration between Eric Rhein, a sculptor, and William Seymour, an actor.
The clients, collectors of Mr.
Rhein's work, had asked him to come up with something different for their party.
Because the guest of honor collected English silver, he decided that London monuments would be appropriate.


India Retreats From Socialist Past
Finance Minister Manmohan Singh set into motion today a range of changes intended to turn India's back on decades of insularity and government controls and to attract foreign money.
Politicians and economists said the changes marked a turning point in the nation's economic history.
"Let the world hear it loud and clear," declared Mr.
Singh, an economist.
"India is now wide awake."


Violence Between Serbs and Croats Continues in Yugoslavia


Fred R. Feuss, Executive, 88
Fred R. Feuss, retired controller of W. R. Grace &amp; Company, died on Monday at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
He was 88 years old and lived in Albany.
He died after a stroke, his family said.


RJR Nabisco Posts Second Profit in Row
RJR Nabisco Inc., whose products include Winston cigarettes and Oreo cookies, said yesterday that it had posted a profit for the second quarter in a row and further improved its balance sheet, significant achievments for history's largest leveraged buyout.
But analysts regarded the performance as being at the low end of their expectations, and some said the stock was overvalued.


Not Too Late to Keep From Making the Fare-Card Blunder; Losing Its Magnetism
To the Editor:
As long as New York City is delaying its transition to magnetic fare cards (news article, July 2), may I suggest it reopen the question.
After nearly 20 years as a straphanger in New York, I have been a commuter in Washington for four.
Washington has many things to be proud of with its Metro, but the magnetic card system is not one of them.
The fare card works only as long as the magnetic strip is active.
Proximity to another strip or a magnetic wallet clasp can inactivate it, and so can a scratch or a wrinkle.
Most D.C. fare-card vending machines accept only coins and $1 or $5 bills.
All coins are good, but not all bills.
I miss the IRT.
JANET LOWENSTEIN WILLEN  Silver Spring, Md., July 2, 1991


Review/Television; The Very Hard Times of Harlem's Dance Theater
"Do you want to look straight at the camera for the fund raising?" Peter Jennings asks Arthur Mitchell, who was a principal dancer of the New York City Ballet before founding Dance Theater of Harlem in 1969.
Both men laugh, but much of "From the Heart of Harlem," the latest offering of "Peter Jennings Reporting," at 8 tonight on ABC, does in fact amount to a plea for support for a black dance company that has run into very hard times.
In the spring of 1990, Mr.
Jennings reports, the company was on the verge of bankruptcy: dancers and administrators were laid off, tours were canceled and the summer session of its school was suspended.
Tonight's account of the company's beginnings in a Harlem basement, the rehearsal scenes and the interviews with the very appealing young dancers would fit easily into a fund-raising show, if the company had the money to produce one.


Kin Say Missing Airmen Are Being Held as Slaves


Citronella Without The Flames
IT's a humble plant, with fuzzy green leaves that smell like lemons, and it doesn't even bloom.
But citrosa -- Pelargonium citrosum Van Leenii, to be exact -- is a new, genetically engineered plant that puts out a perfume so powerful, mosquitoes get too confused to play vampire.
Or so its growers say.


Allied Strike Force Aimed at Iraq Forms in Turkey
At first, the people who get paid to think up catchy military code names toyed with the idea of calling the operation Poised Hammer.
Not only was the phrase graphic but it also accurately described the armed force that is taking shape in this corner of southeastern Turkey, a strike team expected, when complete, to have roughly 2,600 American and allied soldiers.
They stand ready to enter neighboring Iraq and pound it hard should President Saddam Hussein unleash his troops once more against Kurdish enclaves in the Iraqi north.


Sports of The Times; Patience Again a Yank Virtue
WITH the approach of Tuesday's anniversary of Commissioner Fay Vincent's ruling that George Steinbrenner discontinue his day-to-day involvement in the operation of the Yankees, the franchise has regained much of what it stood for before the principal owner's tyrannical reign: continuity, stability and perhaps most important of all, patience.
In the revival, the Yankee franchise is wearing a pinstripe suit again after having discarded its shipbuilder's hard hat.


Elaine P. Halperin, Translator, 81
Elaine P. Halperin, a translator and editor, died on Sunday at her home in La Jolla, Calif.
She was 81 years old.
She died of cancer, said her son, David.


Essay; B.C.C.I.: Justice Delayed
The Underworld Bank scandal is oozing out all over.
Conceived in Karachi, financed in Abu Dhabi, the conspiracy reached into the world's Western capitals and perhaps the U.N. under the protection of high-paid lobbyists and naive spooks.
The B.C.C.I. scandal involves the laundering of drug money, the illicit financing of terrorism and of arms to Iraq, the easy purchase of respectability and the corruption of the world banking system.


Exxon Net Up Slight 2.7%, Bucking Oil's Downtrend
The Exxon Corporation, the nation's biggest oil company, said today that net income in the second quarter rose 2.7 percent, as profits from oil and gas production and foreign operations barely offset downturns in other parts of its business.
Exxon was unusual among major oil companies in posting higher income for the quarter.
Yet its profit was half its first-quarter total of $2.2 billion -- the highest of any quarter in Exxon's history.


ITT Earnings Down by 20%
The ITT Corporation said on Tuesday that its second-quarter earnings were only about half the level of a year ago, when a one-time gain increased its earnings.
Even without the gain, ITT's profits were 20 percent below those in last year's second quarter.





Baker Asks Asians to Move Warily on New Pacts
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d urged major Southeast Asian countries today to move cautiously on proposals to create new trade and security alliances that would replace "tried and tested frameworks" involving the United States.
Speaking at the annual meeting of foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, Mr.
Baker appeared to react warily to proposals made at the meeting to create an East Asian trading bloc that did not include the United States, and to begin regular regional meetings on military issues.


U.S. Moves On Pan Am Pensions
The Federal agency that insures private pensions sought court permission yesterday to take over two Pan Am pension funds, worth about $840 million and covering almost 35,000 current and former employees, contending the airline had not set aside enough money to meet its obligations to retirees.
If the court agrees, it will be the biggest takeover ever for the pension corporation.
James B. Lockhart, executive directior of the agency, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, expressed concern at the same time about similar problems -- underfunded liabilities as they are known -- of several other carriers he did not identify, as well as companies in the automobile and steel industries.


Bush on the Offensive in Defending C.I.A. Choice
President Bush today issued another brisk defense of his choice to head the Central Intelligence Agency, Robert M. Gates, calling news reports linking the nominee with unapproved intelligence operations "phantoms" and "shadows."
The President's remarks came amid open worries by some of Mr.
Gates's supporters in Congress and outside of government that the debate over his nomination was spinning out of the White House's control, in part because of the Administration's preoccupation with winning Senate confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.


Poles Vent Their Economic Rage on Gypsies
Her mink coat shredded, her windows shattered and her French porcelain in pieces, Maria Paczkowska shuffled forlornly around the scratched wooden floor of her living room, destroyed in a recent ransacking of gypsy property in this northern Polish town.
"I can't sleep, I can't eat," she said.
"All I keep hearing is what they scream: 'Death to the gypsies!' "


Miscellany
*
Mitchell Williams Advertising Inc., Minneapolis, will open an international division.
Principals are Sue Riley, formerly a principal at the marketing firm Lee &amp; Riley, and Christa Tiefenbacher-Hudson, who previously directed Lee &amp; Riley's international department. *
The United States Committee for Unicef has hired a promotions firm, Shambroom &amp; Hepner Inc., New York, to help market its holiday cards to companies as promotional tools.


Ryan and Gossage Piling Up the Numbers
No. 308 came up for NOLAN RYAN and RICH GOSSAGE on Tuesday night.
As in Ryan's 308th victory and Gossage's 308th save.
Not a bad night for two golden oldies with a combined age of 84, including 44 years in the big leagues.
They pooled their talents as the Texas Rangers beat the Boston Red Sox 5-4, but they weren't the oldest win-save duo ever.


Cole Album Catches a Trend And Rides It Up the Charts
Natalie Cole, whose career has had as many ups and downs as the stock market, has lately scaled a new height.
That's because her latest album, "Unforgettable," has hit the top of Billboard's pop charts five weeks and 1.2 million copies after its release.
Even more notable is that the songs on the album are older than the 41-year-old Ms.
Cole.
They were all associated with her father, Nat (King) Cole, who died in 1965.
A tribute album like this might once have been considered an act of artistic desperation.
But now, because of a sea change in pop music over the last several years -- a change evidenced by albums of standards by artists like Linda Ronstadt, Dr.
John, Rickie Lee Jones and Harry Connick Jr., as well as the reissue of decades-old material from Frank Sinatra and Nat Cole -- "Unforgettable" looks like a stroke of commercial genius.


Getting Plants in Shape
Topiary Inc. 41 Bering Street, Tampa, Fla. 33606; (813) 254-3229.
They did not get top billing, but to garden enthusiasts, the real stars of last year's film "Edward Scissorhands" were the shrubs coaxed into whimsical shapes, like leaping dolphins and graceful swans.


U.S Senate Trade Conditions Are 'Unacceptable' to Beijing
The Government tonight rejected as "unacceptable" a United States Senate vote attaching conditions to the extension of trade benefits for China.
In a statement read on the evening television news, the Foreign Ministry said the Congressional action constituted "interference in China's internal affairs."


Clear Skies, a Calm Sea and Some Exercise Help Make an Enjoyable Outing


2 German Captives Threatened
An Islamic faction threatened today to take "extremely negative action" against two German hostages unless Germany provided details within 48 hours on the condition of two imprisoned Shiite Muslim terrorists.
The threat, which came in a statement delivered to the Beirut newspaper An Nahar, was accompanied by a photograph of Heinrich Strubig, 50 years old, a German relief worker.
It was the first time anyone claimed responsibility for kidnapping Mr.
Strubig, who has been missing for two years.


J. Howard Carter, 86, Law Firm Co-Founder
J.
Howard Carter, a founding partner in 1937 of the Manhattan law firm of Townley Updike Carter &amp; Rodgers, now Townley &amp; Updike, died Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old.
Mr. Carter died of cancer, his daughter said.


Government Scraps Study of Teen-Age Sex
The Government is scrapping plans for an $18 million survey on the sexual behavior of teen-agers after conservatives contended that the study would intrude on private matters and pose offensive questions.
Supporters of the planned study said the research was needed to help prevent unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases, like AIDS, among young people.


Battle Over Trading Hours
The battle over early stock-trading hours shifted to the Securities and Exchange Commission today, as an opponent of opening the markets at 9 A.M.
Eastern time tried to muster support among regulators.
Officials from Montgomery Securities, a San Francisco brokerage, met here with S.E.C. officials and objected to a plan by the New York Stock Exchange to open trading a half-hour earlier, starting Sept. 9.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  AMERICAN LEAGUE
Cleveland Indians -- Sent Doug Jones, pitcher, to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled Rudy Seanez, pitcher, from Canton-Akron of the Eastern League.
Minnesota Twins -- Optioned Allan Anderson, pitcher, to Portland of the Pacific Coast League.
Activated Dan Gladden, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
NATIONAL LEAGUE
New York Mets -- Named R.C.
Reuteman general manager of baseball operations of Be-year contract.
Football  NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE
Atlanta Falcons -- Signed Mike Pichard, wide receiver, to a three-year contract.
Miami Dolphins -- Signed Aaron Craver, running back, to a three-year contract.
Placed Liffort Hobley, safety, on the physically-unable-to-perform list.
New York Giants -- Signed Howard Cross, tight end, to a two-year contract, and Henry Blades, nose tackle.
Waived Daniel Kelner, wide receiver, and Jerry Williams, defensive lineman.
Agreed to terms with Kanavis McGhee, linebacker, on a three-year contract.
Tampa Bay Buccaneers -- Agreed to terms with Ervin Randle, linebacker.
Signed Robert Martz, offensive lineman.
Waived Dave Colonna, tight end.
Colleges
Chapman -- Named Derek Anderson sports information director.
Marist -- Named Nick Macarchuk III men's assistant basketball coach.
Yale -- Named John Glynne interim men's assistant hockey coach.
Hockey  NATIONAL HOCKEY LEAGUE
St. Louis Blues -- Agreed to terms with Brendan Shanahan, right wing.


A Census Adjustment Could Cost New York
To the Editor:
In all the fuss about whether or not to adjust the Census (front page, July 16), one fact has been ignored.
Distribution of billions in Federal funds are based on population totals reported by the Census Bureau.
The popular wisdom is that if you have more people living in your state, you will receive more money.
But a state receives more money only if it gains a greater share of the total population.
California, New York, Texas and Florida are the largest states.
If there had been an adjustment, California would have gone from having 11.97 percent of the population to 12.15 percent; Texas from 6.83 percent to 6.85 percent, and Florida from 5.2 percent to 5.3 percent.
New York would have gained 500,000 people but its share of the total population would have dropped from 7.23 percent to 7.2.
A few hundredths of a percentage point may not sound like much, but each tenth of a percent is worth $40 million a year in Federal funds.
Our rough calculations indicate that New York State would lose $10 million.
States should look more carefully at how their population share would change under adjustment before spending a lot of money suing the Census Bureau.
BRAD EDMONDSON  Editor in Chief American Demographics Ithaca, N.Y., July 17, 1991


Mr. Bush Plays Hide, Not Seek, on Arms
Even as the United Nations is pressing Iraq to open all its chemical weapons facilities to international inspectors, President Bush has backed away from requiring similar inspections to verify a treaty to ban chemical weapons.
The new U.S. proposal to the chemical arms talks in Geneva makes a sham of Mr.
Bush's professed determination to curb proliferation.
Arms controllers deem it essential to verify compliance with a ban by allowing inspectors access to any facility suspected of manufacturing or storing chemical arms.
But other Pentagon and intelligence officials fear that such unfettered inspections could come back to haunt the U.S. if inspectors sought access to secret sites that don't house chemical arms.
These officials prefer to shield U.S. facilities that perform intelligence and other functions.
A compromise that would protect secret installations from unjustified snooping while allowing the necessary inspections was proposed by the British.
For instance, a perimeter could be drawn around a facility to allow international inspectors close enough to assure themselves that it has nothing to do with chemical arms.
But some American officials feel that would still be too close for comfort.
President Bush has sided with them and gotten the British to back off.
He's prepared to allow states to refuse prompt and proximate access to facilities.
That would enable them to stall inspectors and evade the ban.
The perverse decision alienates Western governments that saw the need for serious on-site inspections to deter cheating and makes it easier for third world states to oppose such inspections.
And it may lead an insecure state that suspects a neighbor of cheating to hold onto its own chemical weapons rather than rely on a weakly enforced treaty.
Mr.
Bush has his priorities wrong.
Halting the proliferation of chemical arms is more important than hiding secret U.S. sites from inspection.


Tax Divides Connecticut Republicans
A bitter sense of unity settled over the State Capitol today as it became clear that Connecticut's fiscal and political stalemate had claimed a new set of victims in the minority Republican Party, leaving all participants equal in the same stew of frustration.
Lawmakers said that the failure of the House of Representatives on Tuesday night to override Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s July 1 budget veto and to impose a budget without an income tax blew apart the central dynamic that had driven the struggle over the last few months: Republican unity.
It also revealed the House to be as deadlocked within its own ranks as it is with the Senate and with Mr.
Weicker.


British Leader Shaken By Scandal Over Bank
The growing international scandal around the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, closed by the Bank of England on July 5, may not have much effect on the British general election that has to be called sometime within the next 12 months, but it has shaken Prime Minister John Major to his boots.
The seriousness of the scandal began to dawn on Mr.
Major last week, just after he had successfully acted as host for the meeting between President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union and the leaders of the seven biggest industrial democracies.


Racing; Jockeys Fly, Horse Is Stuck On a Day At the Races
The Saratoga Race Course, the oldest and probably the quaintest track in the United States, opened its experimental five-week season today before a solid crowd of 22,293 spectators.
And it promptly lived up to its tradition as the house of upsets.
This is where Man o' War suffered his only loss in 21 starts, where Secretariat lost at the height of his career, where Affirmed cut off Alydar and lost on a foul.
This is also where Angel Cordero Jr. reigned as the master jockey for most of the last generation, only to lose the opening race of this opening day after holding the lead from the start.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17
The Soviet system of power sharing would be drastically decentralized under a treaty that President Gorbachev and the republics have agreed to in draft form.
Page A1


Dr. H.M. Goldman, 79; Founded Dental School
Dr.
Henry M. Goldman, the founding dean of the Goldman School of Graduate Dentistry at Boston University, died on Tuesday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 79 years old and lived in Boston.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


I. B. Singer, Narrator of Jewish Folkways, Dies
Isaac Bashevis Singer, whose vivid evocations of Jewish life in his native Poland and of his experiences as an immigrant in America won him the Nobel Prize in Literature, died yesterday.
He was 87 years old and lived in Surfside, Fla.
Mr. Singer died after several strokes, said his wife, Alma.


Football; Gastineau Reputation Doesn't Affect Byrd
When Dennis Byrd registered a team-high 13 sacks for the Jets last season, it was the highest total since Mark Gastineau, the team's career sack leader, accumulated 13 1/2 in 1985.
There was some thought that maybe this year Byrd, the second-round draft choice out of Tulsa in 1989, might want to trade in his No. 90 jersey for old No. 99 and fully assume the mantle of the flamboyant Gastineau, who had 107 1/2 sacks over his career and a league-record 22 in 1984.
But the Jets gave the number to John Bosa, the plan-B free-agent defensive end acquired from Miami.


Edward Bodman, 69, An Investment Banker
Edward Dunham Bodman, an investment banker who worked earlier in his career for the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Agency in China, died yesterday at his home in Stonington, Conn.
He was 69 years old and also lived in Manhattan.
He died of intestinal cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Thornburgh Insists U.S. Bank Inquiry Is Aggressive
Stung by accusations that the Justice Department responded slowly to allegations of wrongdoing at the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh insisted today that he was moving aggressively to investigate the bank.
Mr.
Thornburgh said in response to questions submitted by The New York Times that he was "puzzled" by accusations that the department had proceeded slowly.
He asserted through a spokesman, Dan Eramian, that Federal prosecutors in Atlanta, Miami, Washington and Tampa, Fla., were pursuing complaints that officials within B.C.C.I. had engaged in criminal fraud.


Spending for Covert Action on Rise Under de Klerk
Spending by the South African Government on secret projects has significantly increased since President F. W. de Klerk took office nearly two years ago and promised to dismantle apartheid.
According to figures in the Government's annual budgets, the funds allocated for covert ctivities have risen by more than 38 percent since the 1989-90 fiscal year, which began five months before Mr. de Klerk was elected President, and by more than 92 percent over the last five years.


Tetra Pak Fined By European Bloc
The European Commission fined the Swiss-based packaging company, the Tetra Pak Group, a record $87 million after the panel found that the company engaged in abusive marketing and pricing.
Tetra Pak said it would appeal.


Health Insurer Plans to Seek Big Rate Rise
New York State's largest health insurer said yesterday that it planned to raise health insurance rates by 50 percent for all 300,000 people who buy their own policies and also for 120,000 employees of small businesses who are considered bad risks because some have serious illnesses.
The move by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield would mean that the cost of comprehensive policies would rise to more than $11,000 a year for individuals and more than $9,000 for members of some small groups.
The increases, which require approval by the State Insurance Department, would apply in New York City, Westchester, Nassau, Suffolk and Rockland Counties.


Skimming the Cream Off Schools
Should parents of children in the most troubled schools be encouraged to send their children, at public expense, to private or parochial schools?
A proposal to do that is now being considered by the New York Board of Regents.
The question brings into sharp focus the problem that underlies the popular idea known as "choice."
Helping students trapped in poor schools is imperative.
That's why the Regents ought to offer them better public schools before giving state support to private and parochial schools.
The idea of school choice is to permit parents to shop around so that bright, ambitious students can escape inferior schools.
Setting up a more competitive system might also force underachieving schools to shape up or close down.
But that's only the easy, appealing side of the idea.
The hard side is, what's to be done about the children left behind, whose parents are indifferent, afraid or absent?
Only cruel social Darwinists can ignore, as the Bush Administration does, that inescapable consequence.
To ignore it risks undermining public education for all students.
Worse, the Board of Regents is now asked to go further.
Without a clear plan for protecting the children left behind even within the public schools, it is called on to enable the cream of the crop of poor children to attend non-public schools.
But such a double jump risks a great deal.
Several existing choice plans, like one in Minnesota, limit the playing field to public schools.
That would seem to be the best approach for New York, where public education has a proud history as a unifier of society.
But some public school districts still suffer from unfair distribution of state school aid and the Legislature remains reluctant to shift more money away from richer districts.
Why, then, should the Regents rush to give state education dollars to private schools that have greater flexibility to admit desired students and expel undesirable ones?
Or to parochial schools, raising inevitable constitutional questions?
The proposed choice plan would affect students attending 59 schools being monitored by the State Education Department because of poor performance.
The plan would give vouchers, each worth about $2,500, to about 10 percent of the 50,000 students in those schools.
Parents could use the vouchers to transfer their children to approved public, private or parochial schools.
For students left behind in the poorly performing schools, the proposal suggests structural and programmatic reorganization.
Good, but why not
start
with such public school improvements, like throwing out all the bureaucratic rules for the worst schools and bringing in competent leaders who can instill a sense of shared purpose among teachers, students and parents?
Choice, too, can be inspirational and perhaps society will one day deem it desirable to extend choice to non-public schools.
But it would be far more prudent, before undermining the accountability and morale of public schools, to try out choice within the public schools.
The test is not whether some parents would love choice; it's how society deals with the poor children who need good schools most.


Bonds Rally on Durables Report
A surprising drop in June durable-goods orders was greeted warmly in the credit markets yesterday, and prices of Treasury notes and bonds rallied on the news.
The decline, the first in three months, "changes the probabilities that the economic rebound is as vigorous as the Fed thinks," said John Eckstein, an executive vice president at Yamaichi Securities.


Anheuser-Busch Reports 11% Increase in Earnings
The Anheuser-Busch Companies, the world's biggest brewer of beer, reported record sales and profits in the second quarter although it sold slightly less beer than in the year-ago period, the first slippage in 15 years.
The company, which sells Budweiser, Busch and Michelob beers, earned $286.7 million, or $1 a share, up more than 11 percent from $257.5 million, or 90 cents a share, in the second quarter of 1990.
The performance was within Wall Street analysts' expectations.


First Chicago Plans Job Cuts
The First Chicago Corporation, the nation's 13th-largest banking company, said today that it would cut 1,000 jobs by the end of the year to try to reduce its annual costs by $100 million.
The cuts represent 5.7 percent of First Chicago's work force of 17,500.


Political Memo; Cuomo Seeking the Presidency? Yes, He Isn't, Maybe He Is
Since putting the state budget to rest three weeks ago, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has appeared on national television to belittle the Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas and has told a convention of black Baptists that the national debate on quotas reflects a Republican strategy to make an issue of race.
He has issued a news release saying that President Bush's economic policy "lacks any formula for sustainable, long-term growth" and has told reporters that the Republican economic agenda "is zero."


Tenneco Is Sued
Tenneco Inc. said Abraham Kostick, who owns 100 Tenneco shares, filed a lawsuit against the company in Federal District Court in Houston, contending that Tenneco, based in Houston, gave misleading financial information.
The suit accuses Tenneco's chairman, James L. Ketelsen, and other top executives of exaggerating revenues and inflating the company's stock price.
Last week, another shareholeder filed a similar lawsuit.


Philharmonic Appoints Public Relations Head
Lois Cohn, who has been the director of public affairs at Carnegie Hall since 1984, will become the director of marketing and public relations for the New York Philharmonic on Sept. 19, it was announced yesterday.
Deborah Borda, the orchestra's new managing director, said that Mrs.
Cohn would take her new post on Sept. 19.
She succeeds Francis Little, who held the job from 1979 until his death last July.


Baseball; Cone Out in 4; Mets Are Just Out of It
For the Mets, it was a night of morbid curiosity.
David Cone stood on the mound and wondered how it was possible he could be so bad.
Outfielders halted their empty pursuits of huge flyballs, stood, stared and wondered just how far the home runs would travel.
And Manager Bud Harrelson sat in the dugout, taking in the data of the destruction and calculating the long-term damage tonight's 8-4 loss to the Giants might entail.


More Criticism for Seles
MONICA SELES was criticized yesterday by the Yugoslav Tennis Federation for refusing to play for her country in this week's Federation Cup in England.
"Participating for a national team is an honor and duty of every top athlete. But not for Seles," said a statement issued by the federation in Belgrade.
The statement added that Seles and her family had evaded the Yugoslav national team in the past and were now making up excuses for her refusal to play.


Cutbacks at Rosenfeld From America West
Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss Advertising, New York, has reduced the pay of its approximately 150 employees and instituted other cost-saving measures in the wake of the bankruptcy filing and cutbacks in ad spending by one of its largest clients, America West Airlines Inc.
The moves are "part of our determination to make sure the agency is in the right economic position to go forward," Harold L. Strauss, co-chairman, said yesterday in a telephone interview.


House Panel Backs Plan for Closing Bases
The House Armed Services Committee today approved, 44 to 8, an independent commission's proposal to close 34 military installations and realign 48 others.
The issue will be considered by the full House on Tuesday.
The Senate Armed Services Committee is expected to act on the commission's report by Friday.


For Collectors, Anything Goes When They Dust Off the 50's
TOO young to collect much during the 1950's, Jeff Weinstein and John Perreault have more than made up for lost time.
If not for an incongruously new microwave oven on their pink-and-aqua Formica kitchen counter top, their 1956 ranch in Bellport could pass for a high-style rendition of a "Father Knows Best" set.
Some 3,000 pieces of 1950's china, by such trendsetters of the day as Ben Seibel, Eva Zeisel and Russel Wright, crowd cabinets, drawers and shelves throughout the house.
Furniture by designers like Charles and Ray Eames and George Nelson fills the rooms.
Even the square, smooth lawn evokes the Eisenhower era.


Radioactive Leak Discovered At Bulgaria Nuclear Reactor
A small radioactive leak has been discovered at Bulgaria's troubled Kozlodui nuclear power plant, the official B.T.A. press agency reported today.
A plant spokesman said a radioactive area measuring one square yard was found between the plant's No. 1 and No. 2 reactors, which are scheduled to be shut down this summer because of safety concerns.


Three Companies In Space Venture
The Rockwell International Corporation has teamed with the Boeing Company and Aerojet to develop a reusable spacecraft to launch "Star Wars" components.
The spacecraft will be designed for the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, the agency formed by the Reagan Administration to coordinate research on a space-based missile defense system.


A Face Lift Is Planned For 'Dewar's Profiles'
One of the best-known "profiles" in advertising is getting a face lift.
Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago, is introducing redesigned versions of its long-running series of print advertisements for Dewar's White Label scotch.
The revamping is the first in eight years for the "Dewar's Profiles" campaign, which began in 1969 with a look at the actor Jerry Orbach.


MOZAMBICAN PAPER REPORTS MASSACRE
A major Mozambican newspaper says rightist rebels killed as many as 1,000 people in rampages through northern villages and displayed the heads of some victims on store shelves.
The rebels today denied the report, which was published on Monday in Noticias, the eastern African country's largest-circulation paper.
The killings reportedly took place in Nampula province in the last month, but the reports could not be independently verified.


Nurses' House Calls Keep Newborns Fit
Her name is Elisheva Rachel Freedman, and she is 5 days old.
She has walnut-brown hair and tiny blue eyes, open just a sliver, which look up at the world from a nest of blankets in her parents' tiny Queens apartment.
Already something about her is faintly reminiscent of her mother and father, a young Orthodox Jewish couple whose Flushing apartment contains one wall filled with solemn-looking books in Hebrew and another wall strung with a festive pink plastic "It's a Girl" banner.


Japan, to Rescue Bank, Will Tap Deposit Fund
Shedding new light on how they intend to consolidate the Japanese banking industry, Government officials said today that that they planned to tap the deposit insurance fund to help a healthy bank acquire a dying mutual savings bank.
With its paternalistic style of regulating banks and coercive but quiet methods for managing financial problems when they crop up, Japan has never before touched its bank deposit insurance fund.


Pitchers are Demoted
Two pitchers who established club records in recent seasons were sent to the minors yesterday.
The Cleveland Indians demoted reliever DOUG JONES, their career save leader, to Class AAA Colorado Springs and the Minnesota Twins shipped ALLAN ANDERSON, their only season earned-run average champion, to Class AAA Portland.
Jones, who cleared waivers, had the right to refuse the assignment and become a free agent, but said he would report to the minors.
If he had opted for free agency, he would have forfeited more than $700,000 remaining on his $2.05 million salary for this year.


Computer Flaw Delays Shuttle Flight
The launching of the space shuttle Atlantis was postponed today for at least a week because of a faulty engine-control computer that must be replaced.
The problem with the controller on one of the shuttle's three main engines was discovered as the craft was being fueled for a liftoff planned for 10:55 A.M.
Flight officials at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration scrubbed the mission at 6 A.M. when they determined that erratic readings from the engine controller were caused by mechanical problems and not software problems.


A PREHISTORIC AX IS FOUND IN GREECE
From sediments of a Stone Age lake bed in northwestern Greece, an archeologist has uncovered a flint hand ax made by a human ancestor who lived between 200,000 and 500,000 years ago.
Scientists say it is the earliest firm evidence for the presence of a species of early man in the Greek peninsula.


Senator Excused From Case, Stalling Action on Cranston
The Senate Ethics Committee's already troubled deliberations on Senator Alan Cranston were thrown into disarray tonight when a panel member unexpectedly withdrew from the case.
The latest setback could delay a resolution of the case for several months.
Senator Jeff Bingaman, Democrat of New Mexico, informed committee members that he would disqualify himself from the case because he learned Tuesday that the Washington law firm in which his wife is a partner had represented aides to Mr.
Cranston.
The firm was also owed legal fees that Mr.
Cranston, a California Democrat, planned to pay, he said.


Battling the Results of an Israeli Air Attack


Baghdad Journal; When All That Glisters Must Be Sold (for Scraps)
The shimmering golden domes of the Khadimain mosque, one of the holiest shrines for Shiite Muslims, seem to rise like a dream above the gasoline fumes and the raucous clatter and confusion of Bab Al Kublah Street in this poor quarter of Baghdad.
The mosque's golden domes are subtly mirrored in the windows along the crowded street, for it is also Baghdad's leading gold market, where every sort of gleaming pendant, bauble, bracelet, bangle or filigree belt can be bought or sold.


Egypt Urges Israeli Flexibility on Talks
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt said here today that Israel should be more positive and show greater flexibility in replying to an American plan to convene a Middle East peace conference.
Mr.
Mubarak spoke after talks today with Prime Minister John Major of Britain.
In remarks as he left 10 Downing Street, the Egyptian leader said he was optimistic about diplomatic efforts by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to induce Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel to sit down with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria and other Middle East leaders.


Orders for Durables Drop 1.6%
New orders for long-lived factory goods fell 1.6 percent in June and were not as strong in May as previously estimated, the Commerce Department reported today.
The unexpected decline in June's orders fanned doubts about economic recovery and caused bond prices to rise, but it did not force analysts into a fundamental reappraisal of the outlook.
They noted that the report on orders for durable goods is one of the most erratic of the Government's statistical series.


A Dark, Stormy Day To Pedal
One of the more perilous and exacting stages in the recent history of the Tour de France began today in the tranquil village of Flumet, where those riders who happened to glance left could see black clouds building up over the distant Alps.
A few moments later, the road curved sharply and the race headed directly at the storm.


Theodore Wilson, Actor, 47
Theodore Wilson, a television and movie actor who appears in the new Mel Brooks film "Life Stinks," died on Sunday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center here.
He was 47 years old.
His sister-in-law, Naomi Pringle, said he had suffered a stroke.
Mr.
Wilson played Earl the postman in the situation comedy "That's My Mama" and appeared in many other television shows, including "Crazy Like a Fox," "Good Times," "The Redd Foxx Show," "Roll Out," "You Can't Take it With You," "Quantum Leap," "L.A. Law" and "Gabriel's Fire."
In addition to "Life Stinks," his film credits include "That's My Life," "A Fine Mess," "The River Niger," "Carny" and "The Hunter."
He was a member of the Negro Ensemble Company in New York City.


Football; Perez Rejoins Giants And Battle to Be No. 3
The Giants' quarterback of the present will be Phil Simms or Jeff Hostetler.
The quarterback of the near future will probably be Hostetler.
The quarterback of the more distant future may be Mike Perez.
The same Mike Perez they drafted on the seventh round and then dropped in 1989?
More or less.


Bush to Meet With Soviet Opposition
The White House said today that President Bush would address the Supreme Soviet of the Ukraine and meet with members of the emerging democratic movement in Moscow as part of a diplomatically tricky effort to foster contacts with the Soviet Union's emerging opposition.
Because of its political sensitivity and symbolic importance, this foray by Mr.
Bush into the volatile world of Soviet politics could end up overshadowing the formal centerpiece of his trip to the Soviet Union next week: the signing of a treaty reducing nuclear weapons and a two-day summit conference with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Review/Performance Art; Holding Hu-person-ity Up to Ridicule
"I'm in a rotten mood and I bet you are too," announced Rachel Rosenthal in the opening moments of her performance piece "Pangaean Dreams," which had its East Coast premiere at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday evening as part of Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival.
The 64-year-old Los Angeles-based performance artist, who arrived on the stage in a wheelchair, angrily lamented the destruction of wildlife by a recent pesticide spill in the Sacramento River.
Then she pulled herself up, peeled off assorted casts and bandages and began comparing her history of bone fractures and other physical problems with the breakup of Pangaea, the mythical supercontinent that may have existed 250 million years ago.
For Ms.
Rosenthal, that supercontinent serves an all-purpose metaphor for a mystical unity of mind, body and spirit on the earth that has been shattered by human evolution.


Promotions at the Top At Bernard Chaus Inc.
Nicole Eskenazi has been named corporate executive vice president for the women's sportswear company Bernard Chaus Inc., where she will oversee the company's seven divisions.
Mrs.
Eskenazi's promotion coincides with the election of Josephine Chaus to chairman and chief executive of the company that Mrs.
Chaus founded with her late husband, Bernard, in 1975.


Critic's Notebook; Through Annie Leibovitz's Lens, A Celebration of the Celebrated
Anyone who skims through American magazines has probably encountered at least one photograph by Annie Leibovitz.
If you missed her photojournalism for Rolling Stone in the 1970's, which ranged from rock stars to Presidential hopefuls, you've probably seen her vivid celebrity portraits for Vanity Fair, whose chief photographer she became in 1983.
Failing that, you can't have escaped seeing her so-called portrait-ads for American Express and the Gap, which also featured the famous and would-be famous.
At the moment, the work of the 41-year-old photographer seems even more ubiquitous than usual.
A 20-year retrospective is drawing record crowds at the normally sedate National Portrait Gallery in Washington.
And her photograph of the actress Demi Moore, discreetly naked and seven months pregnant, is playing on the cover of the August issue of Vanity Fair, setting off a small fire storm of reaction.


Baseball; Boyd's Texas Debut Spoiled by Red Sox
Joe Hesketh and two relief pitchers combined on a two-hitter tonight as Boston spoiled Oil Can Boyd's Texas debut with a 2-1 victory that snapped the Red Sox' six-game losing streak.
Hesketh (4-1) went six and two-thirds innings before Jeff Gray and Jeff Reardon finished up as the Red Sox broke a four-game Texas winning streak.
Hesketh gave up two hits, a walk and had four strikeouts.
Reardon pitched a perfect ninth for his 24th save.


Pregnant Queens Woman Is Killed, but Baby Lives
A pregnant woman was shot in the face and mortally wounded only a few yards from her Queens home along a quiet, shady street early yesterday morning, but doctors were able to save her eight-month-old fetus before the woman died, the police said.
The woman, Sabrina Bost, 20 years old, was in cardiac arrest when she arrived by ambulance at Jamaica Hospital less than 20 minutes after the shooting, doctors said.
As one team of doctors opened her chest and began massaging her heart, another performed an emergency Caesarean section.


New Reprieve for S. I. Ferry
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has come up with $1.6 million more to keep the Staten Island Ferry in full operation for seven more months.
Service was reduced by New York City on July 1 to save money, but it was restored 18 days later for at least 30 days after a court found the public had not received 30 days' notice.
In a letter to Borough President Guy V. Molinari, Mr.
Cuomo said the state already chipped in more than $11 million a year for ferry operations but had found the extra $1.6 million from tax revenues.


Kimberly-Clark Net Up
The Kimberly-Clark Corporation said its second-quarter profits rose 53.2 percent over an unusually weak period last year.
But investors found the results disappointing and the company's stock plunged $6.75, to $93.25, in trading today on the New York Stock Exchange.
Kimberly-Clark's net income was $123.2 million, or $1.53 a share, on sales of $1.69 billion, the company said on Tuesday.
A year ago, the company earned $80.4 million, or $1.01 a share, on sales of $1.61 billion.


Madagascar Insurgents Take 2 More Ministries
Opponents of President Didier Ratsiraka occupied two more Government ministries today without resistance from security forces and filled the streets of the capital in defiance of a decree banning public gatherings.
Opposition politicians have peacefully taken over six Government offices this week.
Mr.
Ratsiraka issued the emergency decree on Tuesday in hopes of holding onto power, but the army has appeared reluctant to confront the tens of thousands of protesters who have gathered almost daily since June 10 to call for his ouster.


Market Place; 3 at Goldman Leaving; Were in 'Vulture Fund'
Three partners in Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, all closely identified with the "vulture fund" that produced large profits and angry clients for Goldman, will give up their general partnerships at the Wall Street firm, Goldman said yesterday.
Two of the men, Mikael Salovaara, 37 years old, and Alfred C. Eckert 3d, 43, will set up their own vulture fund to invest in securities of troubled companies, Goldman officials said.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 25


Sconce, Ensconce, Ensconced
WHEN Nikko Hotels International began renovating the Essex House on Central Park South last year, Suzanne Lipschutz, an antiques dealer, bought 16 of the crystal wall sconces that had graced the hotel's lobby.
"The hanging chandeliers didn't do it for me, but these wall ones somehow epitomized old New York," Ms.
Lipschutz said.
She promptly sold four to a client for a house in Texas and took two home to hang in her own living room in Manhattan.


GQ Drive to Collect Clothing for Homeless
GQ, the men's fashion magazine, is planning to sponsor its first clothing drive for the homeless.
The Conde Nast Publications' monthly, also known as Gentlemen's Quarterly, will seek to involve advertising agencies in Chicago, Detroit, Los Angeles, New York and San Francisco.
The agencies will be asked to make containers available in their offices so employees can deposit clothing for the drive.


A Passion for a Hobby That Clings to You
IT all began quite innocently about 10 years ago, and it's been a wild ride ever since.
At the Main Street Festival in Laurel, Md., Marlou Freeman bought a set of decorative magnets for her refrigerator.
"There was a chicken, a panda, a duck and some other animals," Ms.
Freeman recalled.
"Within a year, every square inch of my refrigerator was covered."


2d-Quarter Earnings Drop For 2 Subsidiaries of G.M.
The General Motors Corporation, whose automotive earnings have been hit hard by the recession, saw the second-quarter profits of two important non-automotive subsidiaries decline.
G.M.'s finance subsidiary and electronics and aerospace units both posted lower profit yesterday, in large measure because they are dependent on automotive sales.
A third unit, the Electronic Data Systems Corporation, showed a strong increase in profits.


Money Fund Yields Unchanged in Week
Yields of money market funds showed virtually no change in the week ended yesterday, according to IBC/Donoghue's, which regularly monitors the leading funds.
Yields on bank money-market accounts that compete for the public's interest in short-term investing were 5.23 percent, compared with 5.25 percent the week before, according to The Bank Rate Monitor's national index.


Film Makers Lobby To Protect Their Work
Over breakfast this morning at the Grand Hotel here, a group of directors, cinematographers and screenwriters plotted their strategy for a day of lobbying on Capitol Hill.
They had flown into town to voice their support for a major piece of legislation being introduced in Congress by Representative Robert J. Mrazek, Democrat of New York, to protect the rights of film makers.
Representative Mrazek is the author of the National Film Preservation Act of 1988, which authorizes the Librarian of Congress to select 25 American films each year that are "culturally, historically or esthetically significant," and which requires notice to be attached if the films are altered.
The legislation was offered as a compromise after Mr.
Mrazek and others failed to win passage of a bill to ban the coloring of black-and-white films.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.64
5.74
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.60
7.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.70
5.74
7.46
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.08
8.16
8.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.41
8.48
8.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.42
9.46
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.13
7.14
7.41
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


McDonnell Douglas Sought Advance From the Pentagon
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation faced such a severe cash squeeze early this year that it sought a $1 billion advance from the Pentagon on contract work, a senior Pentagon official said today.
But the official, who asked not to be identified, said the Defense Department demanded that the St.
Louis-based company take money-saving steps.


U.S. Court Likely To Get TRW Case
The lawsuit that Texas and four other states have filed in a Texas court against TRW Inc.'s credit reporting agency will probably be moved to Federal District Court, the parties in the case said.


Dollar Declines on Report Of Weak Factory Orders
The dollar fell against most leading currencies yesterday after the Government released an unexpectedly weak report on factory orders to the nation's manufacturers.
The Commerce Department reported that orders for durable goods slipped 1.6 percent in June after three months of gains.
Some analysts said the report could rekindle talk of a double-dip recession.
That could put further pressure on the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates in an attempt to help the economy.


P.&amp; G. Completes Deal With Revlon
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company completed the purchase of Revlon Inc.'s Max Factor and Betrix lines of cosmetics and fragrances for $1.06 billion.


S.E.C. Backs Trader Bar
The Securities and Exchange Commission has backed sanctions imposed by the New York Stock Exchange against a former vice president of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The exchange had concluded that the former executive, James Carlton McLamb of Raleigh, N.C., should be permanently barred from membership or association with any stock exchange member or organization.


Thornburgh Insists U.S. Bank Inquiry Is Aggressive
Stung by accusations that the Justice Department responded slowly to allegations of wrongdoing at the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh insisted today that he was moving aggressively to investigate the bank.
Mr.
Thornburgh said in response to questions submitted by The New York Times that he was "puzzled" by accusations that the department had proceeded slowly.
He asserted through a spokesman, Dan Eramian, that Federal prosecutors in Atlanta, Miami, Washington and Tampa, Fla., were pursuing complaints that officials within B.C.C.I. had engaged in criminal fraud.


GENE IS ISOLATED IN DEADLY DISEASE
Only months after they gained their first slender clue into the baffling biochemistry of a common disease of the body's connective tissue, Marfan syndrome, researchers have identified the gene behind the syndrome.
Moving rapidly ahead, they then pinpointed a particularly deadly mutation that results in the worst form of the illness.


Schuster Executive to Head Little, Brown
Turning his back on an unsettled Simon &amp; Schuster after a difficult year, Charles E. Hayward, president of the publisher's adult-trade division, was named president of Little, Brown &amp; Company yesterday.
The appointment, rumored for several weeks, means that Mr.
Hayward is accepting slightly less financial responsibility in exchange for what he sees as a freer hand to develop a wider range of businesses.


Baseball; Glavine and Braves Victims As Pirates Continue to Surge
Lloyd McClendon had three hits and drove in two runs tonight, leading the Pittsburgh Pirates to a 7-4 victory over the Atlanta Braves.
After losing the opener of the three-game series, the Pirates won the final two by a combined 19-7 score, giving them 11 victories in their last 14 games.


Siblings: Growing Up And Closer
ADULT siblings inhabit a twilight zone of family relationships.
They have no roles, no rituals, no clear-cut patterns of behavior, a few proscribed but no prescribed ways of relating -- no relationship at all, sometimes, since as freewheeling adults theirs is a voluntary association.
"Sometimes it seems like little more than that -- an association," said Janice A. Cummings, publisher of Memory Lane Magazine for radio station KXAM in Scottsdale, Ariz., and the eldest of five siblings age 22 to 35.
"I mean, sometimes I can't believe that we were all raised under the same roof. I look at my brothers and sisters as adults and think, 'Who the hell are you?' "


Microsoft's Net Up 73% in the 2d Quarter
The Microsoft Corporation, the nation's largest personal computer software company, continued being a juggernaut of growth in revenues and earnings for its fourth fiscal quarter.
In the quarter ended June 30, Microsoft said it earned $138.4 million, or 73 cents a share, up 73 percent, from the $80.0 million, or 43 cents a share in the fiscal fourth quarter of 1990.
Revenues for the quarter increased 56 percent to $526.6 million, from $337.0 million.


Drug Unit Disbanded in Investigation
An elite police narcotics unit in upper Manhattan has been disbanded and its six members reassigned in an investigation by the Manhattan District Attorney's office into charges that the officers lied when they said they witnessed drug purchases that led to about 100 arrests, top law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The most consistent allegation is that unit members would arrest a drug buyer who was leaving a building known to be used by drug dealers and then arrest the suspected sellers inside without witnessing any transactions, as required under the rules of evidence.


Man Said to Be Remorseful Over Slayings in Milwaukee
A man held in the killing and dismembering of 11 people has confessed to the crimes, the police said in court documents filed today.
The man's lawyer. added that his client had also expressed remorse.
In an affidavit submitted in Milwaukee County Circuit Court, Lieut.
David Kane of the Milwaukee police wrote that the man, Jeffrey L. Dahmer, 31 years old, had told the police that he met his victims at taverns or shopping malls and lured them to his apartment for photographs.


Times Mirror Net Falls 35%
The Times Mirror Company said yesterday that its second- quarter earnings tumbled 35 percent, primarily because of weak advertising demand.
The publishing company, based in Los Angeles, earned $30.7 million, or 24 cents a share, in the quarter that ended in June, compared with $47 million, or 36 cents a share, a year earlier.
The company's revenue fell nearly 3 percent, to $880.5 million, from $906.6 million.


Lightweight Tile, Heavyweight Look
ROGER QUESTEL is pretty proud of himself. He invented a new material for wall tile.
Questech, said the president of the year-old company called Intaglio , is "an integrated component material of bronze, copper or pewter, a special polymer and ceramic." In other words, it's a lightweight molded tile that has the look of cast metal.


Bare-Bones Walls and Bargains on Tenth Avenue
Last week the one-time Pottery Barn at 231 Tenth Avenue (West 24th Street) in Manhattan reopened as a 15,000-square-foot Williams-Sonoma Outlet Center.
Here, for decades, college students bought their first wineglasses to go with their Almaden.
The new store has changed not just in name, but also in character and goods.
This second week of business attracted smartly dressed shoppers leaping out of cabs, checkbooks in hand.
Couples, desperate to furnish their homes, brought toddlers.
As the children reached for breakable objects the mothers scolded and other customers frowned.


York Research Shares Plunge
The York Research Corporation's stock lost nearly two- thirds of its value yesterday after the power cogeneration plant builder said it was cutting ties with a Japanese company.
York, based in Stamford, Conn., said it had agreed to end the Tomen Corporation's options to participate in its cogeneration projects.
Cogeneration plants reuse waste energy to generate power.


Protect Consumers, Not Dairy Farmers
Milo Minderbinder, the famous wheeler-dealer in Joseph Heller's antiwar novel "Catch-22," "enriches" himself by buying high and selling low.
With a similar spit-in-your-eye logic, the House Agriculture Committee proposes to protect American consumers -- by cutting back production of milk, thereby driving up its price by as much as 50 cents per gallon.
Get it?
Put plenty of milk on every breakfast table by cutting back production and raising prices.
That's a proposition that only Milo, or one of 200,000 dairy farmers contributing a total of $2 million a year in campaign contributions, could love.
But it's a punishing proposition for millions of poor parents struggling to feed their children.
Ordinary logic and fairness dictate a no vote when it comes to the House floor, as early as this week.
The bill would raise next year's milk price supports, the minimum price the Government guarantees dairy farmers, by 25 percent.
That would reverse the 30 percent slide in milk prices during the past year.
To prevent higher prices from leading to oversized surpluses, which the Government would be required to buy, the bill would penalize farmers who expand production.
The idea is to drive up prices without driving up the deficit.
That's clever, but wrongheaded.
It isn't Congress's responsibility to guarantee dairy farmers -- or house painters, taxi drivers or locksmiths -- a decent living.
If the milk market is glutted, some farmers will have to exit.
Indeed, the movement off the farms will intensify as technological advances allow fewer farmers to meet the nation's needs.
Congress could help distressed dairy farmers the same way it helps other displaced workers: job relocation and retraining.
It could provide more unemployment compensation, even welfare.
But forcing poor parents to skimp on milk purchases to bail out well-off farmers makes sense only in "Catch-22."


Brazil Wins Skirmish With I.M.F.
President Fernando Collor de Mello has scored a populist victory here in a shouting match with the International Monetary Fund, which acceded to his demand yesterday that Jose Fajgenbaum, an Argentine economist, be removed as head of the fund's negotiating team in Brasilia.
He is to be replaced Thursday by Sterie Baza, an American.
In the morning, demonstrators greeted the President, waving signs reading, "Long live Collor! I.M.F., Respect our people!" and "Brazil is not a colony!" Headlines proclaimed "I.M.F. backs down," and "I.M.F. heeds Collor."  Debate Over Motives
In more sophisticated circles, analysts were debating today whether Brazil's shouting match with the fund actually represented a new, populist turn in economic policy, or a clever piece of political theater.
Some suggested that Mr.
Collor might have stage-managed it to make an eventual accord with the fund more palatable at home.
Debt-rescheduling talks with the fund resumed today after a three-day suspension.


ECONOMISTS ASSESS ARAB-ISRAEL MOVE
If Arabs and Israelis decide to make deals, not war, how much does the Israeli economy stand to gain?
Nobody has a remotely reliable estimate, said Michael Bruno, governor of Israel's central bank.
Nobody is suggesting, said Dan Halperin, an Israeli consultant in Tel Aviv, that "lifting the boycott today will have a major impact tomorrow."


Union Leader Wins Acquittal In a Bribe Case
The leader of the nation's largest construction union and one of the city's most powerful union bosses was acquitted yesterday of charges that he extorted money from contractors in exchange for promising labor peace and allowing them to use nonunion workers.
The verdict was a major setback for Federal prosecutors in Manhattan who contend that the union leader, Paschal McGuinness, heads one of the most corrupt union locals in the nation and has ties to organized crime.


Corrections
The Book Notes column yesterday carried an erroneous byline.
The column was by Roger Cohen.


Du Pont and Union Carbide Report Earnings Declines
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, the nation's biggest chemical producer, reported a 21 percent decline ducer, reported a 21 percent decline in its second-quarter earnings yesterday, citing weak market conditions and unfavorable currency-exchange movements.
The Union Carbide Corporation, meanwhile, reported that its earnings had plunged 57 percent.


U.S. PLANS TO BUILD NO NEW SHUTTLES
The Bush Administration said today that it planned to build no more space shuttles, concentrating instead on creating new family of rockets to succeed the 30-year-old designs now being used.
A plan was announced by Vice President Dan Quayle in a speech at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California.
"In all probability, we have purchased the last space shuttle," he said.


Results Plus
UNIVERSITY GAMES  U.S.
Rakes in the Gold  Jon Drummond, a sprinter, and the men's and women's basketball teams led the United States on a gold-medal winning spree at the World University Games yesterday in Sheffield, England.
Drummond, one of four Americans to collect a gold medal in track, split his pants as he raced down the straightaway in the 200-meter final.
Other United States gold medalists on the track were 400-hurdler Derrick Adkins, who beat the field by a second in 49.01 seconds; decathlete Steven Fritz, with his highest points total (8,079), and long jumper Alan Turner with his second-best longest jump (26 feet 10 inches).
In basketball, the United States men defeated Canada, 96-56, for the gold medal, as Hubert Davis and Calbert Cheaney scored 14 points apiece.
The United States women captured the gold with an 88-62 victory over Spain.
The American women broke a 22-22 tie to take a 42-29 lead at halftime.
Ruthie Bolton, the former Auburn guard who scored 40 points against Romania earlier in the tournament, had 22 yesterday. (AP) TENNIS  Ailing Graf Still Wins  Steffi Graf will fly home today from the Federation Cup for treatment of tendinitis in her shoulder and may miss Germany's remaining matches.
Graf, playing in pain and requiring on-court treatment, struggled to win her singles match yesterday against Patricia Hy of Canada as Germany advanced to the quarterfinals of the 32-nation event.
The United States and top-seeded Spain also reached the quarterfinals with victories yesterday, along with Italy, Switzerland, Austria, Indonesia and Czechoslovakia.
Jennifer Capriati and Mary Joe Fernandez won singles matches in straight sets as the United States swept past Bulgaria.
Spain got three-set singles victories from Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Conchita Martinez to defeat Australia.
Capriati and Fernandez defeated the Maleeva sisters, Magdalena and Katerina, in singles, and Gigi Fernandez and Zina Garrison then defeated the Maleevas in doubles.
Capriati had a four-game streak at the beginning and a six-game run at the end in a 7-5, 6-2 victory over Magdalena Maleeva.
Mary Joe Fernandez won, 6-2, 6-1, over Katerina Maleeva, and the doubles team won, 6-2, 6-1. (AP) Gildemeister Holds On: Top-seeded Laura Gildemeister, Peru's leading women's player for the last seven years, yesterday held off Louise Field of Australia, 7-5, 6-4, to reach the quarterfinals in the Westchester Ladies Cup at Manhattanville College.
Gildemeister, who reached the quarterfinals at Wimbledon, rallied in the seventh game of the second set from a 15-40 deficit to break Field's serve and take command, 4-3.
Lori McNeill of Houston, seeded No. 2, rallied for a 6-7, 6-3, 7-6 victory over unseeded Andrea Farley of Cincinnati.
Bruguera Upset at Dutch Open: Unseeded Mark Koevermans upset top-seeded Sergi Bruguera, 7-5, 6-4, yesterday to reach the quarterfinals of the $250,000 Dutch Open ATP tournament in Hilversum.
Koevermans, a Dutchman ranked 50th in the world, played strongly and consistently on the clay against Bruguera, a Spaniard ranked eighth in the world.
In other matches, unseeded Marc Rosset of Switzerland eliminated fifth-seeded Goran Prpic of Yugoslavia, 7-6, 3-6, 6-4, and Renzo Furlan of Italy defeated eighth-seeded Omar Camporese 1-6, 7-6, 6-2. (AP) Lendl and Courier Gain: Top-seeded Ivan Lendl and second-seeded Jim Courier advanced to the third round of the $1.2 million Canadian Open yesterday in Montreal.
Lendl dropped the first set to Gilad Bloom of Israel, but rebounded for a 4-6, 6-4, 6-4 victory.
Courier, who won the French Open, defeated MaliVai Washington, 7-5, 6-3, as eight seeded players won their second-round matches. (AP)


Not Too Late to Keep From Making the Fare-Card Blunder
To the Editor:
Before New York's straphangers allow the subway to switch from tokens to magnetic fare cards (news article, July 2), learn from Washington.
I have lived in Queens and in the District of Columbia, and I'm not surprised that magnetic cards are popular with municipal governments -- they let subway systems squeeze more money from riders.
For more than a century a New Yorker has been able to go to the farthest reaches of the subway system for one fare, and every increase in the fare has been made only with considerable deliberation.
With the magnetic card system, each rider's fare depends on where the trip begins and ends -- it will no longer be so economical to live in or visit the outermost parts of the boroughs.
It will also be painfully easy to raise the fares, needing only a slight modification in the computer program that deducts values from the magnetic cards at the turnstiles.
There is also a Big Brother aspect to the magnetic card system: the card you carry shows your (or, more precisely, its) travel history of where trips began and ended.
People who persist in using private cars should defray the expenses for those who use the more environmentally considerate mass transit system.
Don't raise the price for bus and subway, but raise parking rates, gasoline taxes, tolls, license plate fees and the other expenses associated with clogging the streets and polluting the air.
And offer a lower fare for rush hour as an additional incentive to ride mass transit to and from work.
BERNARD J. SUSSMAN  Washington, July 2, 1991


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
ADC Telecommunications Inc., Minneapolis, a maker of telecommunications equipment, named William J. Cadogan chief executive, effective Nov. 1. *
Atlantic Recording Corp., Los Angeles, a Time Warner Inc. subsidiary, appointed Derek Shulman chairman of its Atco Records division.


Columbus Bequeathed Us the Idea of America; Indian Bondage
To the Editor:
One point can be added to Karl E. Meyer's evenhanded discussion of Columbus and Spanish colonial policy (Editorial Notebook, June 27).
Bartolome de Las Casas saw that the root of the trouble came from the land-grant system whereby a Spaniard who was given an estate also got possession of the Indians on it, making them in effect slaves.
He returned to Spain in 1515 to appeal to the king.
His plea: "If your majesty would reserve to yourself alone the jurisdiction of the Indies, without sharing it among the Spaniards, it would be the greatest happiness imaginable to the Indians."
This same theme ran throughout his "Very Brief Account of the Destruction of the Indies." He proposed that the Indians remain under their own chiefs, who would be subject only to the Spanish king.
This had been the design of Queen Isabella, he said, when days before her death she commanded the governor of Hispaniola to treat all the Indians as free people.
His plan was never adopted, but in 1542, de Las Casas was influential in getting Charles V to issue ordinances intended to secure better treatment of the Indians and limit distribution of their lands among the Spaniards.
Sadly, these new laws were honored more in the breach than in the observance.
EVELYN SHARP  Tulsa, Okla., July 3, 1991


Sex Assault Cases: St. John's Verdict Touches off Debate
When a Queens jury resoundingly rejected allegations that three former St.
John's University students sexually assaulted another student after getting her drunk, it touched off celebrations in Bethpage, L.I., where the three men live.
But it also touched off debate around the nation, as everyone from straphangers on New York City subways to rape-crisis counselors in Berkeley, Calif., tried to discern the meaning of the verdict in the case, one of relatively few to come to trial on charges of sexual violence on college campuses.
The defendants in the case were charged with sodomy and sexual abuse.


Capital Cities/ABC's Profit Down by 10%
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. said yesterday that its earnings fell 10 percent in the second quarter and that revenues were flat.
Earnings totaled $127.8 million, or $7.60 a share, compared with $142.3 million, or $8.19 a share, a year earlier.
Revenues were up slightly, to $1.36 billion.


2 State Offerings Raise $400 Million
Two states have issued tax-exempt bonds in a buoyant market where good investor demand, a shortage of supply and improving economic news have combined to bring more favorable rates for issuers.
The Florida Board of Education's $200 million issue yesterday was won by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company with a bid of 6.8331 percent.


Troubled Workers Transport Urban Woes to the Catskills
Bill W. left New York in the spring last year because trouble was following him.
It can be that way in the city, he said.
Men roam the streets looking for or waiting for something bad to happen, and the tension from this can make you tired and old.
When the bus from the Concord Resort Hotel came to his homeless shelter to recruit workers, he slipped on.
"Drugs got me," he said.
"I needed a place where no one could find me. My own escape."
His first day in the Catskills, working in the kitchen of the Concord Hotel, he washed close to 500 dishes.
Then, he said, he walked down the road to his small room in a falling-down bungalow, closed the door and removed a small pipe and some crack from a pouch.
Outside, he heard two men arguing.
Someone was throwing stones against the side of the bungalow.
It sounded like Jerome Avenue in the Bronx when he was homeless.
Nothing was happening.
Just drugs and drink and the idle feeling that in a flash, something could turn wrong.
No. 3 in Per Capita Crime
Hundreds of people like Bill, homeless and penniless or in trouble have come to the Catskills either on their own or as recruits of the big hotels to fill minimum-wage jobs.
Some have come to escape the strife of urban life but others have brought with them some of its grimmest symptoms, chiefly drugs and violence.


HONG KONG BUOYED BY AIRPORT ACCORD
After two bleak years in which it has lurched from one crisis to the next, exhaling confidence the way a punctured tire loses air, Hong Kong finally seems to be feeling good about itself again.
A new agreement was reached at the beginning of this month between Britain and China about a new airport to be built here -- and more broadly about how the territory will be governed until the hand-over to China in 1997 -- and it has elicited an enormous sigh of relief.


Filings Revised By Occidental
The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said today that it had revised its financial statements for the last four years at the request of the Securities and Exchange Commission to settle a disagreement over the accounting of the acquisition of the Midcon Corporation in 1986.
The company said the restatement had no effect on its cash flow for any period, and in the most recent period -- fiscal 1990 -- the only effect was a $2 million increase in shareholders' equity.


Home Video
From Disney
Video films are sometimes pulled from circulation, but next winter Disney plans to cut one up into pieces.
"Fantasia" is to be released on Nov. 1.
The video, which will cost $24.99, will be in stores for 50 days, after which the studio, always adroit at recycling its properties, will break it into parts.
Some of the pieces, according to the plan, will be scrapped; others will be incorporated into a new animated film, "Fantasia Continued," to be released in 1996 or 1997.


PLANET REPORTED IN DISTANT SPACE
Astronomers say they have discovered a planet around a distant star.
If their claim is confirmed, it would be the first established detection of a planet beyond the solar system.
The object they have observed appears to be stranger than its discoverers even imagined: a massive object orbiting the remnant of a star that collapsed in a violent explosion.


Baseball; Kelly's Infield 'Homer' Both Pitiful and Pivotal
Everyone remembers the Little League version of a home run.
The ball is hit, gets bobbled, juggled and thrown around, and some 12-year old circles the bases, smiles and brags about his error-laden homer.
Those crazy misplays usually remain on the tiny fields with tiny players, but Pat Kelly hit one last night at Yankee Stadium and it was a pivotal and pitiful play that scored three cheap runs and helped power the Yankees to a 10-2 victory over Seattle.


William R. Beer, Professor, 48
William R. Beer, a professor of sociology at Brooklyn College for 22 years, died on Tuesday at his home in Northport, L.I.
He was 48 years old.
He died of a brain tumor, his family said.


KICKBACK SCANDAL IS ROCKING CANADA
While Prime Minister Brian Mulroney was in London last week representing Canada at the summit conference, some of his political cronies back home were rocked by charges of kickbacks and bribery that could spur resignations and even the premature fall of his Progressive Conservative Government.
The accusations are not new.
They were brought some years ago by a local Tory businessman named Glen Kealey, who asserts that in 1986 a Cabinet minister asked him for a $5,000 kickback in a $160 million office building project Mr.
Kealey was promoting for Canada's new space agency.


Pop in Review
Whitney Houston
Madison Square Garden
Given the theatrical demands of modern pop music, Whitney Houston's success has been achieved against some odds.
Ms.
Houston, who performed to a less than full house at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday night, isn't a natural performer, and she hasn't in any way mastered the large-scale rhetoric of passion needed to convince a huge hall of her sincerity.
In a form that demands acrobatics she's ungainly at best, looking distinctly ill at ease, as if she had suddenly awakened to find herself in someone else's body.
She should thank her record company, because with clever packaging -- videos, print ads, radio play -- it has created an image for her that will survive her live shows.


Sales of Domestic Vehicles Drop 5.4%
Sales of domestically built cars and trucks fell 5.4 percent in mid-July, but the drop did not dampen the optimism that has been building among analysts in recent weeks that the automotive market is improving.
Domestically built cars -- defined as those built in the United States, Canada and Mexico -- sold at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 6.6 million in the July 11-20 period.
That compared with a 7.3 million rate in the previous reporting period, which also had nine selling days, and a 6.9 million rate in the corresponding period of last year.


CHRONICLE
The New York Post has hired WILLIAM NORWICH, a former society columnist for The Daily News, to succeed AILEEN MEHLE (SUZY, that is), as The Post's society columnist, PETER S. KALIKOW, the newspaper's publisher, said yesterday.
Ms.
Mehle, who is joining Fairchild Publications, publisher of Women's Wear Daily and W, will stop writing for The Post early in August.
Mr.
Norwich, 37 years old, said in a telephone interview yesterday that he is to begin with the Post on Sept. 4.


Calendar: Wildflowers And Tropical Offerings
Wild and Cultivated  Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
A workshop on wildflowers of the northeastern United States will be held from 1 to 4 P.M.
Saturday.
Fee, including materials, $37; $32, members.
A class on shade plants for city gardens will be offered on Aug. 2 (fee, $27; $22, members) and summer garden maintenance will be the topic on Aug. 11 (fee, $30; $25, members).
Reservations required.


GORBACHEV'S PLAN ON POWER SHARING WINS WIDE ASSENT
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev announced today that he had reached agreement with most of the country's republics on a draft treaty for a drastically decentralized system of power sharing in the Soviet Union.
By achieving a draft accord with nine of the 15 Soviet republics, Mr.
Gorbachev has achieved a signficant political success on the eve of an important Communist Party central committee meeting, and next week's meeting in Moscow with President Bush.


Poles Teach U.S. on Employee Ownership
To the Editor:
"Poland Outcapitalisms America" (editorial, July 8) puts the American attitude toward capitalism in perfect perspective.
We seem to say that capitalism works for everyone else, but not in our backyard.
As Poland casts aside Communism, employee stock ownership plans have emerged as the most effective tool to promote economic freedom.
Expanding employee ownership offers an ideological alternative to Marxist-Leninism by advancing a democratic capitalist platform of expanding ownership and democracy.
Marx and Engels stated that you could sum up the entire philosophy of Communism in a single sentence: Abolish private property.
The democratic alternative offers an open system that promises working people everywhere what Communism could never provide: political freedom and control over their economic destinies.
In many emerging democracies, employee co-ownership of the companies for which they work lends substance to the rhetoric of freedom and opportunity for all.
While most Americans hail the advances toward capitalism in Eastern Europe, they fail to support similar opportunities and measures in the United States.
Representatives Beryl Anthony, Cass Ballenger and I have introduced H.R. 2410, a bill promoting employee stock ownership plans.
It provides incentives for expanding employee ownership that will give Americans a stake in the company for which they work.
Historians, economists and philosophers alike attribute the economic strength and stability of the United States to our commitment to individual rights, private property and free enterprise.
While we have widespread property ownership, the average citizen has not fully participated in ownership of our country's corporations.
Our tax structure facilitates corporate enterprise but not the widespread ownership of capital.
As a result many American workers feel detached from their workplace and at times disenchanted with free enterprise.
Expanding employee stock plans would make participation in the system possible for those who have lacked access to capital and credit.
As the United States searches to promote productivity and improve national competitiveness, we should look to the almost 9,000 privately owned companies that have transferred stock to employees.
Most of these -- a few brought back from the brink of bankruptcy -- are successful money makers.
If Poland and other Eastern European countries can take bold entrepreneurial steps to expand democratic capitalism, shouldn't the United States be willing to take similar steps to expand ownership to all Americans?
DANA ROHRABACHER  Member of Congress, 42d Dist., Calif.
Washington, July 11, 1991


Pop in Review
Jim Hall-Ron Carter Duo; Joe Pass Blue Note 131 West Third Street Manhattan Through Sunday
The combination of the Jim Hall-Ron Carter guitar-bass duo and the unaccompanied guitar solos of Joe Pass makes for a program of chamber jazz at its most chamberish.
But both the Hall-Carter team and Mr.
Pass manage to make their programs at the Blue Note lively and varied without abandoning the subtleties that are their hallmarks.


Review/Fashion; Saint Laurent, Elder Statesman, Shines in Eye of the Paris Storm
After the raging fashion storm stirred up by the fall and winter couture openings, there came a pause in the week's entertainment.
Yves Saint Laurent provided an oasis of calm today, and the audience responded with a standing ovation.
It seems the appetite can be sated with too much Chinoiserie, rock clothes and ballerinas.
There comes a time for staples, like meat and potatoes, and Saint Laurent provided it.


Compaq Profits Fell 80% in Quarter; Wall St. Not Surprised
Confirming its forecast for weak earnings, the Compaq Computer Corporation said today that its profit plunged 80 percent in the second quarter.
Net income fell to $20.3 million, or 23 cents a share, from $104.3 million, or $1.18 a share, a year earlier.
Sales fell 16.7 percent to $717.8 million, from $862.2 million.


Books of The Times; Tough Talk, Shootouts Auras and a Loopy Lady
Pastime By Robert B. Parker 223 pages.
G.
P.
Putnam's Son. $19.95.
Maximum Bob By Elmore Leonard 295 pages.
Delacorte Press. $20.
In his latest Spenser thriller, "Pastime," Robert B. Parker continues the return to form he displayed in his previous two outings, "Playmates" and "Stardust." This time Spenser, the tough-guy private eye from Boston, has to help out Paul Giacomin, an older version of the troubled teen-ager Spenser rescued from a bad divorce in Mr.
Parker's earlier novel "Early Autumn."


Stocks Stable in Tokyo
Japanese stocks showed little change today after posting sharp gains on Wednesday.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues gained 35.24 points, or 0.15 percent, to close at 23,332.71.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei surged 538.49 points, or 2.37 percent.


French Company Withdraws Drug as an AIDS Treatment
A French company said today that it was withdrawing the controversial AIDS drug Imuthiol after unfavorable tests.
A senior executive of the company, Institut Merieux International, said the latest study of patients treated with Imuthiol showed no benefits.
But he also said the drug produced no harmful effects.


Silver Hits 11-Week Low As Recession Fears Grow
Silver prices fell yesterday to their lowest level in more than 11 weeks, as renewed recession fears and a lack of inflation prompted heavy selling of futures contracts on the Commodity Exchange in New York.
Silver futures settled 27.6 cents to 32 cents lower, with the contract for delivery in July down 27.6 cents at $3.984 an ounce, the lowest settlement of a near-term silver contract since May 3.


Edward K. Bryant, Engineer, 89
Edward K. Bryant, a retired partner in the engineering firm of Tippetts-Abbett-McCarthy-Stratton, died on Monday in Washington.
He was 89 years old and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Bonds Rally on Durables Report
A surprising drop in June durable-goods orders was greeted warmly in the credit markets yesterday, and prices of Treasury notes and bonds rallied on the news.
The decline, the first in three months, "changes the probabilities that the economic rebound is as vigorous as the Fed thinks," said John Eckstein, an executive vice president at Yamaichi Securities.


I.B.M. Introduces Supercomputer
I.B.M. introduced a scientific supercomputer yesterday that is the first fruit of a previously secret "skunk works" team set up to speed the company's notoriously slow process of turning technological advances into salable products.
The world's largest computer maker has been under attack for marketing new systems long after much smaller companies have introduced similar products.
So in January 1989, the International Business Machines Corporation created a company within a company, bringing together a handful of computer designers and scientists and giving them their own independent management and venture financing, much like a Silicon Valley start-up.


Last-Minute Offer to Buy Businessland
The Computerland Corporation, a leading computer store chain, made a last-minute offer today to acquire Businessland Inc., which is in the process of being sold to another company.
Businessland said its board continued to recommend that shareholders and bondholders accept an offer from JWP Inc.
Saying the company wanted a friendly deal, a Computerland spokesman said it would wait to see what happened with the JWP offer, which expires on Friday.


Comex Seeks Computer
Commodity Exchange Inc., the world's largest gold and silver exchange, is negotiating with several computer and electronics companies to develop a hand-held computer for recording trades.
The hardware would consist of a hand-held terminal for each floor trader, which would communicate with a base-station computer, the exchange, based in New York, said this week.
The base station, which would receive and transmit trading information, would also feed the exchange's clearing system, the Comex said.


President Out At Selectronics
Selectronics Inc., a developer and manufacturer of hand-held electronic Bibles and other reference products, said yesterday that its president and chief operating officer, James Finke, had resigned.
Mr.
Finke was hired last year to expand the company's retail business, but Selectronics has since been restructured to focus on contracts with a few big distributors.


Rev. Hozen Seki, Is Dead at 87; Leader of Buddhists in New York
The Rev.
Hozen Seki, founder of the New York Buddhist Church, died on Saturday at Maui Memorial Hospital in Hawaii.
He was 87 years old and had lived in Lahaina on Maui since he retired in 1983 as minister of the church.
He died of a massive heart attack, his family said.


People
*
C.
Henry Foltz has been appointed to the newly created posts of president and chief operating officer at Liggett-Stashower Inc., Cleveland.
He had previously been executive vice president and account group director.
Thomas S. Case, chief creative director, and Edmund M. Kagay, director of graphic services, have been named vice chairmen. *
Peter B. Himler has been named senior vice president and media director in the New York office of Cohn &amp; Wolfe, an Atlanta-based public relations agency.
He had previously been vice president and media director.


For a Japanese Palazzo
"A HIGH-TECH monastery" is how Joseph Lembo describes Angelo Pietro, the 3,000-square-foot pizza and pasta restaurant in Fukuoka, Japan, that he designed for the Pietro Company.
To supply what Mr.
Lembo and his partner, Laura Bohn, called "an interesting twist," three people from Art and Construction, a New York company, traveled to Fukuoka, on the island of Kyushu, to cover the walls with plaster befitting an Italian palazzo.


CHRONICLE
The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation has announced that Prof.
SARA LAWRENCE LIGHTFOOT of the Harvard University Graduate School of Education has been appointed to its board.
The Chicago foundation is best known for its "genius grants" to people of unusual promise and accomplishment.
The grants, now typically several hundred thousand dollars per recipient over five years, may be used as recipients see fit.


Officers to Guard Token-Booth Shift Changes
To protect subway token-booth clerks from crime, transit police officers will be present when the clerks change shifts under a plan worked out this week by the Mayor, the police and a union leader.
The new policy was prompted by several recent attacks on token-booth clerks.


Events: Images of Life, From Cradle to Grave
Everyday Images Newark Museum, 49 Washington Street (Central Avenue), Newark; (201) 596-6550.
"Folk Art: Works on Paper," an exhibition of portraits, decorative pictures, birth certificates and mourning paintings, will be at the museum through Aug. 25.
Hours: noon to 5 P.M.
Wednesday through Sunday.
Free admission.


Bush Urges Congress to Pass Energy Plan
With the Bush Administration's national energy strategy facing a tough time in the Senate and just undergoing examination by subcommittees in the House, the White House held a pep rally today to push for its enactment.
Five months after President Bush introduced the strategy during the Persian Gulf war, it seems the war did more to create a desire for a policy than to settle the deep division over many issues in the President's proposal.
Lawmakers and energy experts are reluctant to predict how the legislation will emerge from the House and Senate, and whether Congress will produce a law the President will be willing to sign.
Endorses Senate Bill
Speaking today to about 200 energy company executives and state and local officials in the Old Executive Office Building, President Bush again endorsed a bill proposed by Senator J. Bennett Johnston, the Louisiana Democrat who is chairman of the Energy Committee, and Malcolm Wallop, the Wyoming Republican who is the committee's ranking minority member.
But Mr.
Johnston said, "This is a big bill with a lot of disparate parts, and it's got a long way to go." He said Congress would eventually pass legislation, however.


Citicorp Sees Flat '91 Profit
Profits at Citicorp this year will "barely" exceed the depressed level of 1990, John S. Reed, the banking company's chairman, said yesterday.
Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, earned $458 million in 1990, but only $113 million in the first half of this year.
Mr.
Reed has warned that problems with bad loans will continue to depress profits over the next several quarters.


Belzbergs in Offer On First City Debt
The Belzberg family of Canada has presented a plan to give up control of the First City Financial Corporation, the core of its $6 billion empire, to satisfy the company's European creditors.
The proposal asks holders of $139 million in bonds to convert them into equity.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about stock trading on Tuesday referred incorrectly to the earnings and stock price of Quaker Oats.
The company did not report second-quarter earnings yesterday; it will do so in early August.
The company's stock on Tuesday rose 50 cents, to $59 a share; it did not fall $4.125.
Tuesday was the first day of trading for Quaker Oats without its Fisher Price unit, which was spun off.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE joys and freedom of summer carry special dangers for children.
A few of the hazards, like drowning and heat stroke, are clearly related to the season.
Others, like delinquency, drug abuse and sexual activity, are less obviously seasonal.
Psychology researchers and child-safety experts have found patterns among children who get in trouble at this time of year.
They have also discovered relatively simple ways parents can protect their children.


Accounts
*
Asiana Airlines, Seoul, South Korea, to Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, for its North American account.
The agency listed billings at $3 million. *
Fila Footwear U.S.A., a subsidiary of the Italian company Fila Sport S.p.A., to Blakeslee Group, Baltimore.
The agency said the account, with billings of $2.5 million, is for back-to-school advertising.


Pop in Review
Geri Allen Trio
Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street Through Sunday
On the jazz piano family tree, Geri Allen prefers the branch that started with Thelonious Monk and extends to Herbie Nichols, Andrew Hill, Paul Bley and Randy Weston.
Monk and his individualistic heirs traded the steady-swinging sense of jazz time for music that moves in sprints and pauses, leaping ahead and then ruminating over new surroundings; they also bent ordinary chords into clusters, or shattered them into ambiguous shards, subverting and sometimes ignoring tonal harmony.


More New York Talent Going to Chicago
FOR the second time in eight months, J. Walter Thompson Chicago has turned to New York to find a top executive.
This time, the agency said that it had chosen Nina DiSesa, a senior vice president and deputy creative director of McCann-Erickson New York, as its new executive vice president and executive creative director.


CHRONICLE
Gen.
H.
NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF was decorated by the French Government and made an honorary member of the fabled French Foreign Legion yesterday at the Legion's headquarters near Marseilles.
In a gesture honoring General Schwarzkopf's leadership of French and other allied forces in the Persian Gulf war, Gen.
MAURICE SCHMITT, France's Chief of Staff during the war, presented him with the medal of Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor.


Overeager Stadium Fan Thwarts Maas's Bid to End 10-Day Slump
The ball rocketed off Kevin Maas's bat and looked like it might end his hitless streak in splendid fashion.
It sailed higher and higher into the night air and creeped toward the right field seats.
A home run would be the perfect way for Maas to break a streak that had gone on too long.
Seattle's Jay Buhner drifted back to the fence and sized up the ball while Maas prayed for it to find a fan in the seats.


Review/Theater; A Long Conversation With a Captive Audience
Itzik Manger, who died in 1969, was a major Yiddish poet, but his significance is not easy to grasp in Miriam Hoffman's rushed, confusing play, "A Rendezvous With God," at the John Houseman Studio Theater.
The 65-minute appreciation, which stars Avi Hoffman as Manger, is a melange of songs, poems and unfunny comic shtick that has a homey atmosphere but is too scattered to cast much light on Manger's writing or on his life.
In the play's opening moments, Manger wanders onto the stage with a bottle of pink wine, plunks himself down at a table and embarks on a one-sided conversation with God, announcing to his maker that he's going to tell "what it's like to be a Yiddish poet on this side of paradise." By the end of the show, Manger who describes himself as "a loser and a boozer" has drained the bottle and seems mildly tipsy.


Shanahan Leaves Devils
BRENDAN SHANAHAN, the Devils' third-leading scorer last season with 29 goals and 37 assists for 66 points, has been signed as a free agent by the St.
Louis Blues.
The 22-year-old right wing, a first-round draft choice of New Jersey in 1987, was a Type 1 free agent, meaning compensation must be agreed upon by the clubs or by an arbitrator.
In four seasons with the Devils, Shanahan averaged 22 goals and 31 assists. . . .
RON SMITH, the Rangers' assistant coach the last two seasons, will be named head coach of their Binghamton (N.Y.) farm club today.
He will replace JOHN PADDOCK, who left the Binghamton Rangers to become head coach of the Winnipeg Jets.


Carter Hawley Allows Zell/Chilmark's Offer
Carter Hawley Hale Stores, the West Coast's largest operator of department stores, said yesterday that its board had authorized an investor to begin a tender offer for Carter Hawley's outstanding claims and to provide financing to hasten the company's removal from voluntary bankruptcy.
Carter Hawley, which filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code in February, said the Zell/Chilmark Fund, a limited partnership based in Chicago, would soon begin a cash offer to buy for 40 percent of face value two issues of Carter Hawley notes and bonds and almost all its unsecured or vendor trade claims.
The debt issues are 12.25 percent senior subordinated notes due in 1996 and 12.5 percent senior subordinated debentures due in 2002.


Bayard G. Schaeffer, Retail Executive, 64
Bayard G. Schaeffer, a former vice president of Saks Fifth Avenue, died at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital on Tuesday.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a long bout with Parkinson's disease, a spokesman for the family said.


Baseball; Griffey Enjoys Clobbering Yankees
Ken Griffey Jr. flashed three queens to a couple of teammates last night in the visitors' clubhouse before the game, good enough to win another hand of Low Hole Roll Your Own.
"A little like poker," he said.
The Seattle Mariners' center fielder couldn't wait to put the cards down and get started.
He couldn't have been more disappointed when he suffered a slight knee injury in the third inning, then had to take a seat on the bench and watch his teammates lose, 10-2, to the despised Yankees.


Columbus Bequeathed Us the Idea of America; A Dark Record
To the Editor:
Karl E. Meyer's Editorial Notebook of June 27, in its defense of the European invasion of the Americas, attacks my book "The Conquest of Paradise" (not "The Discovery of Paradise") and its less than hagiographic treatment of Christopher Columbus.
I do not dismiss Columbus as "an incompetent bumbler" in my pages, though I do remark he was exceedingly careless in protecting his ships and lost five of the seven he captained on his two major voyages.
My book goes to great lengths to show that cruelty and violence were, as Mr.
Meyer says, "common currency" in all European nations; I spent a chapter solely on the dismal side of the English settlement of Jamestown to make that point.
"The Conquest of Paradise," despite Mr.
Meyer's suggestion, was written to indict not Columbus, the Spanish or the Roman Catholic nations, but the thoroughgoing evils of the culture of Europe as a whole, whose enthusiastic inheritors we Americans have been.
I protest strongly against his notion that a disparagement of the European record "travesties history." I have spent many years in a careful study of that record, seven of them for this book (whose historical accuracy has been widely recognized), and I have come to believe that the record is almost unrelievedly dark in ways that conventional patriots simply do not understand.
For example, Mr.
Meyer may regard societies based on Europe's competitive "individual rights" as superior to those, like the nonstate Indian tribes, based on communitarian cohesion.
I do not, and I challenge him to compare one day the long experience of such primal communities against his precious individualistic states to determine which is the more harmonious, peaceful, benign and content.
KIRKPATRICK SALE  New York, July 2, 1991


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about fiber optics misstated the size of a Bell Communications Research video screen known as Video Window.
It is eight feet wide, not eight feet high.
Because of a production error, several lines were misplaced in the continuation of the article.
The affected paragraphs should have read:


Golf; Amid Gripes and Groans, 2 Manage to Calm Course
There were no storms to disrupt the Michelob New York State Open today, but there were obstacles.
The Monster, the Concord Hotel course that would make a recreational golfer shiver, had most of the best professionals and amateurs in the state talking to themselves.
The 54-hole tournament, interrupted by severe weather Tuesday, continued today with scores soaring, players complaining, and some predicting that even-par would bring home the $10,000 first prize in this $65,000 event.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
American Medical Electronics Inc., Dallas, a maker of medical equipment, received commercial marketing approval from the Food and Drug Administration for new equipment to treat hip fractures. *
Ashland Oil Inc., Ashland, Ky., sold the assets of its Cleveland Tankers Inc. subsidiary, a private American shipping company.
Terms were not disclosed.


INSIDE
Delay in Cranston Case
A senator with a possible conflict of interest withdrew from the Ethics Committee's consideration of action on Senator Alan Cranston.
Page A18.


St. John's Juror Believes Woman Consented to Sex
One of the jurors who acquitted three suspended St.
John's University students on Tuesday of sexually assaulting a female student said yesterday that he believed that she had given her consent, "one way or another," to the sexual activity.
The juror said he and other members of the Queens jury had rejected one of the prosecution's central contentions: that the defendants had pressured her to drink so much liquor that she became incapacitated and was incapable of giving consent.


Soviet Aide Rejects Questions on Arms Left in East Europe
The Soviet Foreign Ministry today shrugged off the Bush Administration's concern over missile systems remaining in Eastern Europe, calling it "an ancient issue."
The Foreign Ministry spokesman, Vitaly I. Churkin, asked why the White House raised questions about the Soviet-supplied missiles just before a superpower summit meeting: "Why, why now?"


Columbus Bequeathed Us the Idea of America
To the Editor:
As an immigrant of 50 years ago, I find myself disturbed by the unabating controversy over the historical legitimacy of celebrating the 500th anniversary of the discovery of America ("Columbus Was Not Eichmann," Editorial Notebook by Karl E. Meyer, June 27), because it only spoils the fun and sows a wholly unwarranted self-consciousness in approaching the occasion.
As a historian, I am alarmed by the irrelevancy of the objections and what strikes me as a conceptual confusion.
The debate was largely set off by a book full of ponderous, but frequently farfetched learning and tendentious argumentation, Kirkpatrick Sale's "The Conquest of Paradise," which argues that the discoveries, viewed from a non-Western perspective, amounted to a brutal imperialist venture, as harmful to America's natural environment as it was to Indian cultural identity.
The debate has focused on Columbus, trying to debunk his status as a historical symbol.
What is at stake is no less than America's historical identity.
One need not be a conservative, but feel committed to the most vital liberal tradition, to view these revisionist ideas as basically gratuitous challenges to whatever is unique about America's cultural personality and historical essence.
One might even agree that the discoveries were substantially a Western achievement and that one of their side effects was to give a powerful boost to modern European imperialism, and still remain firmly convinced that their total impact was to further the freedom of the modern individual on a worldwide scale.
But none of these objections can shake certain fundamental facts:
American civilization, in a way that has no parallel in history, is the result of a continuous creative process by the people of the world, mostly of the lower classes, who have projected their individual dreams into its making.
That this infinitely manifold dream has not only been the motivation of the American immigrants and their descendants but is still passionately nourished around the globe is brought home by such seemingly irrational manifestations as the rebellious Chinese students' placing a replica of the Statue of Liberty in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Neither the significance nor the dramatic scope of this singular relationship between America and the world's people can be properly gauged unless one appreciates the power of ideas in history.
The idea of America is undeniably a myth, a colossal collective delusion that insists on surviving after 500 years despite the inevitable disenchantments of immigrants and the innumerable disappointments over America's political behavior in the outside world.
Columbus has always provoked controversy precisely because he was driven by irrational myth, that is, his oft-repeated conviction that he was looking for (or had found) the Garden of Eden.
Although he shared this amazing concept with the great majority of people in his time -- the Earthly Paradise appears on otherwise sober maps of the day -- it stamps him as an inadequately educated man of the people, way behind the humanist sophistication of his age.
Yet it was his unparallelled achievement, and that of other European discoverers, to have opened the gates to the dreamland of the world's people.
THOMAS E. GOLDSTEIN  New York, July 7, 1991
The writer, emeritus professor of history at City College, is a past president of the Society for the History of Discoveries.


Mr. D'Amato Gets Reckless on Crime
Senator Alfonse D'Amato reacts angrily to Federal judges who don't like his amendments to the crime bill just passed by the Senate.
If they won't accept his approach, he says, they "should find another line of work." Despite his bluster, the judges have the better arguments.
Now it's up to the House to eliminate measures that offend rational sentencing and the proper balance of state and Federal responsibility.
One amendment would establish Federal jurisdiction over most murders committed with guns and allow death as punishment.
The second would impose mandatory minimum Federal sentences of 10 to 30 years for the use of guns in violent or drug trafficking crimes.
Federal judges worry that since Mr.
D'Amato's amendments provide for no additional resources, new jurisdiction over thousands of crimes now handled by states would quickly overwhelm Federal courts and prisons.
That's possible, though Federal prosecutors retain discretion to leave cases to the states if the load grows too heavy.
More important, the mandatory minimums flout the carefully crafted sentencing guidelines used by Federal courts since 1987.
The guidelines supplanted the old system that allowed parole boards broad discretion to decide how much time a prisoner would actually serve.
Under the guidelines, judges impose fixed terms according to formulas that allow finely tuned sentences, taking account of the seriousness of the offense and the convict's level of involvement and willingness to cooperate.
Mr.
D'Amato's measure violates the spirit of that system.
It would, for example, mandate 10 years for the low-level drug seller caught with a gun in his pocket, even if willing to testify against a more substantial "kingpin." That invites cynical plea bargaining and other fudging that the guidelines were designed to inhibit.
The amendments would also trample on state prerogatives for no good reason.
Mr.
D'Amato's death penalty and Draconian prison terms, offered with no additional financing for Federal law enforcement, would have little effect on crime control.
The gun-toting hoodlums at war with each other in urban neighborhoods would still have much more to fear from each other than from official prosecution.
Meanwhile, perpetrators of domestic violence and hapless petty thieves normally dealt with in state courts could be subjected to crushing Federal punishments on a prosecutor's whim.
Public frustration with crime needs to be addressed, but not in ways that violate common sense -- and not for the sake of a Senator's grandstanding.


Male Fortress Falls at Yale: Bonesmen to Admit Women
As bastion-falling goes, this is some fall.
Forced to choose between Bonesmen who are women and no Bonesmen at all, the alumni of Yale University's Skull and Bones -- which fancies itself the nation's most influential fraternity -- have voted to admit women.
Behind the thick stone walls of their windowless fortress in New Haven, separated from the hoi polloi by a padlocked iron door, a supersecret all-male committee of this supersecret all-male society will decide in the next few weeks how to switch to coeducation.
Sidney Lovett, the secretary of the association that runs Skull and Bones, said yesterday that a timetable would probably be worked out by the time the new school year starts in the fall.
And so women will go where none has ever gone before, if all the old Skull and Bones stories are to be believed.
Whether people tapped for membership -- who are widely rumored to go through such initiation rituals as lying in a coffin and recounting their sexual pasts -- will henceforth be known as Bonespersons, Mr.
Lovett would not say.


Studies Say Women Fail to Receive Equal Treatment for Heart Disease
Two new studies show that doctors treat women with heart disease less aggressively than they treat men.
Experts said the studies, which involved tens of thousands of patients, offered the first irrefutable evidence of sex differences in the way the condition was treated.


As U.S. Struggles to Restart Colorado Bomb Plant, Critics Question Its Need
As the Department of Energy struggles to reopen the first part of its nuclear weapons plant at Rocky Flats in two months, questions have been raised not only over whether the plant is ready to be reopened, but whether it is even necessary.
The questions arise in part because a new arms control treaty with the Soviet Union is expected to sharply reduce the need for nuclear weapons.
The age of the Rocky Flats plant near Denver has also cast doubt on the wisdom of massive new investments there.


Washington at Work; Summit Meetings, Past and Present, Are Grist to an American Historian
The practice of diplomatic history requires reading and rereading all previous books on an era, examining thousands of pages of documents, and relentlessly requesting authorities to release more.
Then, says Michael R. Beschloss, "you think very hard about whether you would reach different conclusions from what the people who came before you thought."


Strong Overseas Sales Lift McDonald's Profits
The McDonald's Corporation, the world's largest restaurant chain, reported yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose 8 percent, to $232 million, or 63 cents a share.
That compared with profits of $215.8 million, or 59 cents a share, a year earlier.
McDonald's is embroiled in a domestic price war with competitors, and much of the rise in the second quarter came from strong foreign sales.
But analysts said the earnings were more sluggish than they had expected.


Brewer Dismisses Takeover Rumor
Heineken N.V., the Dutch brewer, said there was no evidence that Philip Morris, Anehuser-Busch and Procter &amp; Gamble were interested in its shares, despite rumors that the companies were planning a takeover.


Grumman and Marietta Earnings Gain
Two military contractors, the Martin Marietta Corporation and the Grumman Corporation, have reported higher second-quarter earnings despite a drop in revenue.
Martin Marietta said yesterday that expense reductions and more sales of higher-margin products helped lift income 3.6 percent.
Grumman, which released earnings on Tuesday, also attributed some of its 11 percent earnings increase to cost-cutting and higher margins.


Bridge
Several thousand bridge players are converging on Las Vegas today for the start of the Summer National Championships, which will last 10 days.
Some are already there, fighting in the final stages of the Grand National Team Championship, but most will enter the lists tomorrow, either in the Life Master Pairs or in the International Fund Game.
The latter, which helps subsidize American representatives in international competition, will be played tomorrow night at the following clubs in the New York metropolitan area: Manhattan: Beverly, 130 East 57th Street; Riverside, 490 Riverside Drive; Manhattan, 23 West 73d Street.


Gasoline at Low Price, But Benefits May Fade
A year after Saddam Hussein sent tanks into Kuwait and fear and anger into the hearts of American motorists, the price storm is over and the cost of gasoline is at historic lows, when inflation is taken into account.
A new study by Cambridge Energy Research Associates concluded that the pretax price at the pump is now the lowest since 1947, after adjusting for inflation.
Even with a one-third increase in recent years in Federal and state taxes, which now average 36 cents a gallon, gasoline today is only about 8 cents a gallon higher than it was in 1988.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.53
5.63
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.59
5.58
7.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.71
5.70
7.47
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.04
8.08
8.42
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.37
8.41
8.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.35
9.42
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.12
7.13
7.39
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Film; Kathleen Turner As Private Eye
WHEN the initials on the smoked-glass door actually mean Vicki and the shoes up on the desk are high heels, things are bound to be a little different.
They certainly are for V. I. Warshawski, the latest and slinkiest of this summer's dangerous movie heroines.
As the central figure in a series of detective novels by Sara Paretsky, Victoria Iphigenia Warshawski is an anomaly among private investigators, a wisecracking feminist who turns the unlikeliness of her career choice into a clear advantage.
As played slyly and wittily by Kathleen Turner, she has now become as sexy as she is smart.
It's too bad that "V. I. Warshawski" is itself a lot less glamorous than Ms.
Turner's performance, since the character could easily be the centerpiece of a more appealing film.
Directed by Jeff Kanew ("Revenge of the Nerds," "Troop Beverly Hills") and acted by a no-star supporting cast (Charles Durning is one of the few familiar-looking actors), this film, set in Chicago, provides a cut-rate setting for a character who could just as reasonably have been given the full "Dick Tracy" treatment.
Still, "V. I. Warshawski" has a breezy style and a serviceable, even surprising detective plot.
And it has Ms.
Turner, who makes the most of V. I. Warshawski's sardonic humor.


At the Bar; With Two Lawyers on the Management Team, the Mets Go into the Baseball Record Books.
In some ways, it is altogether fitting and proper that Shea Stadium is the only major league ballpark named after a lawyer.
For the New York Mets who play there are apparently the only team in baseball run by two law school graduates.
Of course, baseball has always had its share of lawyers.
For whatever it's worth, at least three managers who won World Series -- Miller Huggins, Branch Rickey, and Tony LaRussa -- had legal training.
The Commissioner of Baseball, Fay Vincent, is a lawyer, as were three previous commissioners, Bowie Kuhn, A. B. (Happy) Chandler and Kennesaw Mountain Landis.


Art in Review
'Imagenes Liricas: New Spanish Visions' Queens Museum of Art Flushing Meadows-Corona Park Through Sept. 8
This exhibition highlights a serious and engaging strain in contemporary Spanish painting.
It includes the work of eight artists, most of whom belong to a generation that was born into the closed society of Francisco Franco's regime but that matured in the atmosphere of openness following his death in 1975.
These artists do not take for granted that modernism is a thing of the past or something to be treated ironically.
Most of their works are abstract, although leavened with references to objects, figures and landscape.
The pervasive tone is not high-key (like the films of Pedro Almodovar or the installations of Antoni Miralda), but cool, meditative, distant.
Colors are dusky, surfaces elaborately calibrated.


Credit Markets; Lilco Prices Bonds To Yield 9.78%
The Long Island Lighting Company priced $375 million in general and refunding mortgage bonds yesterday, through an underwriting group led by Lehman Brothers.
The Lilco bonds, noncallable for the first five years, will be due in July 2024.
They are rated Baa-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BBB- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, a spokesman for Lehman said.


Insurers' Debt Rated Lower
Reflecting the hard times hitting the nation's insurance industry, Moody's Investors Service Inc. lowered the ratings of four more insurance companies yesterday, citing troubled mortgage and real estate investments.
It was the second time in a week that Moody's downgraded insurers.


House Bill Carries Something for All
Today was delivery day on Capitol Hill, a day that lawmakers live for and get re-elected for.
The House Public Works and Transportation Committee approved a $153.5 billion, five-year transportation bill that includes $6.8 billion for more than 400 assorted projects for House members in their districts.


Economic Scene; Mixed Benefits From Recycling
RECYCLING has moved into the same league as motherhood, the flag and apple pie.
A poll taken last year by the Roper Organization found that 74 percent of those who answered favored mandatory recycling to ease environmental problems.
But solid-waste disposal problems vary widely across the country.
Embracing one disposal method over others may increase costs without necessarily providing environmental benefits.
It is certainly true that when thrown-away materials are recovered and turned into new products, there are several benefits.
Obviously, that much less material is going to overburdened landfills.
Re-use also eliminates the need to mine or harvest virgin materials, and since reprocessing usually involves less pollution than extraction and refining, the earth benefits in this way as well.
Some materials, largely metals, have been recovered for years.
A sophisticated network of dealers and processors collects the steel in old cars and industrial projects and sells it to mills as a raw material.
Aluminum-can makers have promoted the re-use of beverage containers because they save vastly on electricity consumption, compared to using raw ore.
But other materials have not fared so well.
Old newspapers have piled up for lack of equipment to de-ink and repulp them into new paper.
Plastics come in a multiplicity of chemical formulations, which must be separated to be of much use.
Markets for most recycled plastics have been slow to develop as well.
To promote recycling, 38 states have enacted a variety of product bans, mandates, taxes and tax incentives.
Now, with the Federal law that governs solid waste, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, due for reauthorization, some environmentalists are pushing for national standards.
They would insist that a broad variety of materials and products contain a certain percentage of material recycled from trash bins.
But many economists argue that such rules would be wrong.
Recycling may make economic sense in highly populated areas where landfill fees have been rising.
But in some parts of the country, landfill space is abundant and cheap, and reprocessing plants are nonexistent.
These people would be better off dumping and using the money saved for other worthy purposes, if there is no threat to the environment.
"Mandated recycling in some circumstances would make sense if conserving landfill space were the only policy goal," wrote Lynn Scarlett, of the conservative Reason Foundation, in a study on solid waste.
"But such efforts may consume more overall resources (environmental and commercial) than if waste were simply landfilled."
Still, environmental groups see a Federal mandate as essential to develop recycling industries.
"For more than 20 years, environmentalists have sought such a mandate on the grounds that recycling conserves resources, saves energy and is fiscally prudent," said Allen Hershkowitz, a scientist at the Natural Resources Defense Council.
An effort to reconcile the two positions is included in a report, "Project 88-Round 2," drafted by Robert N. Stavins, a professor at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.
The report is significant because its predecessor, issued in 1988 at the behest of Senators Timothy E. Wirth and John Heinz, had an important influence on the Clean Air Act passed last year.
The Clean Air Act allows generators of acid rain gases to trade credits, allowing the emission of a certain amount of pollutants.
This is intended to encourage the company that can curb pollution at the least cost to do so and sell its credits to companies where cleanup costs would be higher.
The argument is that this is the lowest-cost approach to reducing the desired amount of pollution.
The current report would take a similar approach, using tradable permits as part of a general trend toward using market techniques to achieve environmental goals.
"Under such a system," the report says, "the Federal Government could set an industrywide recycling rate (or recycled content standard) which individual firms could meet in one of two ways: they could use the required percentage of secondary materials or they could use fewer secondary materials and buy permits from other firms which exceed their recycling requirements."
This approach would increase the demand, and presumably the price, of recycled materials without forcing companies that are unable to use them to make expensive alterations to their production processes.
As markets for recycled materials develop, generators of solid waste will have to do some calculations.
Do the prices being offered justify the cost of collection and separation, minus the cost of dumping in a fully approved, environmentally sound landfill?
For some, the answer will be to recycle.
But for others, dumping will make more sense.


Accounts
*
Hotels of America Reservations Service Inc., New York, to Burkhardt &amp; Christy Advertising, New York.
The new service operates an 800 number that provides assistance finding accommodations at about 15,000 hotels.
An agency spokesman said the account's billings were $3 million to $4 million for a first-year print campaign.
The following year, the spokesman said, the campaign is to expand to broadcast spots, and billings are to rise to $5 million to $6 million. *
In Health, a Time Warner magazine formerly known as Hippocrates, to Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.
The agency said the account had previously been handled by Cox Advertising, New York. *
The government of the Soviet Republic of Georgia to John Adams Associates Inc., Washington, to establish an information center in Washington and to act as liaison with the Federal Government.
The firm will also assist with marketing and tourism public relations.
Billings were not disclosed.


Traffic Alert
Park Avenue Street Fair: Park Avenue South will be closed Sunday from 17th to 23d Street from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.


House Democrats Unveil Crime Bill
House Democratic leaders, moving to redefine the national debate on law and order by focusing on prevention instead of punishment, today unveiled an $850 million anticrime package that would direct Federal money to local and state governments.
The bill would provide money to hire police officers to walk beats, funnel $300 million to states that have disproportionately high levels of drug-related crime and try to reduce the number of repeat criminals by expanding drug treatment for prisoners and by creating boot camps in state prisons.


Take Women's Health to Heart
For years, feminists have complained that the male-dominated medical profession gives short shrift to the ailments of women.
And now a flurry of articles in leading medical journals suggests they may well be right -- at least in part.
Two new studies of heart disease, reported in The New England Journal of Medicine, documented a widespread pattern of treating women less aggressively than men.
And a report from the American Medical Association found similar discrepancies in kidney transplants and lung cancer.
The apparent bias requires a stronger Federal commitment to women's medical problems and a revolution in physicians' attitudes.


The United Way for New York Is Shifting Gears
Conditions in New York have become so desperate, the United Way says, that its once-a-year fund-raising appeal is no longer enough.
Now it is embarking on its first-ever summer appeal, and experimenting with fund-raising techniques that it has never tried before.


New Jersey Acts to End School Chiefs' Tenure
The State Senate gave overwhelming final approval today to a bill eliminating career tenure for school superintendents in New Jersey, the only state that guaranteed superintendents their jobs for life.
The measure, passed 25 to 6, now goes to Gov.
Jim Florio.
The Governor, who has argued that schools must be made more accountable for their policies and spending, made elimination of superintendent tenure a legislative goal in his State of the State address in January.


A Concert Saluting Korean Music
The Brooklyn Philharmonic Chamber Ensemble will present a free concert saluting Korean music and musicians at 8 P.M. tomorrow at the Prospect Park Band Shell, Prospect Park West and Ninth Street, in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn.


Public Needs, Answered Privately
Voluntary taxation sounds like a contradiction in terms, but programs financed by taxes that businesses impose on themselves are making significant improvements in many American cities.
The latest addition to this trend is New York City's 17th Business Improvement District.
Approved by Mayor David Dinkins this week, it was created to upgrade Times Square.
There are now more than 1,000 business improvement districts nationwide.
Member businesses promise to pay special, continuing surcharges on their real property tax bills to finance local improvements.


On Any Given Sunday, Possible Harassment
Tonight, with Zeke Mowatt on the Giants and Lisa Olson in Australia, the National Football League's exhibition (pun intended) season begins.
Zeke and Lisa are both struggling for professional recognition and personal stability, but that's where the similarity ends.
Don't forget that Zeke was the perpetrator and Lisa the victim of a disturbing incident that occurred 10 months ago in the New England Patriots' locker room, and is still widely discussed and largely unresolved.
"We call it the Zeke Mowatt incident," said Michele Himmelberg, a founder and past president of the Association for Women in Sports Media (the acronym is pronounced "Awesome"), which discussed the issue at a convention this week in Newport Beach, Calif.
"Somehow, it got turned into the Lisa Olson incident, as if she was the one who caused it."


General Dynamics
The General Dynamics Corporation. said it had leased a building in Falls Church, Va., about 10 miles west of Washington, as its new headquarters.
The military supplier said it had signed a 10-year lease for about 87,000 square feet in the Fairview Park office development.
It plans to complete its move from its suburban St.
Louis headquarters, which it has occupied since 1971, in November.


Cost Cutting by Goodyear Helps Return to Profitability
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, which has in recent months sharply reduced its work force in an effort to regain profitability, yesterday reported second-quarter net income of $22.5 million, or 38 cents a share, compared with a net loss of $9.4 million in the year-earlier period.
The earnings improvement was largely the result of cost cutting and came in the face of a 2.8 percent drop in tire sales, the company said.
Sales for the quarter slipped 3 percent, to $2.79 billion, from $2.87 billion in the second quarter of last year.


Northern Telecom
Northern Telecom Ltd. said it would supply $120 million Canadian ($104 million United States) worth of telephone equipment to Poland and plans to open a plant there by 1992.
The Toronto-based telecommunications company also plans to set up a joint venture with a Polish company to manufacture, install and service equipment.


Algeria in Ferment -- A Special Report.; In Algeria, Hope for Democracy but Not Economy
Algeria is in a state of turmoil -- some call it a revolution -- that is tearing apart the country's once solid socialist political fabric and plunging it into economic decline.
The drastic changes under way, however, include an astonishing flowering of political diversity that is sweeping aside 29 years of one-party rule by the National Liberation Front in this nation of 25 million, which became independent from France in 1962.


Shamir's Stance Calms Hard-Liners
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's tough stand against dealing with Palestinians from East Jerusalem and his refusal to make any territorial concessions has satisfied hard-line members of his coalition, who have dropped their threats to quit his Government.
Officially, the Israeli Government is awaiting a list that Jordan is to submit to the United States of Palestinians who could take part in the proposed peace conference.
In the meantime, Mr.
Shamir and his aides are holding intense discussions with members of the small right-wing parties in the governing coalition.
They have expressed the sharpest objections to Mr.
Shamir's offer to attend the peace conference if his concerns about the Palestinian delegation are met.


Review/Fashion; 2 Veterans Defy Tides of Change
In the end, the establishment triumphed over the infidels.
Hubert de Givenchy and Valentino Garavani upheld the couture tradition with lavish shows that spelled out luxury, gentility and familiarity in clothes that offended nobody.
Couture clients were not distracted by efforts to extend the frontiers of fashion and cheered happily.
The iconoclasts who had tried to find a new focus for made-to-order clothes, taking over the experimental role assumed by ready-to-wear producers in the last decade or two, had made their move early in the week.
Now it was the turn of the established houses to insist all was right with the couture world.


F.D.I.C. Sues Officials Of Failed Texas Bank
Federal regulators filed a lawsuit late on Thursday against the former directors and officers of the failed First Republicbank Corporation, seeking at least $100 million for their involvement in the nation's largest bank failure.
Alan Whitney, a spokesman for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in Washington, said the agency's law firm in Dallas filed the lawsuit on Thursday afternoon but gave few other details.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8
A new Communist Party charter that rejects some of the party's most hallowed principles, even the sanctity of Marxism-Leninism, was proposed by President Gorbachev, throwing his lot with reformers.
Page A1


Schwarzkopf Visits Britain


Man in Courthouse Shooting Is Acquitted
Last Jan. 22, Jose Dominguez was, he says, a man deep in grief and deep in fear -- grief for his murdered son and fear that he and his other son would soon be killed, too.
So on that windy morning he climbed the steps of the Bronx County Courthouse and waited in anger for Jose Roman.
He waited with a gun.
And when Mr.
Roman, the man accused of killing his son, emerged, Mr.
Dominguez pulled out a .38-caliber revolver, shot him in the back and fled.


A Storyteller on the Truth of Fiction
I wandered over the land, and good people did not neglect me.
After many years I became old and white; I heard a great deal, many lies and falsehoods, but the longer I lived the more I understood that there were really no lies.
Whatever doesn't really happen is dreamed at night.
It happens to one if it doesn't happen to another, tomorrow if not today, or a century hence if not next year.
What difference can it make?
Often I heard tales of which I said, "Now this is a thing that cannot happen." But before a year had elapsed I heard that it actually had come to pass somewhere.
Going from place to place, eating at strange tables, it often happens that I spin yarns -- improbable things that could never have happened -- about devils, magicians, windmills, and the like.
The children run after me, calling, "Grandfather, tell us a story." Sometimes they ask for particular stories, and I try to please them.
A fat young boy once said to me, "Grandfather, it's the same story you told us before." The little rogue, he was right. --
"Gimpel the Fool," story
. ..


A Sharp Rise In Failures
Fifty percent more businesses failed in the first six months of this year than in the first half of 1990, reflecting the impact of the recession, the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation reported yesterday.
The biggest increase was among transportation and utility companies, where failures increased 54 percent, to 1,894.
Failures in the service sector grew 51 percent, while the number of failing manufacturers rose 36.5 percent, the business information company said in a survey.


Fellow Writers Remember the Charm, Wit and Irony and the Child
Isaac Bashevis Singer was remembered by fellow writers and friends yesterday for his charm, sly wit and ironic perspective.
He was a brilliant but unpretentious man, they said, who had what the novelist Hugh Nissenson called a "childlike" quality "that was the secret of his genius."
"I believe there are imps and demons that hide pens," Mr.
Singer told him once, Mr.
Nissenson said.
While anyone could joke about that, Mr.
Singer said it with that "childlike quality," he said.
"He never lost that sense of wonder and terror that a child feels in the face of the universe."


Erickson Gains 14th Victory as Twins Rout Tigers, 9-3
The Minnesota Twins regained their hitting touch tonight, and the timing was great for Scott Erickson.
After two days of failing to hit with runners on base, the Twins pounded out 14 hits, and beat the Tigers, 9-3, to keep a four-game lead in the American League West.
The hitting helped Erickson pick up his 14th victory, tops in the major leagues.


Mammoth Tug-of-War: 350 Runts vs. 1 Giant Beast


Corrections
An article yesterday about the acquittals in the St.
John's University sexual-assault case misattributed a statement from a defendant.
It was Matthew Grandinetti, not Walter Gabrinowitz, who said of the charges, "I hope reasonable people realize now that it was all a sham."


City Council Failed Miserably to Make a Difference on Budget
To the Editor:
Did the New York City Council "come of age" during this year's budget battle (editorial, July 3)?


Critic's Choice/Music; Mozart: Total Immersion
So the Mozart year hasn't quite wrestled you to the ground?
Want that final knockout punch, the half-nelson to send you permanently to the floor?
Lincoln Center has it waiting this weekend.
Roger Norrington and his London Classical Players are holding another of their public think tanks, this one called a "Mozart Experience" and dealing largely with 1791, the great man's final year.
It will spread out from Alice Tully Hall to Avery Fisher Hall and occupy most of the nooks and crannies in between.
Subscribers, after paying $95, can listen to Mozart played, sung, talked about, danced to, pulled apart and finally put back together.
Tomorrow and Sunday nights at Avery Fisher, there will be two major orchestra concerts starting at 8.
In the afternoons at Alice Tully beginning at 2:30 will come a parade of chamber pieces, solos, a lot of talk around round tables and some very English tea breaks as well.
If you don't want to go to everything, single tickets are available.
They are $17 to $35 for the concerts and $15 for the afternoon events.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


I.B. Singer's New York: Fading, Yes, but Still Here
Three times a week, Isaac Bashevis Singer would walk into the Famous Dairy Restaurant, a narrow Jewish dining spot on West 72d Street near Broadway whose name bears no relation to its homespun clientele.
"What's for lunch, Semkele?" the Nobel-Prize winning author would ask his regular waiter of 20 years, Sam Orenstein.


Diner's Journal
Elias Corner for Fish
On a dim corner of 31st Street and 24th Avenue in Astoria, Queens, in the shadow of the plangent N train, is one of the best seafood restaurants in New York City.
Elias Corner is a tiny neighborhood spot that fills up nightly with a jovial Greek-speaking clientele.
Don't expect many creature comforts, for this Hellenic hangout is to Le Bernardin what a Boston whaler is to the Forbes yacht.
It has a glass fish counter at the entrance, a tiny square kitchen behind it, a beer and wine cooler in the dining room, pale fluorescent lights and a plastic shark mounted on the wall.


The N.B.A. Draft Is Heading West
For the first time since it became open to the public in 1978, the National Basketball Association draft will be held outside New York.
Commissioner David Stern announced today that the 1992 draft would be held in Portland's Memorial Coliseum, site of the Tournament of the Americas Olympic qualifying basketball tournament.


The Poet's Art Mined the Patient's Anguish
Nothing Hidden
To the Editor:
As someone intimately familiar with the process by which Diane Middlebrook wrote her forthcoming biography of my mother-in-law, Anne Sexton, I was surprised by "Betrayed: The Poet and the Public" (editorial, July 20).


CHRONICLE
Senator BOB DOLE gave his foundation's Leadership Award to two companies, Nynex of New York and Kreonite of Kansas City, Kan., for outstanding programs for the disabled.
The Dole Foundation for Employment of People with Disabilities was founded in 1984 by Mr.
Dole, who has limited function of his right arm because of a World War II wound.
Since its inception the foundation, based in Washington, has given more than $3.3 million in grants to nonprofit organizations involved in employment for the disabled.
The awards, presented last night in Washington at a reception at the National Museum of Women in the Arts, were accepted by WILLIAM C. FERGUSON, chairman and chief executive of Nynex, and LARRY BURD, senior vice president of Kreonite, a manufacturer of photo and graphic arts equipment with 235 employees, 13 percent of whom have disabilities.
Nynex has a corporate manager who oversees issues relating to the disabled, including hiring, promotion and adapting the workplace.


Kamisunagawa Journal; For a Town in a Hole, This Could Be the Answer
When the old Mitsui coal mine finally closed here four years ago, everyone left in this ramshackle town on Japan's northernmost island could see the future: Kamisunagawa was fast on its way to becoming one of Japan's many rural ghost towns.
The young people had long since fled, realizing more quickly than their parents did that the grimy work of extracting coal from the hard ground of Hokkaido was hardly Japan's industrial destiny.


Step Right Up to a County Fair!
THE county fair.
The one and only.
The smoky, seductive pall of frying sausage, wafting across the fairground and mingling with the sweet country perfume of fresh hay.
The self-satisfied gaze of blue-ribbon Holsteins in the livestock barn.
The urgency of barkers.
The distant shriek of humanity on thrill machines being rocked and shaken, bumped and thumped, tossed into the air and whooshed back down.
The county fair, where the soda always seems fizzier, the beer beerier and the hot dogs, arguably, hot-doggier.
These are the mature days of July, just about hot enough for the county fair to assume its traditional role as the summer's dominant amusement, still holding its own quite nicely, thank you very much, in this era of cable readiness.


Profits Down 30.6% at Disney
The Walt Disney Company said today that its net income for its third fiscal quarter fell 30.6 percent as the recession cut attendance at its theme parks.
Disney said it earned $165.5 million, or $1.24 a share, in the quarter ended June 30, down from $238.4 million, or $1.75 a share, a year earlier.
Revenues slipped 1.8 percent, to $1.51 billion, from $1.54 billion.


Interpublic Group Reports Gain of 17.2%
The Interpublic Group of Companies, New York, reported yesterday that its net income for the second quarter rose 17.2 percent, to $36.2 million, or $1 a share, from $30.9 million, or 92 cents a share, in the comparable period of 1990.
Revenues rose 16.7 percent, to $399.5 million, from $342.4 million.
The earnings were in line with analysts' expectations, and the company's share price rose 50 cents yesterday, to $44.50, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Interpublic attributed its results to cost-containment measures and a net new-business increase of $368 million in the first six months of the year, up $100 million from the first half of last year.
Interpublic continues to benefit from its strong presence in the international arena, analysts said, where advertising performance has been outpacing sluggish domestic results.
Interpublic owns agencies including McCann-Erickson Worldwide, Lintas Worldwide, Dailey &amp; Associates and the Lowe Group.


Editor Dismissed at Philadelphia Magazine
The editor of Philadelphia magazine was dismissed this week after a dispute with the publisher over a feature in the August issue called "Best of Philly," which lists various "bests" in such categories as restaurants, businesses and even jokes.
Ron Javers, the ousted editor, said David H. Lipson Jr., the publisher, discharged him on Tuesday in a dispute over "editorial integrity." Mr.
Javers declined to elaborate.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Israeli remarks on a regional peace conference referred incorrectly in some editions to Hanan Ashrawi, a West Bank Palestinian.
She is a woman.


Buhner, Minus Pinstripes, Shows He's a Bomber
Once upon a time in a place known as the Bronx, Jay Buhner was a young player searching for a chance to shine with the Yankees.
That was back in the days when George Steinbrenner ran the show, so Buhner wound up being traded for an aging veteran.
Just like a bunch of other kids.
Now with Seattle, Buhner relished the opportunity to hammer his former club yesterday and knock their youth movement off stride.
With several fresh faces now strutting their stuff as he was never able to do as a Yankee, Buhner upstaged everyone by smashing a mammoth two-run home run beyond the left-field bullpen, driving in another run and powering the Mariners to a 6-3 victory at Yankee Stadium.
The homer was measured as 479 feet.


Du Pont Plans to Trim Expenses by $1 Billion
The E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said today that it would cut costs by $1 billion over two years by reducing staff and trimming its chemicals and specialties businesses in the United States.
The announcement comes a day after Du Pont reported a 21 percent drop in second-quarter earnings.
Edgar S. Woolard Jr., the company's chairman, said costs were hurting the chemical giant's ability to compete worldwide.
The reductions will not affect Conoco, Du Pont's energy subsidiary, based in Houston.
Net income for the quarter was $549 million, compared with $694 million for the corresponding quarter in 1990.
The decline was attributed largely to the recession.


Imperial Chemical's Profit Is Stronger Than Expected
As tensions mounted about the possibility of a takeover bid from Hanson P.L.C., Imperial Chemical Industries today announced first-half earnings that exceeded analysts' expectations.
I.C.I., Britain's third-largest company, also released more details about a program announced in February to cut costs, divest peripheral or underperforming businesses and focus on promising operations.


Marchers Seek Special Inquiry in Police Killing
About 300 people marched through downtown Jersey City tonight demanding the appointment of a special investigator in the fatal shooting of a 23-year-old man by a police officer last week.
"One of us was killed, a member of our community, a very nice guy," one marcher, Frank Rivera, 40 years old, said of the victim, Maximino Cintron.
"We want this cop to pay for what he did."


Navratilova Speaks on Suit
Calling herself "naive," Martina Navratilova says the lawsuit filed by her former companion could leave her with financial problems.
In an interview with Barbara Walters taped Wednesday for broadcast tonight on the ABC program "20/20," Navratilova reviews her seven-year relationship with Judy Nelson, a former Texas beauty queen.
Shown a clip from a 1986 videotape of her and Nelson signing a "cohabition agreement" that Nelson has cited in a suit seeking half of Navratilova's earnings during their time together, Navratilova said she had been "naive" to make the agreement.


Auction-House Sales Are Off 50 Percent for Year
Sotheby's and Christie's announced yesterday that they expected record declines of 50 percent or more in their worldwide sales for the 1990-91 auction season, which ends Aug. 31.
The declines are the first reported by Sotheby's since 1984 and the first for Christie's since 1985.
Both auction houses reported that sales in New York continued to be about half of their worldwide totals.


Lost Work at G.E. Will Mean Layoffs
The loss of a $50.5 million Navy contract means more layoffs and additional cost-cutting measures for General Electric's Syracuse operations, a company spokeswoman said.
G.E. lost the contract last week to the International Business Machines Corporation, the spokeswoman, Connie Grasso, said.


Auto Output To Decline
Auto makers were scheduled to produce 128,363 cars and light trucks in the United States and Canada this week, down from last week's 185,726, Ward's Automotive Reports said today.
This week's production is lower than the same week a year ago, in which 202,764 cars and light trucks were produced, the trade journal said.


Court Permits Clinic Advice On Abortion
Family planning clinics in New York may continue to provide abortion counseling for the time being without jeopardizing Federal financing, a Federal appeals court in Manhattan has ruled.
The ruling, issued on Monday, means that the Bush Administration may not yet enforce its ban on such counseling despite the Supreme Court ruling in May upholding its right to do so.


LeMond, With Few Watching, Almost Sneaks By in Stage 19
For the first time in years nobody was keeping a close eye on Greg LeMond in the Tour de France, and he took advantage today by nearly winning the 19th stage.
After some disastrous mountain stages in the Pyrenees and Alps that ended his chance for a third consecutive Tour victory, LeMond found himself down in eighth place over all, 14 minutes behind the leader, Miguel Indurain of Spain.


Goodbye Columbus, Hello Leif
Deftly upstaging all the ballyhoo that's in the works for next year's 500th anniversary of Columbus's first landing in the Americas, a Viking longboat is even now approaching the coast of Newfoundland to commemorate Leif Ericson's 1,000th.
No one knows exactly when Ericson landed -- probably not in the year 991, but around then.
His exact landfall is also in dispute, but so is Columbus's.
Details.
Details.


To Unstrangle This Splendid Untax
Congress, having invented a process for supplementing the earnings of low-paid parents, now seems willing to strangle it in red tape.
The treasured innovation is the earned income tax credit, which Congress expanded to blunt the impact of the 1990 deficit reduction package on poor families.
But in the process it made the tax credit numbingly complex, requiring families to file a dense two-page form with their tax return.
The danger is that the new schedule will discourage millions from applying for money they desperately need and are entitled to.
Unless Congress swiftly amends the new provisions, its humane purpose will be sabotaged.


Construction Worker Trapped for Five Hours in Harlem Building Collapse


John M. Coward, 66, Investment Firm Head
John Mortimer Coward, former president of Coward Enterprises, an investment firm, died on Wednesday at his home in Essex Fells, N.J.
He was 66 years old and also lived in Edgartown, Mass.
Mr. Coward died of cancer, his wife said.


17 SLAYINGS TIED TO MILWAUKEE MAN
A convicted child molester whose apartment was strewn with body parts is believed to have killed at least 17 people, and some killings may have occurred more than a decade ago, the police said today.
They said they had found parts of 11 bodies in the apartment of the 31-year-old suspect, Jeffrey L. Dahmer, who was formally charged today with four counts of first-degree intentional homicide.
Mr.
Dahmer was also charged at the hearing in State Circuit Court here with habitual criminality.


House Approves Fetal Tissue Use in Federally Financed Research
The House voted today to overturn a ban on the use of fetal tissue for federally financed scientific research.
The provision, which passed 274 to 144, is included in a bill that would authorize financing for a host of health programs administered by the National Institutes of Health.
It had been attacked by lawmakers who oppose abortion.


Midlantic Posts Loss, Plans Cuts
The Midlantic Corporation, a troubled banking company based in Edison, N.J., announced a $415.3 million loss for the second quarter yesterday, and said it would reduce its size by more than 25 percent as part of a recovery plan.
The second-quarter loss was the latest sign of the company's growing problems with bad loans made for commercial real estate projects, primarily in New Jersey.
Including a small first-quarter loss, the company lost $438 million in the first half of the year.


Italian Photographer In Second Stir in a Week
Oliviero Toscani, an Italian photographer, has set off his second advertising stir in less than a week.
Two print advertisements created by Mr.
Toscani for Nordica Sports Systems, a ski equipment maker, have been rejected by skiing magazines.
The ads, part of a series, are meant to illustrate a slogan, "Tomorrow, snow." They show a man and a woman in profile, nude except for their Nordica ski boots.
Earlier this week, several magazines rejected three of the six ads Mr.
Toscani created for the Benetton Group retail clothing chain.
One showed a kiss between models dressed as a priest and a nun.
Nordica is owned by Benetton, and Mr.
Toscani's work is just the latest example of the company's penchant for ads that draw attention.
Mr.
Toscani reports directly to Luciano Benneton, president of the Benetton Group.


Two Keyboardists Who Keep Out of Pigeonholes
Musicians and purism don't mix.
The categories imposed by marketers and commentators have little to do with the process of becoming a musician or creating a composition or arrangement; they're arbitary and confining.
Don Pullen and Bernie Worrell, two brilliant keyboardists performing in Manhattan this weekend, have forged individual styles that defy and scramble the music they grew up on.
Mr.
Worrell, one of the architects of Parliament-Funkadelic's multifarious funk, spent his youth training to be a classical pianist and even graduated from the New England Conservatory.
Don Pullen, a jazz pianist who thrives both inside and outside tonality, is steeped in down-home blues and gospel music and dabbles in Latin rhythms.
For both musicians, a musical education never stops.
Don Pullen
Don Pullen has found his own bridge between mainstream and avant-garde jazz.
He writes easygoing jazz tunes and sultry ballads, but his solos are likely to crash through the tonality barrier, turning into fierce swoops and crashes and clusters.
"The old-timers, the blues players, would start sort of low-key and by the time they finished they would rock the house," said Mr.
Pullen, who will appear at Sweet Basil this weekend.
"It's the same with the gospel players. When I'm about to go 'outside' " -- beyond conventional harmony -- "there's a kind of barrier that I have to break through. I like solos to build naturally, and sometimes it's very difficult to get into that realm. The technical things that I'm doing and the mental state have to be together, and then it happens. But my background is so varied, I don't know what comes from which."


Credit Markets; BRIEFS
Debt  *
Associates Corp. of North America's $300 million in noncallable 8 3/4 notes, due in 1998 were priced at 99.85 to yield 8.779 percent.
The company, based in Irving, Tex., is in the installment financing, leasing and insurance business.
Common Stock  *
Catherine Stores Corp., a Memphis-based real estate chain, announced an initial offering of three million shares at $8 a share through Paine Webber.
The company has sold about one million additional shares to existing shareholders at the same price.
Ratings  *
State of Washington general-obligation debt retained its AA rating by Moody's Investors Services Inc. yesterday, after state legislators rejected the Governor's 10-year $1 billion spending program. *
Illinois said it requires about $300 million in short-term securities in this new fiscal year to help pay outstanding bills. *
Maytag Corp., Newton, Iowa, the appliance company that has $582 million in long-term debt, is being reviewed by Moody's for a possible downgrade.
Senior debt is rated at A2, a shelf registration has a tentative A2 and its commercial paper is rated Prime-1.


BRIEFS
*
L.
M.
Ericsson, Stockholm, a telecommunications company, said it had been awarded a significant share of British Telecommunications P.L.C.'s latest transmission equipment orders, with a potential value of up to $16.5 million. *
Kobe Steel Ltd., a maker of aluminum products, and Aluminum Co. of America, Pittsburgh, said they would jointly try to market aluminum in Japan to the transportation industry. *
McDonald &amp; Co.
Investments Inc., Cleveland, a holding company, and Gradison &amp; Company Inc., Cincinnati, a securities company, will merge. *
Morrison Knudsen Corporation, Boise, Idaho, was awarded a $90 million contract from BASF Group, Parsippany, N.J. *
Raytheon Company, Lexington, Mass., an electronics company, won a $23.4 million contract to operate Pave Paws missile tracking radar sites at Cape Cod Air Force Station in Massachusetts and Beale Air Force Base in California. *
U.S.
Shoe Corp., Cincinnati, a shoe retailer, and Leslie Fay Companies, a clothing company, will end the licensing arrangement under which U.S.
Shoe has produced and marketed Leslie Fay brand footwear since 1989.


Criminal Inquiry Starts at Nomura
A senior Justice Ministry official said today that a criminal investigation had begun into whether the Nomura Securities Company joined an organized-crime boss in a stock-manipulation scheme.
The explosive announcement, made before Parliament's Finance Committee by Kazutomi Ijima, head of the ministry's criminal division, was the first indication in the month-old stock market scandal that the Government was preparing to take legal action against the securities firms or individuals involved.


James Harper Jr., Bank Officer, 72
James Harper Jr., a retired vice president of Marine Midland Bank, died on Wednesday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 72 years old and lived in Greenwich.
He died of leukemia, said his sister.


Sounds Around Town
Two Guitarists, Plus Bass
Joe Pass with Jim Hall and Ron Carter, the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Manhattan, (212) 475-8592.
Joe Pass, a supreme jazz formalist, turns every tune he plays into a fully fleshed solo guitar piece, complete with a melodic bass line, singing inner voices, subtle dynamics and elegant improvisatory embellishment.
Jim Hall (on guitar) and Ron Carter (on bass) have enjoyed a sporadic but rich musical partnership that goes back nearly two decades to their 1972 duo album, "Alone Together." Shows are tonight through Sunday at 9 and 11:30 with a third show tonight and tomorrow at 1:30 A.M.
There is a $20 music charge plus a $5 minimum at tables or a $15 admission to the bar.


Credit Markets; ARA Says Issue Drew New Buyers
ARA Services Inc. said about 40 percent of the bonds it sold earlier this week went to investment-grade buyers.
The bonds, which sold at par, carried a 10.625 percent yield, typical of a junk bond offering.
ARA Services, a unit of the ARA Group, is based in Philadelphia and provides food distribution, maintenance and other services.


PENTAGON CASTS DOUBT ON PHOTO
The Pentagon cast doubt tonight on the origins of a mysterious photograph that reportedly shows three lost Vietnam War fliers, saying the picture passed through the hands of known fakers of such information.
In a report issued tonight, the Pentagon also said that biographical information that accompanied the photograph, including birth dates, Social Security numbers and home addresses of the three men, was false.


Leaders of Anti-AIDS Effort See Good Progress So Far
THE leading advertising executives behind Ads Against AIDS, their industry's first national educational campaign to fight the disease, say they are pleased with their progress to date.
Since May, when a contest was announced to create campaigns to combat AIDS, more than 1,000 print, television and radio advertisements have poured in, from 425 entrants in the United States and abroad.


I.B.M. Protests U.S. Contract
I.B.M. said today that it had filed a protest seeking to overturn a $1.4 billion Government contract with A.T.&amp; T..
On July 15, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company won a Treasury Department contract to supply computers and work stations for the Internal Revenue Service.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League


Man Is Put to Death in Virginia For Rape and Murder of Girl, 13
A man who raped and killed a 13-year-old girl in 1983 was executed Wednesday night in Virginia's electric chair.
The man, Albert J. Clozza, 31, became the 12th person to die in the electric chair since Virginia resumed executions in 1982 and the 150th executed in the nation since a ruling in 1976 by the Supreme Court allowed states to resume capital punishment.
He was pronounced dead at 11:07 P.M.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  McEnroe Loses Temper


British Industry Shaken by Bank's Closing
This month's closure of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International is rocking British exporters and small- and medium-size financial institutions.
It is causing withdrawals from smaller banks and savings and loan associations in Britain, raising concerns about potential liquidity problems at some.
And a British exporters' association claims that $3.35 billion worth of trade goods are in jeopardy because letters of credit involving B.C.C.I. are in limbo.


The Giants at Practice: The Good and the Bad
For a week and a half at their training camp here, almost 80 Giants have been hammering and finessing and sweating, usually in two practices a day, usually in cruel heat and humidity, today in rain and drizzle.
The team that won Super Bowl XXV in January has perhaps 16 new players with a chance to make the team.
It has players who have helped their cause by their performances here and players who may have lost ground.
Here is a look at some of them: Who's Hot
PHIL SIMMS and JEFF HOSTETLER: So far they're about even in their fight to be the starting quarterback.
"They're both playing relatively well," Coach Ray Handley said.
"I'm not thinking about the decision day today. I'm going to let the preseason games take their course."


4 Die in Clash in Nicaragua
Rearmed contra rebels attacked police officers today in a northern Nicaraguan town and two police officers and two former guerrillas were killed in the gunbattle, the Interior Ministry said.
Up to 80 contras attacked Quilali, about 150 miles northeast of Managua, and fought a six-hour gunbattle with 30 policemen until they were driven out by army and police reinforcements, the Deputy Interior Minister, Jose Pallais, said at a news conference.
Six policemen were wounded in the fighting, the heaviest since disgruntled former contras began taking up arms again earlier this year.


CHRONICLE
EDWARD FURLONG, the 13-year-old co-star of "Terminator 2," is the subject of a custody battle between his mother and his aunt and uncle.
A hearing on the matter was held Monday in Los Angeles Municipal Court.
For 13 months, Edward has been living in Los Angeles with the aunt and uncle, NANCY TAFOYA and SEAN FURLONG.
The boy moved to Los Angeles after his mother, ELEANOR TORRES, separated from his stepfather.
The lawyer for the aunt and uncle, MARC BERRY, said Ms.
Torres wants the boy because he is a movie star.
But PHILLIP MYER, Ms.
Torres's lawyer, said the custody debate began long before Edward's film debut.
The court appointed a permanent guardian for Edward's estate and he and his mother are undergoing counseling.
A conference to determine custody is to be held in the fall.


Pretoria Spent $35 Million To Influence Namibian Vote
The South African Government admitted today that it gave more than $35 million to seven political parties that opposed the leftist South-West Africa People's Organization in pre-independence elections in neighboring Namibia.
The organization, known as Swapo, went on to win the elections for a constituent assembly in November 1989, which were held under United Nations supervision.
But it received only 57 percent of the vote, well short of the two-thirds majority it needed to introduce a socialist-oriented constitution in Namibia.
The territory gained independence from South Africa in March 1990.


Carol Laise, 73, Ex-Ambassador and High State Dept. Aide, Dies
Carol Laise, an American Ambassador who was the wife of an American Ambassador and the first woman to be an Assistant Secretary of State, died yesterday at her home in Dummerston, Vt.
She was 73 years old.
Miss Laise died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Wednesday misidentified a new senior vice president for production at the Touchstone Pictures division of the Walt Disney Company.
She is Jane Goldenring.


GORBACHEV OFFERS PARTY A CHARTER THAT DROPS ICONS
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today proposed a new charter for the Communist Party that rejects some of its most hallowed principles, even the sanctity of Marxism-Leninism.
Speaking at the opening of a two-day session of the party's Central Committee, Mr.
Gorbachev, who is both President of the Soviet Union and General Secretary of the party, criticized "fundamentalists" in the party and threw his lot in with reformers seeking to replace the militant utopianism of old with a broad Social Democratic platform.


Isaac Bashevis Singer, Nobel Laureate for His Yiddish Stories, Is Dead at 87
Isaac Bashevis Singer, whose vivid evocations of Jewish life in his native Poland and of his experiences as an immigrant in America won him the Nobel Prize in Literature, died on Wednesday.
He was 87 years old and lived in Surfside, Fla.
Mr. Singer died after several strokes, said his wife, Alma.


From Germany to Lebanon, Terrorist Rage Reverberates
Two convicted Lebanese terrorists imprisoned in Germany emerged this week as potentially important figures in future talks over German hostages held in Beirut.
The two men are brothers, Mohammed Ali Hammadi and Abbas Hammadi.
Mohammed Hammadi is serving a life sentence after being found guilty of murder and air piracy in the 1985 hijacking of a T.W.A. airliner.
His brother is serving a 13-year sentence in connection with the kidnapping of German businessmen in Lebanon.


A Job That Can Go
To the Editor:
I agreed to be the Republican candidate for City Council president in the 1950's because I recognized that this post was unnecessary.
Only an incumbent, I believed, could effectively move to abolish it.
I have written each successive incumbent urging them to recognize that the job was not needed and to earn the respect of citizens by moving to end it.


Dollar in Broad Advance; Gold Prices Remain Flat
The dollar advanced yesterday in a largely technical session that saw the currency recover some of its losses from the previous day.
Gold prices were basically flat, down slightly in New York, after small declines in Europe.
Bullion was quoted at $364.25 an ounce late yesterday at Republic National Bank, down 10 cents from late Wednesday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The seven regional Bell companies can now create information services like home banking and electronic shopping, following a Federal judge's decisiion to lift a legal restriction.  [ Page A1. ]  Companies already in the information business were disappointed by the decision.  [ A14. ]


Phone Companies Are Permitted To Provide Information Services
A Federal judge lifted a legal bar today that had prevented the seven regional Bell telephone companies from offering services like home banking and electronic shopping, known collectively as information services.
The decision was a victory for the so-called Baby Bells, which hope to raise profits by selling Americans many new high-technology services.
But opponents, including the newspaper industry, some long-distance companies and consumer groups, vowed to fight the decision, contending the phone companies could abuse their positions as local monopolies.


Two Rape Cases: Justice on Trial; Florida Scores Against Smith
The bombshell dropped by the prosecutor in the William Kennedy Smith case raises disturbing questions about whether judicially imposed gag orders, which are designed to preserve fair trials, actually undercut them.
Pursuant to the order imposed by Judge Mary Lupo, it was proper for prosecutors to file a public court document alleging that Mr.
Smith had assaulted three women between 1983 and 1988.
But when asked to comment on these devastating charges, Mr.
Smith's lawyers were compelled, under the terms of the gag order, to respond "no comment."


Woman Called Willing to Press St. John's Case
The former St.
John's University student whose account of being sexually assaulted was rejected by a jury that acquitted three of her schoolmates will testify at the trials of two more accused men, her brother said yesterday.
After the acquittals on Tuesday, an adviser to the 22-year-old woman raised the possibility that she would be unwilling to testify in future trials because she had been so distraught by the verdict.
But yesterday her brother said that while she was "still in shock and stunned," the woman "is definitely continuing" with the case.


Neutrogena President Is Former Unit Leader
Allan H. Kurtzman has been named president and chief operating officer for the Neutrogena Corporation, the Los Angeles-based maker of specialty hair- and skin-care products.
Mr.
Kurtzman, 64, had been president of Neutrogena's consumer products division from 1981 to 1987, when he left to become president of Max Factor &amp; Company in Los Angeles after the company was bought by Revlon Inc.
Under Mr.
Kurtzman's leadership, Max Factor more than doubled its sales, with most of that growth coming from international markets, particularly Europe and Japan.


Man in the News; Districting Is His Case: John Richard Dunne
He seems like an unlikely advocate for more Hispanic representation on the New York City Council -- a Republican with a barely discernible civil rights record whose career is anchored in Nassau County and Albany politics.
But Assistant Attorney General John R. Dunne, who heads the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division, is more complicated than that.
Even Democrats praise his integrity, independence and judiciousness.
On the other hand, he is loyal enough to his party that he would not stray too far from the Bush Administration reservation.


Coffee Hits 18-Month Low; Silver Prices Post Rebound
Coffee futures prices sagged to their lowest level in almost 18 months yesterday on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange, extending a price slide linked to mild weather in Brazil and a seasonal slump in demand.
Silver futures rose sharply on the Commodity Exchange in New York in a partial recovery from Wednesday's 28-cent plunge.
Analysts cited short-covering, a form of profit taking in which those who sold contracts Wednesday bought them back at lower prices yesterday.


Review/Theater; 'As You Like It,' in Its Native Language
The Cheek by Jowl Company, which has made its international reputation through unconventional productions of classics, offers an answer to skeptics who still believe the old canard that the English are stuffy about their Shakespeare.
In its United States debut in the Sixth Annual International Theater Festival at the State University here, this traveling troupe addresses the varieties and mysteries of one of Shakespeare's most popular comedies, "As You Like It." The actors enter the Forest of Arden with a spontaneity that never overlooks or undervalues the verse.
The production is staged by Declan Donnellan, who, along with Deborah Warner and Nicholas Mendes, is one of a number of new young innovative English directors.


Woman Is Cleared in Slaying Of Her Husband 16 Years Ago
A judge has dismissed homicide and conspiracy charges against a woman who was charged after her 20-year-old son said he recalled what he saw the night his father was slain 16 years ago.
The judge, Robert E. Dauer of Allegheny County Common Pleas Court, ruled in an opinion made public on Tuesday that prosecutors had not presented sufficient evidence to pursue their case.


Piano in the Garden
The pianist Karen Becker is to give two performances of Charles Koechlin's "Heures Persanes" as part of the free Summergarden series at the Museum of Modern Art Sculpture Garden.
The concerts are to be at 7:30 P.M. today and tomorrow.
Information: (212) 708-9400.


TV Weekend; Crass, Greedy Hollywood Bares All for the BBC
Nicolas Kent, a young Englishman, went to Hollywood for the BBC and managed to get a lot of movie people -- actors, agents, producers, directors -- talking candidly about their work.
Hey, guess what?
"Naked Hollywood" suggests that the business is strictly cutthroat, overrun by vulgar philistines ready to just about kill for their next big hit.
So go tell Nathanaeliel West or Clifford Odets.
The series begins a weekly run on the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network on Sunday at 8 P.M.
Some of the Hollywood principals are upset about the group portrait, two going so far as to make sure one of the six original episodes will not be shown, at least for the time being.
Mr.
Kent, who founded the media magazine Stills in 1980 at the age of 22, insists that he was not out to produce an expose.
He merely trained his cameras on the entrails of a billion-dollar business.
The exhibitionistic participants did the rest, all by themselves, without benefit of a narrator.


Takeovers Seen By Many Banks
One in every six commercial banks responding to a survey expects to be bought out within a few years, if Congress passes legislation removing 64-year- old barriers to interstate banking.
If the banks' expectations prove accurate, the number of commercial banks in the nation -- which topped 14,000 five years ago -- could shrink through mergers and failures from 12,250 now to less than 10,000.
That would be the fewest since the 1890's.


Review/Film; Mel Brooks, From Riches To Rags To Humility
Mel Brooks's new comedy, "Life Stinks," is less downbeat than its title, but not by much.
As the latest in a long line of movie millionaires (Mr. Brooks's version is a billionaire, thanks to inflation) who regain their common sense by spending time with the common folk, Mr.
Brooks appears as Goddard Bolt, robber baron extraordinaire.
He has a much surer sense of how to lampoon such a figure than of how to turn him into anyone nice.
So the film's opening scenes, in which Goddard displays his ruthless business tactics, show some comic promise.
Told that one of his companies plans to cut down 6,000 acres of Brazilian rain forest, Goddard merely shrugs and says, "So?" At the prospect of closing down a nursing home, he advises an aide to "do it late at night." Mr.
Brooks also has fun with the phallic-looking design for a new high-rise project Goddard plans for skid row, and with this entrepreneur's terrible-looking toupee, which he wears with great pride.
"You look like someone who only makes $50,000 a year!" an aide exclaims in horror, once Goddard's hairpiece has been stripped away.


UAL and Delta Air Lines Report Sharply Lower Profits
The UAL Corporation and Delta Air Lines Inc. both reported sharply lower earnings yesterday, as the effects of the recession and the Persian Gulf war continued to hurt travel.
But the profits, however slim, were seen by some analysts as a possible sign of a recovery for the beleaguered airline industry.
Last week, the AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, also posted a small profit.


Auctions
Art and Antiques
The fourth auction of art and antiques from the collection of Roberto Polo, a Cuban-born financier who became a fugitive in 1989, is to be held on Nov. 7 at the Hotel George V in Paris.
The property to be auctioned -- 20th-century paintings, French 18th-century furniture, jewelry, silver and precious objects -- is estimated to bring from $11 million to $15 million by the organizer of the sale, Jacques Tajan of Ader Picard Tajan.
Sotheby's in New York is assisting the Paris auctioneers in publicizing the sale and distributing its catalogues.
Proceeds from the auction, ordered by a French criminal court in Paris, are to go to Mr.
Polo's creditors.


Asdrubal Villanueva, Engineer, Is Dead at 64
Asdrubal Villanueva, a self-educated engineer who held 184 patents and who founded a solar-energy appliance company, died on Wednesday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of lymphoma, the family said.


Whitehurst Hit Hard as Mets Go Numb
Kevin Mitchell's bat was a blur and then so was the baseball.
Wally Whitehurst dived for cover, but didn't find it, the line drive smashing into his right thigh in the fifth inning.
Whitehurst lay on the mound and covered his eyes against the hurt and the afternoon.
The Mets' pitcher, who had done nothing right from the opening inning, ended his day by becoming the perfect metaphor for the team.


The Spoken Word
LECTURE AND WALKING TOUR, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
A walking tour of lower Manhattan, followed by "House of Heritage," a slide presentation and lecture on the changing history of the area, Sunday at noon.
Walking tour fee, $12 ($11 for the elderly, $6 for students); lecture: $2.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Here's Idea of the Day that Might Salvage Game of the Week
Memo to Fay Vincent, commissioner of baseball:
Let's face it.
The current baseball TV plan doesn't work.
Too few games on CBS have demolished the old Game of the Week regularity and too many on ESPN make games as ordinary as disposable razors.
CBS and ESPN are losing oodles of cash on baseball.
After their deals expire in 1993, nobody will match the $1.46 billion they're paying together over four years.


Official Seized in Madagascar
Police commandos seized another minister in the opposition's self-declared government today, while protests continued against President Didier Ratsiraka.
The seizure of Rahantavololona Andrianmanjato at the Public Works Ministry was the government's boldest move since Ratsiraka declared a state of emergency Tuesday to stop the takeover.


Steroids Suit
JOHN WHEELER, a 7-footer who played basketball at Baylor, has filed a lawsuit in Dallas claiming that JIM HALLER, his college coach, induced him to use steroids.
Wheeler's mother, NINA WHEELER, said the steroids had contributed to her son's needing two open-heart operations, one in 1986 and another six weeks ago.
Wheeler, who is 27 years old, has Marfan syndrome and is scheduled for another heart operation Aug. 16.
Marfan syndrome is a hereditary disorder of the body's connective tissues best known for its role in the death of Flo Hyman, who was an Olympic volleyball player.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about Senator Jeff Bingaman's withdrawal from the inquiry into the conduct of Senator Alan Cranston misstated the development in some copies.
Mr.
Bingaman withdrew from the Senate Ethics Committee's deliberations in the case; he did not leave the committee.


Air Travel Offer
A Boston company announced plans to introduce a program in the United States that would offer free air travel with the purchase of goods and services.
The program, called Air Miles, has been in Britain since 1988.
British Airways owns 51 percent of the company, Loyalty Management Group.
The company said American Airlines, United Airlines and Air Canada had agreed to participate.


Monarch Plan Rejected
State regulators seeking to sell the bankrupt Monarch Life Insurance Company today rejected a bidder that was backed by 11 banks that control the insurer's stock.
The state insurance commissioner, Kay Doughty, said Private Capital Partners, an investment company in Purchase, N.Y., had failed to "specify the nature and source of the funding for the acquisition." She said the plan could be resubmitted.


Panel Approves Revised Plan For New York's Council Seats
Less than a week after the Justice Department ruled that New York's City Council redistricting plan illegally shortchanged Hispanic voters, the city's Districting Commission yesterday approved a revised plan and prepared to send it back to Washington.
Hoping for swift approval so the city can proceed with a November election, the commissioners met at 8:30 A.M. in the chambers of the old Board of Estimate -- whose abolition set in motion the sweeping process of government reform that included new Council districts -- and completed their task in minutes by agreeing to changes in District 8, which links East Harlem with the South Bronx.


Vandiver Going to Italy
SHAUN VANDIVER, one of the Golden State Warriors' three first-round draft picks, has signed a two-year contract to play for Fortitudo Bologna of the Italian League.
Vandiver, a 6-foot-10-inch forward from Colorado, was selected 25th over all in the draft June 26.
As a senior at Colorado, Vandiver averaged 21.2 points and 10 rebounds a game. (AP)


Two Rape Cases: Justice on Trial; Florida Scores Against Smith
The bombshell dropped by the prosecutor in the William Kennedy Smith case raises disturbing questions about whether judicially imposed gag orders, which are designed to preserve fair trials, actually undercut them.
Pursuant to the order imposed by Judge Mary Lupo, it was proper for prosecutors to file a public court document alleging that Mr.
Smith had assaulted three women between 1983 and 1988.
But when asked to comment on these devastating charges, Mr.
Smith's lawyers were compelled, under the terms of the gag order, to respond "no comment."


Hill and Player Beat Fast Greens at Open
The fast and undulating greens of the Oakland Hills Country Club justified all the praise -- and fear -- by the players before today's opening round of the United States Senior Open.
Designed by Donald Ross in 1916 and remodeled by Robert Trent Jones twice in the last 20 years, the 5,000 square feet of greens, especially the par-4 18th, which played to an average of 4.871, brought the best golfers over the age of 50 to their knees here today.


Islamic Strikes in Algeria: A Mistake, Then Arrests
The arrest of the leaders of the militant Islamic Salvation Front was the result of their call in May for a wave of strikes and demonstrations to protest an election law that they said was intended to put them at a disadvantage in parliamentary elections set for June 27.
In early June, Sheik Madani, the fundamentalist leader, and his deputy, Ali Belhadj, called on their tens of thousands of hard- line supporters to forcibly resist police troops trying to disband illegal public demonstrations and sit-ins by front supporters.


Treasury Prices Up on Weak Data
Another sign that the economic recovery may be sputtering helped push up prices of Treasury securities yesterday, and interest rates moved a bit lower.
Early in the day, the Government reported that initial claims for unemployment insurance rose by 30,000, to 425,000, in the week ended July 13.


The Poet's Art Mined the Patient's Anguish
Trust Is at Stake
To the Editor:
Dr.
Martin T. Orne, in explaining his making available for publication privileged material and tapes of a patient, the poet Anne Sexton (front page, July 15), claims that he "was often more concerned about her privacy than she was." While he might also be correct in presuming Sexton's implied approval for his action while she was alive, I feel strongly that he was wrong in violating the contract of confidentiality that always exists between psychotherapist and patient.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
After falling as the Government announced a criminal inquiry into Japan's brokerage scandal, Tokyo stocks rebounded today.
Short-covering in futures and arbitrage buying in stocks lifted the Nikkei index of 225 issues 186.36 points, or eight-tenths of 1 percent, to 23,519.07.


Agencies Reap Savings in Building Decline
When engineers planned the repair of Manhattan's West Side Highway from 59th to 72d Street, they estimated the cost at $85 million.
But at the bid-opening in January, the winning contractor agreed to do the job for only $62 million -- a savings of 27 percent.
In a silver lining to the recession, surprises like that are being repeated across the New York region in a wide array of projects on roads, sewers, recycling plants, water lines, subways, schoolhouses, airports and bridges.


Reviews/Film; Of Blintzes, Manicotti and the Mob
The idea behind "Mobsters" is so obvious, so commercial, so foolproof, such fun, that it's a wonder this film didn't turn up sooner.
It's "Young Guns," but about organized crime.
It's baby gangsters!
Take Lucky Luciano, Meyer Lansky, Bugsy Siegel and Frank Costello, cast hot and hunky young actors in the story of their rise to power and riches, and you've got sex, violence, money in the bank.
Unless, of course, the film takes itself seriously.
Then you've got "Mobsters," a surprisingly dull movie preoccupied with the knotty issue of Jewish-Italian relations.


Shira Leibowitz, Student, Is Wed
Shira Leibowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel L. Leibowitz of South Orange, N.J., was married there last night to Rabbi Alfredo Fabio Borodowski, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Borodowski of Buenos Aires.
Rabbis Jehiel Orenstein and Neil Gillman performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Leibowitz, a magna cum laude graduate of Cornell University, is a rabbinical student who is also studying for a master's degree in Jewish education at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York.
She is 25 years old and is keeping her name.
Her father is a partner in LCL Equities, a real estate investment and management company in Parsippany, N.J.
Her mother, Doris Lei bowitz, teaches English at the Solomon Schechter Day School in West Orange, N.J.


Time Warner Cuts Net Loss On Record Operating Profit
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that its operating divisions had record second-quarter income of $551 million before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization -- 2.8 percent more than the $536 million posted a year earlier.
The company said revenues rose 10.5 percent, to $2.85 billion, from $2.58 billion.


At the Movies
"I don't see why a film director should be pigeonholed into making the same kinds of films," said Michael Caton-Jones.
It is a statement that does much to explain why the Scottish director has gone from the sex and British politics of "Scandal" to the World War II American bomber crews of "Memphis Belle" and then to the idyllic South of the contemporary comedy "Doc Hollywood," opening next Friday.
Now he plans to explore the pain of youth in the 1950's when he translates Tobial Wolff's highly praised 1989 book, "This Boy's Life: A Memoir," to film early next year.


Soviet Jews Mustn't Be Mideast Pawns
To the Editor:
As David Biale points out in "New Aid to Israel Can Only Hinder Peace" (letter, July 16), I am indeed opposed to linkage between loan guarantees for the
humanitarian
purpose of absorbing Soviet immigrants in Israel and the
political
issue of the peace process.
But he is off the mark when he says that Israel is sending the Soviet immigrants into the territories and that the issues can therefore not be separated.


TRW in Venture With Hitachi Ltd.
TRW Inc. and Hitachi Ltd. of Japan announced that they would team up on various space projects and related technologies.
A joint management team will review future space programs, technology needs and market opportunities.


Art in Review
Pepon Osorio: A Retrospective
Museo del Barrio 1230 Fifth Avenue (at 104th Street) Through Aug. 4
This exhibition of animated, teeming objects and installations presents the work of Pepon Osorio, a Puerto Rican artist whose many accomplishments include set design, installation and performance art and, most of all, a distinctive style of assemblage that draws actively on Caribbean popular culture.
Mr.
Osorio has a particular gift for decorating everyday objects with all manner of tiny charms, trinkets and toys, plastic flowers and birds, decals and so forth; the complete list would be encyclopedic.


Review/Pop; Mix-and-Match Show With Snarling and Anger
There was a certain symmetry to the quintuple bill that came to Radio City Music Hall on Wednesday night.
It started with Kory Clarke, the lead singer of Warrior Soul, hurling imprecations against "12 years of Republican administrations." And it ended with the Sisters of Mercy performing "Vision Thing," a song that snarls President Bush's slogans in a fury of sarcasm over a booming beat.


Stock Exchanges Suing Quotron
Two Canadian stock exchanges filed lawsuits accusing Quotron Systems Inc., a leading distributor of financial information, of misusing data provided by the exchanges.
The exchanges in Toronto and Montreal are seeking a total of $53 million in damages and restitution for what they contend was a breach of contract and fraud.
The Vancouver Stock Exchange said it also planned to file a lawsuit in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


June Home Resales Up
Sales of existing homes jumped 1.4 percent in June to the highest level in two and a half years, a real estate trade group said today.
It was the fifth straight monthly advance.
All regions of the nation posted gains except the Midwest, which experienced a sales surge in May that analysts said could not be sustained.


Quotation of the Day
"In the past the party recognized only Marxism-Leninism as the source of its inspiration, though the tenet was utterly distorted to suit the pragmatic needs of the day, becoming something of a collection of canonical texts. Now it has become necessary to include in our arsenal of ideas all the riches of our own and the world's socialist and democratic thought." -- President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  [ A1:6. ]


9 Croatians Are Killed In Fighting With Army
Fierce fighting in the Yugoslav republic of Croatia continued today.
At least nine of the republic's militiamen were reported killed and 17 wounded, a ministry of information official said.
It was the second time this week that Croatian forces had come under fire by army troops, whose announced mission in the region is to keep the peace.


Extra Points
Clint James, who has probable ligament damage in his right knee, is scheduled for surgery Friday.
Tim Downing, who has a ruptured disk, will probably have back surgery in a few days.
James and Downing are young defensive ends.
Kanavis McGhee, the Colorado outside linebacker drafted in the second round, signed a three-year contract this morning at Giants Stadium.
But by the time he had solved luggage and parking problems, he did not reach camp until after the afternoon practice ended.


On Wall St., Cuomo Lashes Out at White House
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo accused the White House yesterday of complacency in attacking the country's economic problems and then proposed a series of Federal tax changes that he said would hasten a recovery by spurring long-term capital investment.
The Governor's proposals, which he outlined in a breakfast speech to about 80 business executives at the American Stock Exchange, included a corporate tax credit for investments in newly bought equipment and machinery.
He also said that a cut in capital gains taxes on long-term investments should be coupled with an increase in Federal income taxes for top earners.


Two Rape Cases: Justice on Trial; Florida Scores Against Smith
The bombshell dropped by the prosecutor in the William Kennedy Smith case raises disturbing questions about whether judicially imposed gag orders, which are designed to preserve fair trials, actually undercut them.
Pursuant to the order imposed by Judge Mary Lupo, it was proper for prosecutors to file a public court document alleging that Mr.
Smith had assaulted three women between 1983 and 1988.
But when asked to comment on these devastating charges, Mr.
Smith's lawyers were compelled, under the terms of the gag order, to respond "no comment."


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 26


Credit Markets; Tax Notes Planned By New York City
New York City announced plans yesterday to sell $1 billion of tax anticipation notes by means of competitive bidding on July 31.
Unlike previous note sales by the city, in which the maturity was one year, the new offering will have a six-month maturity, coming due on Feb. 3, 1992.
The city said it hoped the shorter maturity would save about 50 basis points in interest.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.
A spokesman said that the city Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, hoped to attract institutional investors who might want to move away from one-year notes.
Many one-year municipal notes mature on June 30, the usual end of a fiscal year, which can lead to a scramble by money market funds to reinvest.
New York State, meanwhile, is expected to offer $195 milliion of general obligation bonds by competitive bidding on July 31.


French Seek Role for Palestinians From Jerusalem
France has backed a demand by East Jerusalem Palestinians to be present at any Middle East peace talks even though Israel has said it will not take part if they join the Palestinian delegation.
After a meeting here on Wednesday night with a prominent Palestinian leader, Faisal al-Husseini, Foreign Minister Roland Dumas said it was logical for the Jerusalem Palestinians to be involved in talks because this would lend "an authentic character" to the delegation.


Advocates of Disabled Workers Say New Rules Don't Do Enough
Advocates for disabled people expressed anger that Federal rules issued today do not require employers to provide attendants at work to help severely handicapped workers with personal needs like eating.
The Federal regulations were released at a news conference attended by officials, business representatives and advocates for the disabled.
The advocates said that unless employers provided personal assistance to severely disabled employees, like helping them in the bathroom, the workers would not be able to remain on the job.


Books of The Times; Hollywood's Writers Finally Have the Last Word
Backstory 2 Interviews With Screenwriters of the 1940's and 1950's By Pat McGilligan  Illustrated. 417 pages.
University of California Press. $29.95.
Reading "Backstory 2" is a ticket to the Golden Age of Hollywood.
It's a series of outspoken interviews edited by Pat McGilligan, a film historian and biographer, with some of the major American screenwriters of the 1940's and 50's.
The book lights up a time when many of the best movies were fashioned by mature writers and directors, some with a sense of mission.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW -- WORKING GROUP -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Sounds Around Town
Jacquet's Big Band
Illinois Jacquet, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7902.
Absolute luxury in the form of a big band.
Illinois Jacquet's band is smooth, and radiates ease.
It's also worth the trip just to listen to Mr.
Jacquet's tempos, which always avoid cliche and always have something to say.
If that weren't enough, Mr.
Jacquet is one of the finest swing tenor saxophonists alive.
Shows are tonight through Sunday at 8 and 10, with a midnight show tonight and tomorrow.
There is a $15 cover and a $7.50 minimum.


Review/Film; Oh, What a Wonderful Time to Be Discovered in Childhood!
Whatever the interval that separates one's viewing of "My Father's Glory" from that of the equally enchanting "My Mother's Castle," it is only an intermission.
This latter film, the second by Yves Robert based on the childhood memoirs of the popular French playwright and film maker Marcel Pagnol, picks up effortlessly where its predecessor left off.
The hills of Provence still exert a magical attraction for the family of Marcel (Julien Ciamaca), a schoolboy who counts the days, minutes and hours that are spent away from the family's pastoral retreat.
They will seem no less alluring to the viewer.
Much of the appeal of these seductively scenic films is based on pure charm, the kind of charm that means young Marcel will be taking his cod liver oil from a bottle with a lovely antique label.
Thanks to the rosiness of Pagnol's boyhood memories, and to the great affection with which Mr.
Robert presents them, no event of daily life is seen as too trivial to be cause for delight.


Lazarus A. Orkin, Physician, 81
Dr.
Lazarus A. Orkin, a former chief of urology at Beth Israel Medical Center, died yesterday at St.
Francis Hospital in Miami Beach.
He was 81 years old and had lived in Miami Beach since he retired 15 years ago.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Union for Police In Suffolk Agree to Deferred Pay
The union for the Suffolk County police agreed tonight to a deferred pay plan to save the financially strapped county $3.6 million.
The agreement, which followed negotiations between the union, the Suffolk County Patrolman's Benevolent Association, and County Executive Patrick Halpin, came after the county ordered the police force to take a 10 percent pay cut or find another way to save the money.


Man Confronts Monster, and Straub is the Winner
The warnings came from all directions, but Tim Straub paid no heed.
A par score might win the Michelob New York State Open, they predicted.
Par might be all the Monster would be willing to give, they advised.
But with a $10,000 first prize and a state championship on the line today, Straub never held back.
The pro from Orchard Park attacked the golf course at the Concord Hotel that is known as the Monster, shot a three-under 69 and captured the $65,000 event by three shots.


I.B.M. Reduces Price of Laptop
The International Business Machines Corporation yesterday announced a price reduction of more than 12 percent for its new portable computer.
I.B.M. said the laptop computer, which it introduced in March, now carries a list price of $5,245, down from $5,995.


Digital Loss For Quarter: $871 Million
The Digital Equipment Corporation reported a loss of $871.3 million today after taking a $1.1 billion charge against earnings in the final quarter of its fiscal year.
But Digital, the nation's No. 2 computer maker, showed impressive revenue growth and signs that it is finally getting operational costs under control.
Digital's neighbor and longtime rival, the Data General Corporation, announced its third straight profitable quarter after five years of losses.
The company, based in Westboro, Mass., had been virtually written off by many analysts but has had an impressive turnaround after extensive cost-cutting and layoffs.


McDonnell Earnings Rise by 35%
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation today reported a 35 percent increase in earnings for the second quarter, led by a sharp improvement in its commercial aircraft business.
McDonnell Douglas, based in St.
Louis, said it earned $77 million, or $2.01 a share, compared with $57 million, or $1.49 a share, in last year's second quarter.
Revenues increased 22 percent for the period, to $5.04 billion.


The Poet's Art Mined the Patient's Anguish
To the Editor:
Your account of my use in a biography of Anne Sexton of audiotapes that recorded the poet's psychotherapy with Dr.
Martin Orne (front page, July 15) has unfortunately created a false impression of the extent and nature of Dr.
Orne's work with me.
I would like to supply some details.


Our Towns
Frederick Spione doesn't mean to brag, but he feels he has a talent for scavenging.
"Some people say I have a gift," he said, picking up a piece of carpet and stuffing it under his arm, as if afraid that someone would snatch it away.
"I need lawn furniture, and I come out here and find it."


Way Cleared For Changes In Curriculum
The New York State Board of Regents opened the way tonight for revisions in teaching social studies that would give greater weight to racial and ethnic minorities.
The board essentially sidestepped embracing all aspects of a controversial report on multicultural education issued last month by a state panel of teachers and scholars.


Move to Seize New Jersey Life Is Expected
New Jersey officials are expected to go into state court today seeking permission to take over the New Jersey Life Insurance Company.
They say the company is nearly insolvent and has tried to conceal financial problems.
"They are trying to mask their insolvency," said Don Parisi, the New Jersey assistant Attorney General who will represent the state in court.


Progress in Congress On Benefits for Jobless
Seizing on a potentially valuable political issue, Democrats in Congress moved to lengthen the time jobless Americans can receive unemployment benefits.
Republican oposition was tepid as a Senate comittee supported one such bill and another was introduced in the House.
Article, page A11.


U.N. Council Opens Discussion of Iraq Sanctions
The Security Council began informal discussions today on a plan to remove sanctions against Iraq, enabling it to sell oil to buy food and medical supplies, which United Nations officials say are desperately needed by the Iraqi people.
But diplomats cautioned against expecting any quick response to Iraq's needs.
They cited the complex problems in creating and monitoring a program to feed millions of people, as well as the efforts of some Council members, notably the United States and Britain, to link the question of sanctions with other components of the cease-fire agreement ending the Persian Gulf War.


Corrections
A brief report in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Tuesday misidentified the director of target and regional marketing for the Pillsbury Company's baked-goods division.
She is Amy Hilliard-Jones.


Monarch Plan Rejected
State regulators seeking to sell the bankrupt Monarch Life Insurance Company today rejected a bidder that was backed by 11 banks that control the insurer's stock.
The state insurance commissioner, Kay Doughty, said Private Capital Partners, an investment company in Purchase, N.Y., had failed to "specify the nature and source of the funding for the acquisition." She said the plan could be resubmitted.


U.S. LIMITS DOCTORS IN THEIR REFERRALS
The Department of Health and Human Services issued new rules today that will sharply limit the widespread practice of doctors' referring Medicare and Medicaid patients to clinics and other health-care businesses in which the doctors have invested.
The rules are meant to curb the proliferation of such investments, which the Government says are costing Federal health care programs millions of dollars by encouraging the overuse of expensive medical services and procedures.


Pryor Search
The former junior-welterweight champion AARON PRYOR failed to show up for two court appearances in Cincinnati yesterday and both judges issued arrest warrants for him before Pryor's attorney, LESLIE GAINES, managed to get the boxer's appearances rescheduled for this morning.
Pryor, 35, failed to appear in Hamilton County Common Pleas Court for sentencing on a drug-abuse charge.
He later failed to appear in Hamilton County Municipal Court for a hearing on a charge that he violated his probation from a 1989 drug offense.


Graf and Seles: Doubly Troubling
A torn shoulder tendon has knocked STEFFI GRAF, the Wimbledon champion, out of the Federation Cup and will probably keep her sidelined for three weeks.
Graf was examined yesterday at a hospital in Essen, Germany.


Corrections
An article on May 29 about a dispute involving homeless people's use of the library in Morristown, N.J., misstated the involvement of Morristown's municipal lawyer, Herbert Vogel.
He is representing the town in a lawsuit that a homeless man has filed against it, but he is not a defendant.
The article also misstated the location of an office rented by Mr.
Vogel.
It is in the same building complex as a hotel that offered a job to the homeless man, Richard R. Kreimer, but it is not in the hotel itself.


Democrats Move to Seize Jobless Benefits as Issue
Democrats on both sides of Capitol Hill moved today to extend unemployment insurance payments to people who have been out of work for more than half a year, and Republicans raised questions but not much opposition.
Administration officials have threatened a Presidential veto of any move to extend jobless benefits, saying it is not needed because the recession is ending.


Mismanagement Found on U.S. Weather Satellite
The nation's next generation of weather satellites is more than three years behind schedule and has more than doubled in cost because of mismanagement by the space agency and poor workmanship by contractors, the General Accounting Office said today.
The nation now has only one satellite continuously monitoring the weather, and the space agency has run into technical snags in building a series of replacements with improved technology.


Now to Congress and the Appeals Courts
Judge Harold H. Greene's decision to lift curbs on the "Baby Bells" provoked disappointment from companies already in the information business.
The ruling will have little immediate effect, however, because the judge stayed it pending appeals.
Experts also said the decision was likely to increase pressure on Congress to introduce laws governing access to the phone networks.


South Africa Gets Olympic Invitation
South Africa was among the nations invited today when the International Olympic Committee issued 167 official bids to compete in the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
After decades of isolation, South Africa was readmitted to the Olympic movement earlier this month because of its moves toward full racial equality in sport.


AIDS Cases From Transfusions Give Rise to Suits
The AIDS epidemic is producing a growing number of lawsuits that seek damages from hospitals, doctors and blood banks, asserting that they supplied blood contaminated with the virus that causes the disease.
Plaintiffs typically have had a tough time proving negligence in blood transfusion cases, particularly for transfusions performed before 1985, when a test to detect the presence of the AIDS virus became widely used at blood banks and hospitals.


U.S. Bets $100 You Can't Copy This Bill
The Government is printing millions of subtly changed $100 bills in an effort to prevent counterfeiters from duplicating them with advanced color copiers.
The changes -- the addition of a tiny polyester thread and a microscopic line of type -- will not be noticeable unless a person really looks for them.
Benjamin Franklin will still be gazing out from the bills.


At Saratoga, the Drama of the Country Mouse
Lost Link, the horse that got stuck under the starting gate on opening day at Saratoga Race Course, was eating up a storm today and otherwise recovering from a puncture wound on his shoulder.
They issue bulletins on horses here.
And in the season's first, the chief veterinarian at the track, Dr.
Theodore Hill, reported: "There are no major problems, spinal, ligament, tendon. He ate like nothing ever happened."


T.W.A. Forges a Deal To Elude a Bankruptcy
T.W.A. survived another close brush with bankruptcy yesterday after its chairman, Carl C. Icahn, forged an eleventh-hour deal with bondholders that granted them new concessions.
The airline's secured creditors had threatened to go to court yesterday to seek immediate payment of overdue payments on bonds that are backed by spare parts and landing slots.
If the creditors had done so, or if they had sought an injunction in court to seize the collateral behind the bonds, the airline would most likely have been forced to seek bankruptcy protection.


Loss at Bank of Boston
The Bank of Boston Corporation said today that it lost $49 million in the last three months but was nearing profitability by reducing its bad real estate loans.
The loss for the quarter ended June 30 was in contrast to earnings of $3.5 million in the corresponding period last year.
"They're not out of the woods yet, but as loss quarters go, this is a good one," said David Berry, vice president at Keefe, Bruyette &amp; Woods.


Sports of The Times; Rob Dibble: The Pitcher Most Likely
If the ball had been thrown by any other pitcher in baseball, we would not be having this discussion.
But Rob Dibble threw the ball, and you know what happens when Rob Dibble gets his hand on a baseball.
Craziness happens.
He threw a pitch behind Eric Yelding in April.
He heaved a ball and hit a fan in the stands later that month.
Now it's July and Dibble has hit a runner in the back of the leg.


Washington Talk; Thomas Repeating A Ritual: Stroking
Important people, particularly Presidential nominees, stop by lawmakers' offices to shake hands, chit-chat and go on their way.
It makes senators feel important.
It makes nominees more hopeful that they'll be confirmed.
They are called "courtesy calls," and they are a ritual on Capitol Hill.


Review/Theater; 'As You Like It,' in Its Native Language
The Cheek by Jowl Company, which has made its international reputation through unconventional productions of classics, offers an answer to skeptics who still believe the old canard that the English are stuffy about their Shakespeare.
In its United States debut in the Sixth Annual International Theater Festival at the State University here, this traveling troupe addresses the varieties and mysteries of one of Shakespeare's most popular comedies, "As You Like It." The actors enter the Forest of Arden with a spontaneity that never overlooks or undervalues the verse.
The production is staged by Declan Donnellan, who, along with Deborah Warner and Nicholas Mendes, is one of a number of new young innovative English directors.


Rise in Claims For Jobless Aid
The number of people filing claims for unemployment benefits rose by 30,000 in the week ended July 13, the Labor Department said today, but some economists said the overall job picture continued to brighten.
The increase of 30,000 from the the previous week brought the week's total to a seasonally adjusted 425,000.


Kuwait Set To Resume Oil Exports
Kuwait announced today that it would resume exporting crude oil for the first time since Iraq invaded the tiny Persian Gulf emirate last August, bringing a United Nations embargo of oil exports from both countries.
The embargo is still in force for Iraq, but United Nations officials and the United States are discussing the possibility of allowing Baghdad to export enough oil to raise $1 billion to essential foods.


Powell Says U.S. Will Help Soviets Convert Army Assets
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said today that the United States military was prepared to advise and assist the Soviet Army in converting its assets to civilian use.
General Powell is on a six-day tour of military centers, the latest in a series of exchanges of top military officials.


Restaurants
The Seine it is not, this turbid, turbulent waterway separating the industrial reliquiae of Queens from the glass-and-steel Everests of Manhattan.
Yet from a window seat at the Water Club on an East River barge, where everything is starched and fresh and buoyant, it's easy to conjure up a romantic fantasy -- especially after sunset.
The Water Club may not have the awe-inspiring view from the River Cafe in Brooklyn -- both are owned by Michael (Buzzy) O'Keeffe -- nor its histrionic approach to food, but its charms are substantial nonetheless.
The French-trained chef, Richard Moonen, turns out eclectic and imaginative fare that is always well rooted in common sense.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Amax Inc., New York, a materials and energy company, announced four appointments.
It named Paul Drack president and chief operating officer; Thomas A. McKeever president and chief executive of the newly formed subisidiary Amax Energy; V. Bond Evans president of its aluminum company subsidiary Alumax Inc., and Richard A. Kalaher general counsel. *
Ernst &amp; Young, New York, an accounting concern, named Michael Henning vice chairman, tax services.
He succeeds Victor B. Noschese, who is retiring. *
MGM-Pathe Communications Co., Los Angeles, named Sally Suchil senior vice president, corporate legal affairs. *
Royal Insurance Holdings, London, announced two senior management changes in its United States life insurance companies: Julius L. Pallone has been named chairman and Robert J. Ferguson has been named president and chief executive.  *
Standard Chartered Bank, London, named Richard Land senior vice president and regional manager of the bank's operations in the southeastern United States. *
Tektronix Inc., Beaverton, Ore., a manufacturer of electronic products, said it would give Jerome J. Meyer the additional title of chairman, effective Sept. 26.
Mr.
Meyer will continue as president and chief executive.
Robert W. Lundeen, the current chairman, is retiring. *
Willis Corroon Corp., New York, a subsidiary of the London-based insurance brokerage Willis Corroon P.L.C., named Terry W. Warren president and chief executive of its Medtrac subsidiary, which conducts health benefits reviews.


U.N. Has $500,000 Frozen in B.C.C.I. Banks in Africa
The United Nations Secretariat said today that about $500,000 of United Nations money was frozen in accounts in branches of the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce International in two African countries.
Francois Giuliani, the chief spokesman for Secretary General Xavier Perez de Cuellar, also said that Mr.
Perez had twice taken trips on private planes owned by Gaith R. Pharaon, a Saudi billionaire and a major shareholder in B.C.C.I. who had numerous business dealings in the United States.


Dow Adds 13.87 in First Gain of the Week
Stock prices moved higher yesterday for the first time this week.
Analysts, though, were not particularly impressed, blaming widespread skepticism about the economy for the sluggish performance.
After sinking more than 50 points in the previous three sessions, the Dow Jones industrial average rose 13.87 points, or a slim one-half of 1 percent, to 2,980.10.


For Children
Arcadia Amusements 8 Bayville Avenue Bayville, L.I. (516) 628-1774 Recommended ages: 2 and up
It's Saturday night and you wish you were either at the movies or near a beach.
If you have the get-up-and-go to drive to Bayville, a small beach town on the Long Island Sound, you can have entertainment and sea air at the same time.
The Arcadia amusement park, small in scale but stocked with plenty of video games and kiddie rides indoors and batting cages and an 18-hole miniature golf course outside, is right across the street from the Sound.
Once the sun sets, the briny air becomes bracing.
In the air-conditioned arcade, the children can dispense quarters for "Mad Dog McCree," with its laser-disk technology and large-screen video images of villains (whom players get to shoot), while outdoors, parents can shoot a golf ball on the manicured miniature golf course (a rose garden sits in the center).
In addition to 100 video games, there are games like Skee Ball and pinball that provide points for redemption of prizes, and the "ball pit" -- a cushioned room filled with plastic balls -- where small children can bounce around safely.
For the more sportive, nine batting cages are automated to pitch softballs and baseballs.
The rides and video games are 25 cents (a few new ones are 50 cents to $1); miniature golf is $3.75 a person and $2.50 for children under 6, and a batting cage costs $1.50 for 15 balls (helmets are supplied free).
Inside and out, the amusement park is tidy and clean, with bright wall decorations and lighting and a young manager, Constantine Megaris, ready to assist.
A large free lot in back takes care of parking.
And afterward, you're entitled to stroll along Ransom Beach.
Arcadia is open year round, from 10 A.M. to midnight every day.


Frederic A. Potts, Banker, 87
Frederic A. Potts, retired president of the Philadelphia National Bank, died Wednesday at his home on Martha's Vineyard in Massachusetts.
He was 87 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Vincent N. Trimarco, Judge, 84
Vincent N. Trimarco, a retired Chief Judge of the New York City Civil Court in the Bronx, died in his sleep on Sunday at the Catholic Medical Center in Manchester, N.H.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manchester.
Judge Trimarco, a native New Yorker, was a graduate of City College and Fordham Law School.
He was an assistant district attorney in the Bronx for six years and was appointed to Municipal Court in 1951.
He served for a quarter century in city courts before he retired in 1976.


Blair Mountain Journal; Union Fire Reignites In Ashes Of the Past
There are people around here who take as kindly to a coal company's plan to strip mine Blair Mountain as George Bush might take to an offer by Saddam Hussein to buy the White House.
"Blasphemy!" they cry. "Betrayal!"


Jet Rookie Standing in Shadow of Strong Backfield
For Blaise Bryant, breaking into the Jets' offensive backfield is going to be similar to a singer's trying to replace one of the Four Tops.
Bryant, the sixth-round draft pick out of Iowa State, wouldn't mind a backup role.
"I've already said that I want to give Blair Thomas the ball more this year," said Coach Bruce Coslet when asked if he would continue the four-back rotation the Jets used with success last season.
That ensemble helped the team finish fourth in the league in rushing.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 552 money market mutual funds decreased by $1.28 billion, to $458.72 billion, in the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 203 institutional funds increased by $180.5 million, to $132.27 billion.
The assets of the 259 general-purpose funds were down by $723.4 million, to $177.42 billion.
The 90 broker-dealer funds decreased by $733.7 million, to $149.03 billion, the institute said.


Accusations of Deceit Raised About Licensing of Reactor
A member of Congress says the Nuclear Regulatory Commission was misled into issuing the operating license for the Seabrook nuclear power plant in New Hampshire.
An assistant inspector general for the commission reportedly told the lawmaker, Representative John D. Dingell, last week that information given to the commission was false.


People
*
Jon Parkinson has been appointed to the new post of senior vice president and creative director at Hal Riney &amp; Partners, New York.
He had previously been senior vice president-creative director at Ayer Inc., New York. *
Calvin Mew, a senior vice president at Bozell Inc., Detroit, has been named managing director in charge of the Chrysler international account.
He will oversee the agency's activities on behalf of Chrysler in Europe, Asia and the Middle East.
Also, Chuck Russo has been promoted from vice president to senior vice president and group account director of the agency's Chrysler-Plymouth Dealer Advertising Association account, succeeding Roy McKechnie, who has left Bozell. *
Lee Anne Pilson has been named senior vice president and director of client services of the nonprescription division of RWR Advertising Ic., New York, a subsidiary of Nelson Communications Inc.
She had previously been senior vice president and management supervisor at Kallir Philips &amp; Ross Inc., New York.


Review/Film; A Garbage Man With Aspirations
We have only begun to pay the price for David Lynch's immense popularity, and for the influence he no doubt exerts over a whole generation of directorial wanna-be's.
If Adam Rifkin's "Dark Backward" is any indication, then aspiring young film makers in the Lynch mold can easily confuse the use of sickening grotesques and smug, simple-minded acting with the more interesting eccentricities that shape Mr.
Lynch's style.
But "The Dark Backward," which opens today at the Angelika Film Center, concentrates only on stomach-turning trivia and on the kind of exaggeratedly stupid behavior that amounts to directorial condescension.
Drawing on a story idea (the screenplay is by Mr. Rifkin) that is barely solid enough to sustain a brief skit, the film tells of Marty Malt (Judd Nelson), an excruciatingly shy garbage man who harbors dreams of being an excruciatingly bad stand-up comedian.


U.N. Deadline to Baghdad Passes, But U.S. Rules Out Attack Soon
A United Nations Security Council deadline for Iraq to provide a detailed list of its weapons of mass destruction expired today, with the Bush Administration charging that Baghdad had failed to comply with it fully.
But despite some earlier threats of retaliation against the Government of President Saddam Hussein, American officials said that no use of force was imminent.


In the Quest for Justice, Feelings Indeed Count
To the Editor:
As a practicing lawyer and recently published author, I take issue with David Margolick's suggestion, relating to Wallace Stevens, that "law and poetry are an odd pair" and that their worlds best remain "resolutely separate" (At the Bar column, July 12).


Boeing Confident About Customers
Despite the rapid consolidation of the airline industry, with four carriers in bankruptcy court, the Boeing Company's chairman, Frank Shrontz, says he is confident that his customers will still want all of the $100 billion worth of planes on order.
The backlog accounts for production through 1994.


Art in Review
'The Graphic Designs of Herbert Matter'
Museum of Modern Art 11 West 53d Street Through Dec. 3
This small, austerely elegant exhibition will remain on view in the Modern's architecture and design galleries for several months.
It reminds us that the Swiss-born designer Herbert Matter, who died in 1984 at the age of 78, is responsible for a number of familiar images and designs.
Primary among them is an advertisement showing a dusty chimney sweep sitting in a bright red armchair, known as the womb chair, designed by Eero Saarinen.
Done for Knoll Inc., it appeared in The New Yorker magazine annually from 1958 to 1971, according to the exhibition's press release.
Both the stark white space and pratfall humor of this image have many contemporary echoes -- the hilarious television commercials for the Nynex Yellow Pages, for example.


INSIDE
Pretoria Aid in Namibia
The South African Government admitted that it gave more than $35 million to seven political parties opposed to the leftist group in pre-independence elections inNamibia.
Page A3.


Queens Boy Hit by Stray Shot
A 13-year-old Queens boy was shot and critically wounded yesterday when a gunman randomly opened fire from a passing van on a street in the Richmond Hill section, the police said.
The boy, who was not identified by the police because of his age, was struck once in the chest about 4 P.M. as he stood on the corner of 108th Street and 95th Avenue, said Officer Andrew McInnis.
The youth was in critical but stable condition at Jamaica Hospital.
Officer McInnis said the gunman fired from a passing white van.
He said it appeared that that the shooting was random and that the boy was not a target.


Continental Air Weighs Cutbacks
Continental Airlines said that it would review all operations and employment levels because a summer travel surge never came.
A spokesman, Art Kent, declined to say whether layoffs or flight cutbacks were imminent, but said it was unlikely any action would be taken before autumn.


Review/Film; 'Trust': Black Humor And Unlikely Lovers
Putting on her purple lipstick one morning, a teen-ager tells her father she's pregnant.
He calls her a slut, she slaps his face and the minute she stomps out the door he drops dead.
Just as you were warned: if you break your father's heart, it will kill him.
The situation is part nightmare, part bad joke, and the perfect deadpan way to kick off Hal Hartley's "Trust."
Mr.
Hartley's two feature films -- "The Unbelievable Truth" was released last year -- share a droll, distinctive manner.
He drops by suburban Long Island, finds a couple of young characters who have skewed but thoroughly sensible attitudes, and lets them find each other.
Like the films of this 31-year-old writer and director, Mr.
Hartley's characters look realistic, act cockeyed and turn out to be just right.


CHRONICLE
TED TURNER, founder of the Turner Broadcasting System, told the National Audubon Society that he was replacing the cows on his Montana ranch with bison because they are prettier and easier on the environment.
"Buffaloes are better looking than cows," Mr.
Turner told the society Wednesday at its annual conference in Estes Park, Colo.
Mr.
Turner said he would replace his cows with 7,000 bison and that he agreed with environmentalists that cattle were overgrazing the West, turning land into desert and dumping topsoil and nitrates into creeks and streams.


Rulings in Macintosh Suit
A Federal judge today dismissed several claims raised by the Microsoft Corporation and the Hewlett-Packard Company in response to a copyright suit by Apple Computer Inc. over its Macintosh display technology.
In a series of pretrial rulings, Federal District Judge Vaughn Walker said Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard would not be allowed to argue at trial that the Macintosh pictorial window displays lacked the originality required for copyright protection.


Cityful of Sculpture Under the Sky
MORE than many other outdoor sculpture seasons, this one has a distinct character.
For the first time in a good while, isolated installations by individual artists are as commanding as group exhibitions.
The trend is toward functional, fanciful work on which the public can sit or play.
The star of the season is Robert Ressler, whose elegantly hacked Bunyonesque sculptures impose and enchant.
Along with Mr.
Ressler, the season is allowing other emerging artists to shine.
Colin Chase has shown his work indoors in New York City, but now his sculptural blend of Western and non-Western religious traditions can be tested in an outdoor setting.
Like Mr.
Ressler, Tim Watkins, whose billowy kinetic sculptures in Manhattan and Brooklyn are powered by solar energy, is building a reputation entirely through the outdoor sculpture circuit.
Jude Tallichet, whose toylike, militaristic work has a Boschlike wackiness and menace, has never before exhibited in New York.


On Stage, and Off
'Good Times' Is Hollywood Bound
There is nothing quite like a charming, heartwarming hit play to stimulate an insanely competitive, sharklike feeding frenzy in Hollywood.
For months, nearly 20 studios and production companies have been making ever-tightening circles around the rights to Lynda Barry's comedy, "The Good Times Are Killing Me." Among those said to be roiling the waters were Danny De Vito, Quincy Jones, the producers Griffin Dunne and Amy Robinson, and Allyn Stewart, who works with the Guber-Peters Entertainment Company.


Abroad at Home; The Reagan Effect
Over this summer millions of Americans have rediscovered what Ronald Reagan and the new right worked so hard to deny: We need government.
It has been the summer of fiscal crises.
New York City and State, California, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Maine and other states have gone through extraordinary struggles to balance their budgets.
And all had to make severe cuts in public services.


B.C.C.I. Pattern Seen in Fraud Case
Two men have pleaded guilty here to a fraud scheme that the prosecutors said involved laundering $3 million through the defuct Panamanian branch of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
The prosecutors said that the case, while small in the context of the big international banking fraud regulators suspect permeated B.C.C.I., illustrates how the bank had been favored for years by criminals seeking a way to eliminate their financial trail.


A Worry for Germany: Resurgent Nationalism
In this first summer since German unification, the hottest political debates here are over old questions about Germany's dark past.
Some commentators and political leaders say they see troubling signs of resurgent nationalism in the newly united country, and in the questions that Germans are asking themselves this summer: How should the nation honor a long-dead Prussian king?
How sacred should the sites of Nazi concentration camps be kept?
And what sort of monuments should Germans erect to commemorate their past victories?


Pryor Sentenced
AARON PRYOR, the former welterweight champion, was sentenced twice yesterday and will spend six months in jail on a drug-abuse charge.
Pryor told judges in two Hamilton County courts in Cincinnati that he had missed mandatory appearances in both courts on Thursday because he had overslept.
He said that when he awoke he reported to his lawyer, LESLIE GAINES, who arranged to have Pryor appear yesterday. (AP)


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.72
5.82
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.59
7.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.71
7.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.04
8.04
8.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.38
8.37
8.47
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.35
9.35
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.11
7.12
7.37
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Condoms Seized By U.S. Agents in a Label Case
A Federal judge today ordered the seizure of 1.2 million Trojan brand natural-membrane condoms after Federal officials had argued that the lambskin condoms did not provide protection against sexually transmitted diseases.
After Judge John W. Bissell of District Court signed the order, marshals headed for a Carter-Wallace Inc. warehouse in Cranbury in Middlesex County to safeguard the condoms there or at another site or move them to a secure warehouse.


About New York
A splendid, gracious scene.
Sunlight streamed through the skylight perhaps 80 feet overhead.
At the gleaming baby grand, a pianist caressed the velvety magic of Gershwin, Cole Porter, Rodgers and Hart.
Waiters wore tuxedoes.
Participants sitting in well-padded chairs conversed leisurely.
On the buffet tables were at least a dozen kinds of fruit, an enticing mix of cheeses, a half-dozen sorts of cookies, dainty finger sandwiches, cakes from carrot to chocolate and teas from Earl Gray to Raspberry Royale.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a theater review yesterday about a production of "As You Like It" by the Cheek by Jowl Company at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., misidentified a director who was cited among "young, innovative English directors." He is Sam Mendes, not Nicholas Mendes.


Tyson Accused of Rape
Former heavyweight boxing champion MIKE TYSON has been accused of raping a woman at an Indianapolis hotel during a visit to the city last week, authorities in that city said yesterday.
A woman reported she was sexually assaulted by the 25-year-old fighter on July 19, Indianapolis police spokesman ANDREW STONER said.


No More Aid for M.B.A.'s in China
In a modest structure on the leafy campus of the Dalian University of Technology, just across from a huge statue of Chairman Mao leading his Communist flock, capitalism is the burning issue.
The Chinese at the school, who are not trying to outflank Communism's nemesis but to absorb more of it, are losing some ground.
Despite Chinese protests, the Commerce Department has refused to renew an annual $400,000 contribution to a business school program here that has turned scores of young Chinese managers into freshly minted M.B.A.'s for service in their homeland.


Veto Allows Police Dismissals on Drug Tests
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo vetoed legislation today that would have prevented police departments in New York State from automatically dismissing officers who test positive for drugs.
The Governor also signed a bill to allow officers to transfer between New York City's three police departments -- the New York Police Department, the transit police and the housing police.


Korea via Brooklyn
The Brooklyn Philharmonic Chamber Ensemble will present a free concert saluting Korean music and musicians at 8 o'clock tonight at the Prospect Park Band Shell, Prospect Park West and Ninth Street, in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn.
The concert is to be conducted by Constantine Kitsopoulos and is to feature Chin Kim as soloist in Haydn's Violin Concerto No. 1, along with traditional Korean songs arranged for orchestra.
The kayagum, a 12-stringed instrument, will also be used.
The program will also include C. P. E. Bach's Symphony No. 1, "Eine Kleine Nachtmusik" by Mozart and "Chimhyang-Moo" ("Dancing Among Incense"), a solo work for the kayagum by the contemporary composer Byung-Ki Hwang.
The soloist is to be Sang Won-Park.
Information: (718) 622-1000.


George H. Love, 90, Industrialist Who Headed Two Corporations
George H. Love, an industrialist who headed two major corporations in divergent fields, the Consolidation Coal Company and the Chrysler Corporation, died on Thursday at his home in Pittsburgh.
He was 90 years old.
He died of complications from emphysema, his family said.


Toyota Australia
The Toyota Motor Corporation said it would begin building a $355 million car plant here early next year to insure its long-term survival in Australia.
The first cars are expected to be produced in 1994, said Robert Johnston, the president of Toyota Australia.
The plant, to be built in Altona, a western suburb of Melbourne, will include a body shop, assembly line and high-technology paint shop.
Its annual capacity is projected at 100,000 cars.
Toyota, the big Japanese car maker, has been making autos in Australia for 30 years.


No-Hitter for Nine Becomes Loss in 10th
Montreal's Mark Gardner pitched a nine-inning no-hitter tonight, but lost the game, 1-0, when Los Angeles scored a run in the 10th on a single by Darryl Strawberry.
Gardner is the first player to pitch a nine-inning no-hitter against a Dodger home team since Johnny Vander Meer beat Brooklyn at Ebbets Field on June 15, 1938, for his second straight gem.
An opponent had never thrown a no-hitter at Dodger Stadium before tonight.


Duke Threesome On Pan-Am Team
Duke teammates Grant Hill, Thomas Hill and Christian Laettner were among 12 players named today to the United States basketball team for the Pan American Games to be held in Havana Aug. 3-18.
Also making the team, which is coached by Gene Keady of Purdue, were: Anthony Bennett of Wisconsin-Green Bay, Terry Dehere of Seton Hall, Jimmy Jackson of Ohio State, Adam Keefe of Stanford, Eric Montross of North Carolina, Tracy Murray of U.C.L.A., Mike Peplowski of Michigan State, Clarence Weatherspoon of Southern Mississippi and Walt Williams of Maryland.


House Panel Cites U.S. Role In B.C.C.I. Florida Operation
The Justice Department sought to keep the scandal-marred Bank of Credit and Commerce International operating in Florida last year so the department could use accounts for undercover operations, according to Congressional documents released today.
The House Banking Committee's chairman, Henry B. Gonzalez, Democrat of Texas, said he found it "incredible" that the department would put pressure on Florida's Comptroller, Gerald Lewis, "to keep open a crime-infested financial institution."


News Summary
International 2-5
A weapons factory south of Moscow has gone into partnership with a Swedish company and now produces milk and juice containers -- alongside sophisticated military parts too secret to be discussed.
Page 1


CHRONICLE
ELIZABETH TAYLOR will take an eighth walk down the aisle, exchanging wedding vows in October with LARRY FORTENSKY in a private ceremony in which MICHAEL JACKSON will give the bride away.
"After being together for four years, Larry and I finally decided we wanted to spend the rest of our lives together," the 59-year-old Miss Taylor said in a statement released yesterday by her publicist, Chen Sam.


Harlem Arts School Chief
Betty Allen, the executive director of the Harlem School of the Arts, has been named its president, the school announced this week, to run a new capital campaign for scholarships, programs and facilities.
The school, on St.
Nicholas Avenue near 141st Street, was founded in 1964 and is the nation's first institution offering comprehensive pre-professional arts training primarily to black and Hispanic children.


Doctor's Resignation Is First Tied to New AIDS Guidelines
As his medical career took him from one hospital to the next, Dr.
Neal Rzepkowski said, he carried with him the conviction that he was doing the right thing.
In most cases, he told his superiors he was infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
When he beleved it appropriate, he told his patients.
No one, he said, ever protested.
But at a news conference yesterday, Dr.
Rzepkowski watched the president of an upstate New York hospital make an announcement that could end the doctor's career at the age of 39.
Officials at Brooks Memorial Hospital in Dunkirk, about 45 miles southeast of Buffalo, said that they had requested Dr.
Rzepkowski's resignation because he is HIV-positive, and that he had agreed to submit it.


Chevron Profits Fall 40.7%; Shell Has Loss
The Chevron Corporation said today that its profits fell 40.7 percent in the second quarter.
The Shell Oil Company posted its first quarterly loss since 1934, amounting to $68 million, after writing off $90 million for costs related to job cutbacks.
Other oil giants that operate mainly in the United States, as Chevron and Shell do, reported steep declines in earnings earlier this week for the quarter ended June 30.
They included Amoco, ARCO and Phillips Petroleum.


Pirates Keep Rolling Along, But Walk Comes Up Lame
Bobby Bonilla drove in four runs with a homer and a double as the Pittsburgh Pirates beat the slumping Houston Astros, 8-1, tonight for their 12th victory in 15 games.
But the victory may have been costly for Pittsburgh, as starter Bob Walk had to leave the game in the second inning when he strained his right hamstring while scoring a run.


A Hollywood Haunt Gets A Reprieve
The saga of the Formosa Cafe, the dimly lit Cantonese dive where Lana Turner once danced in the aisles and Rudy Vallee got drunk, has a happy ending.
The Hollywood landmark has been saved from the wrecker's ball.
The restaurant, which has fed movie stars and crews alike for 50 years, was to have been razed by Warner Brothers to build a parking garage for an expanded studio here.
The plan sparked a local public outcry over the destruction of what many considered hallowed movie ground, a small patch of history in a land without much history to save.


A Reversible Air-Conditioner, Heat Pump Warms and Cools
Heating and cooling a house used to be separate jobs, but the heat pump, a device that does both, often at much lower cost, is gaining popularity.
Nearly one in three new American houses uses a heat pump, according to a recent Government estimate; in some parts of the country heat pumps are nearly universal in new houses.
A heat pump is "nothing more than a glorified air-conditioner," said Robert M. Little Sr. of the residential marketing department at the Tampa Electric Company in Florida.


Patents; A New Hearing Aid That Fits in a Tooth
Barry Mersky, a dentist in Bethesda, Md., this week patented a hearing aid that fits inside a tooth.
According to the inventor, the new hearing aid can help people who cannot be helped by ear-mounted devices and could prove less noticeable as well.
The device is based on the principle that the teeth and skull pick up acoustic vibrations and conduct sound quite effectively to auditory nerves.
For that reason, Dr.
Mersky said, people who cover their ears can still hear their own voices, albeit more fuzzily.


New Influx of Cuban Refugees Is Creating Strains for Florida
Almost daily, newspapers and television stations here tell of Cuban refugees plucked by planes or cruise ships from the Florida Straits as they bob along in rafts or inner tubes.
But deteriorating conditions on the island have also provoked a much larger and virtually invisible emigration -- tourist charter flights from Havana -- that has begun to strain this city's resources.
Because a growing number of Cubans are arriving here as visitors and overstaying their visas, Florida officials are pressing the Federal Government for access to $35 million placed in an Immigration Emergency Fund that was established after the last big influx of Cubans a decade ago.


F.T.C. and A.T.&amp;T. Give Warnings on 3 Schemes
Scores of consumers who were the victims of unscrupulous telemarketers are being cheated yet again, this time by a telemarketing company that promises to get them the prizes they were supposed to get the first time.
Telephone fraud was also on the mind of A.T.&amp;T.
It warned consumers about the tactics used by swindlers who want to trick them into accepting third-party calls or divulging their calling-card numbers.


Baker Addresses the Mongolian Parliament
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today became the first Western statesman to address Mongolia's Parliament, pledging support for its reform efforts and promising millions of dollars worth of United States aid.
"On behalf of President Bush and the American people, I come here today to lend our support and to work with you for the success of political and economic freedom here in Mongolia," Mr.
Baker told a meeting of bot houses of Parliament in the capital, Ulan Bator.


Campeau Units
The Campeau Corporation said it was not pleased with the restructuring plan presented by its United States subsidiaries, Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation.
According to the plan, Campeau would not retain any equity interest in the subsidiaries, and in exhange it would be released from its liabilities.
Campeau will get to keep a 14.7 percent stake in the Ralph's Grocery Company.
But Campeau's chairman, Stanley Hartt, said he did not think the compensation was enough, given the $1.5 billion investment Campeau made in its takeover of Federated and Allied.


Steeler Reportedly Tried to Kill Himself
Terry Long of the Pittsburgh Steelers, a veteran offensive guard and one of the National Football League's strongest players, was in Allegheny General Hospital today, two days after he reportedly tried twice to commit suicide.
Long was distraught about an impending suspension for failing a steroids test and over possibly losing his starting job, several teammates said.
They said Long had told them he learned Tuesday he had failed a steroids test administered on July 11, the day after the team reported to training camp at St.
Vincent College in Latrobe, Pa.


100 Indian Troops Reported Slain in Ambush by Muslims
More than 100 Indian troops were killed on Thursday when Muslim militants ambushed an army convoy in the state of Jammu and Kashmir, Pakistan's official press agency said today.
No independent confirmation was available.
If confirmed, it would be the most devastating attack by the militants in their open rebellion since early last year.


Milwaukee Police Once Queried Suspect
Two months before butchered bodies were discovered in Jeffrey L. Dahmer's apartment in Milwaukee, neighbors called the police and said they had seen a dazed-looking teen-ager shambling on the street outside, naked and bleeding.
The police who investigated left after Mr.
Dahmer apparently persuaded them that the young man was of age, that the two were living together and that the incident was a domestic dispute.


Treasury Prices Dip in Sluggish Trading
Prices of Treasury securities dipped in light trading yesterday, as credit market participants used a weaker-than-expected report on second-quarter economic growth as an excuse to take profits.
The report showed that for the first time since last year's third quarter growth turned positive, but just barely.
The increase of four-tenths of a percent was less than half what most analysts had expected.


Don't Make Tobacco Addiction a Civil Right
To the Editor:
"None of an Employer's Business" (editorial, July 7) overlooks an important fact.
Three of the largest tobacco companies own life insurance subsidiaries, and these life insurance subsidiaries charge smokers double for life insurance (even if they only smoke off the job!).


Soybean Prices Up Sharply Amid Fears of Dry Weather
Soybean futures prices surged yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade amid fears of dry weather, strong technical signals and signs that India was looking to import a large amount of United States soybean oil.
All soybean oil futures settled 1 cent higher, the permitted daily limit, with the August contract at 20.25 cents a pound.


Another Upset for Nuclear Siren?
Precious Bunny is the 4-5 favorite to win the Art Rooney Pace on Saturday night at Yonkers Raceway, but don't count out Nuclear Siren.
Nuclear Siren came from three and a half lengths back at the head of the stretch to beat Precious Bunny at the wire in 1:51 4/5 in a New Jersey Sire Stake on May 17, on a one-mile track at the Meadowlands.


Bike Race Speeds Up Financially
No matter which rider mounts the victory stand after the Tour de France ends with a sprint down the Champs Elysees tomorrow, the biggest winner could well be Groupe Amaury, the French publishing company that organizes the world's biggest, richest and most famous bicycle race.
Groupe Amaury publishes L'Equipe, a sports newspaper that has been a sponsor of the race for decades, and Le Parisien, a general-interest newspaper.
Buoyed by the exploits of a cycling superstar, Greg LeMond, the American who has won the race three times since 1986 but who has faltered this year, Groupe Amaury has seen its revenues from the 22-day event almost double in five years, to $20 million.


Don't Make Tobacco Addiction a Civil Right; Blatant Discrimination
To the Editor:
You are correct to argue that the high cost of health insurance is insufficient reason for employers to exert greater control over their employees' private lives (editorial, July 7).
Nobody has serious quarrel with an employer setting rules and regulations in the workplace; but we enter a dangerous arena when we pit privacy issues against health.


California Spill Exposes Gaps in Rail Safety Rules
The train derailment and chemical spill that poisoned 45 miles of the Sacramento River in northern California also exposed gaping weaknesses in the railroad industry's safety program and is causing the Government to consider an array of new rules for hauling hazardous materials.
Experts with the National Transportation Safety Board, Congress, and the Federal Railroad Administration say the accident on July 14 illustrated the almost complete absence of regulations for shipping agricultural weed and insect poisons and raised questions about the safety of that type of tank car and the operating procedures of the railroad.


Scowcroft Defends Pentagon Over Vietnam Photo
Brent Scowcroft, the President's national security adviser, today dismissed charges that the Administration was not committed to finding surviving Vietnam War servicemen and he said there was no credible evidence that Vietnam still held any American prisoners of war.
It was the strongest comment so far by an Administration official on the emotionally charged question of whether there are any Americans left trapped in Southeast Asia.
A flurry of recent photographs and renewed charges by family members that the Defense Intelligence Agency was covering up evidence on missing servicemen have forced the Administration into a defensive and sometimes awkward position.


Antitrust Mistrust of the Baby Bells
The best dissent from Federal Judge Harold Greene's decision to allow the regional telephone companies to provide information services comes from, of all people, Judge Greene.
It would hardly make sense, he wrote Thursday, to "turn a key ingredient of the emerging information society over to corporations who not so long ago were involved in major violations of the antitrust laws, and who even now seem ready to engage in anticompetitive practices whenever the opportunity therefore presents itself."


U.S. SEEKS ACCESS TO BASES IN ASIA
The commander of American forces in the Pacific said today that the United States was seeking new military alliances in Asia after the decision this month to shut down Clark Air Base in the Philippines.
The commander, Adm.
Charles R. Larson, said the United States was discussing with its Asian allies the possibility of shifting some functions of the American air base to points elsewhere in the region.


The Sandinista Syndrome
Nicaragua's Sandinista Front still fails to digest the lessons of its 1990 political defeat, judging by its recent congress.
Sadly, the Sandinistas would rather bury their heads in the sands of an obsolete ideology than honorably adapt to the responsibilities of democracy.
The congress reinstalled essentially the same leadership of former guerrilla commanders that was rejected by voters last year.
And while the front dropped explicit references to Marxism-Leninism from its official positions, it reaffirmed its vocation as a revolutionary vanguard, entitled to speak for the peasant and worker masses whether or not those masses agree.


Letter: On Foreign Aid Senate Bill Respects Latin Priorities
To the Editor:
"Forgive Debt, Finance Nature" (editorial, July 16) misleads on the action taken to date by the Senate on the President's Enterprise for the Americas Initiative and misses the central point of the legislative provisions included in the Senate's version of the foreign aid bill.


Hanson Chides I.C.I. Management
Lord Hanson, the head of Hanson P.L.C., said shareholders in Imperial Chemical Indistries P.L.C.
"need to see more real evidence" that the chemical maker's management "is fully addressingthe ways in which shareholder value can be maximized." I.C.I. on Thursday said that its pretax profit had declined to $:507 million, or about $822.4 million, from $:733 million a year before.
The results have led Hanson, I.C.I.'s second-largest shareholder, to say that it would "monitor I.C.I.'s performance with great interest."
Two months ago, Hanson acquired 2.8 percent of I.C.I.
Lord Hanson said the company made the investment because it "considered that I.C.I. was undervalued and that there was significant scope for enhancing value." The purchase "has now encouraged I.C.I. management to consider more carefully its own objectives and to take urgent action to increase shareholder value," Lord Hanson said.


Quake, Flood and Mud Flow Causing Panic in Philippines
An earthquake, floods and mud flows struck parts of the Philippines today, causing panic and adding to the misery of a nation recovering from the devastation of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo, which began last month.
Two people were electrocuted in chest-deep floods in Manila caused by monsoon rains, officials said.


Fernandez and Mets Fall Apart Together
The loss, full of fatal starting pitching, a devastating home run and strategic strangeness from the manager, had the feel of the routine for the Mets tonight.
The predicament it left the Mets in, though, was anything but ordinary.
The Mets, who fell to the Padres, 8-2, lost more of their momentum and more of their confidence and have come perilously close to losing contact with the Pirates.
The defeat, produced by a crushing and sure-to-be-questioned sixth-inning, left the Mets seven games in back of Pittsburgh, their largest deficit of the season.


Amid Lightning, Jets Hear The Rumble of Rumors
Rain and thunder caused the Jets to call off their outdoor drills this afternoon and gave them time to deal with the rumors that they are trying to trade Erik McMillan, their two-time Pro Bowl free safety.
A brusque "no comment" was all that McMillan would offer as he brushed past reporters gathered outside the cafeteria after lunch today.


Officers Returning Fire Kill a Man, Police Say
An unidentified 34-year-old man was shot and killed by two police officers late last night in the South Bronx.
A police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, said the incident began when Officers John Murphy and Sal Grippi responded to a report of shots being fired at a building at 919 Eagle Avenue.


New Influx of Cuban Refugees Is Creating Strains for Florida
Almost daily, newspapers and television stations here tell of Cuban refugees plucked by planes or cruise ships from the Florida Straits as they bob along in rafts or inner tubes.
But deteriorating conditions on the island have also provoked a much larger and virtually invisible emigration -- tourist charter flights from Havana -- that has begun to strain this city's resources.
Because a growing number of Cubans are arriving here as visitors and overstaying their visas, Florida officials are pressing the Federal Government for access to $35 million placed in an Immigration Emergency Fund that was established after the last big influx of Cubans a decade ago.


Amid More Outside Pressure, An N.C.A.A. Committee Meets
A special committee made up of prominent lawyers, former judges, university administrators and representatives of college athletic programs met today to hear testimony on the enforcement and infraction procedures of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
Rex Lee, the chairman and the president of Brigham Young University, and former Supreme Court Chief Justice Warren Burger lead the committee, which was established by the N.C.A.A. in January amid criticisms of its oversight of athletic programs, particularly due process in N.C.A.A. investigations.


California Spill Exposes Gaps in Rail Safety Rules
The train derailment and chemical spill that poisoned 45 miles of the Sacramento River in northern California also exposed gaping weaknesses in the railroad industry's safety program and is causing the Government to consider an array of new rules for hauling hazardous materials.
Experts with the National Transportation Safety Board, Congress, and the Federal Railroad Administration say the accident on July 14 illustrated the almost complete absence of regulations for shipping agricultural weed and insect poisons and raised questions about the safety of that type of tank car and the operating procedures of the railroad.


CHRONICLE
The AGA KHAN can rightfully claim ownership to his grandfather's 1,200-acre horse farm in County Kildare, the Irish High Court ruled Thursday.
Ownership had been contested by YOSHIKA AKAZAWA, a Japanese businessman who said he had an agreement to buy the farm from BERTRAM R. FIRESTONE, a Virginia horse breeder and race track owner.
The Aga Khan said he bought the Gilltown Stud farm from Mr.
Firestone for $14.2 million in 1989.
Mr.
Firestone and DIANA FIRESTONE, his wife, were sued by both the Aga Khan and Mr.
Akazawa.


Langston, Langston, Go Away, Yanks Mutter
The weather was dreary at Yankee Stadium last night, causing the game between the Angels and the Yankees to be delayed for just over an hour by rain.
With Mark Langston pitching for California, New York's outlook was just as ominous when things got under way.
In the end, the rain held off once the game began, but Langston didn't.
He rained strike after strike down upon the Yankees in leading the Angels to a 5-1 victory.
Langston pitched into the ninth inning in stopping New York on seven hits and, in doing so, became the second 14-game winner in the major leagues.


Leadership of Communists Approves Gorbachev Plan
The leadership of the Communist Party overwhelmingly approved President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's proposed new charter today, clearing the way for a full congress in November to transform the former "vanguard of the proletariat" into a broad-based "party of democratic reforms."
"The model that has been imposed on the party and society for decades has suffered a strategic defeat," Mr.
Gorbachev said in his closing comments to the Central Committee.
"This conclusion is of principled significance. It follows that we have come to face the necessity of a new drastic change of our entire viewpoint of socialism. We will not find an answer to our queries within the framework of the old model."


Trade Talks Put U.S. Jobs in Peril
To the Editor:
"No Fatal Distractions in London" (editorial, July 15), on the Uruguay Round of international trade talks, is the kind of thinking that has led to huge United States trade deficits and reduction of manufacturing jobs.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Greetings Corp., Cleveland, a maker of greeting cards, named James M. Semon senior vice president-international operations and John J. Sullivan president of its Carlton Cards Ltd. subsidiary. *
Bush Industries, Jamestown, N.Y., a furniture manufacturer, appointed Robert L. Ayres chief operating officer and chief financial officer and Donald F. Hauck senior vice president of finance.


Dollar Off After G.N.P. Data; Gold Prices Higher in U.S.
The dollar declined across the board yesterday, depressed by an unexpectedly weak report on United States economic growth during the second quarter.
Gold prices rose in domestic dealings after declining overseas.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $366.20 an ounce, up $1.70.
Republic National Bank said gold rose $1.75 an ounce to a late bid price of $366.


Regents Reject Voucher Plan For Tuition
The New York State Board of Regents today narrowly rejected a proposal to give parents state-financed tuition vouchers to send their children to private or parochial schools.
The controversial pilot program, which would have involved about 5,000 students in the state's worst public schools, was defeated, 8 to 6, in a surprisingly close vote after its chief proponent, Vice Chancellor R. Carlos Carballada, gave an impassioned speech, urging his colleagues to do something to help schoolchildren who he said were "not learning the skills they need to make it in life."


Pete Rose's Statistics Fall Short of Great
To the Editor:
In "Put Rose Almost in the Hall of Fame" (Op-Ed, July 8), James Reston Jr. suggests that Pete Rose, the former Cincinnati Reds star now banished from baseball for gambling, should have a separate exhibit in the Hall of Fame to display his rise and fall as a morality tale.


Leadership of Communists Approves Gorbachev Plan
The leadership of the Communist Party overwhelmingly approved President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's proposed new charter today, clearing the way for a full congress in November to transform the former "vanguard of the proletariat" into a broad-based "party of democratic reforms."
"The model that has been imposed on the party and society for decades has suffered a strategic defeat," Mr.
Gorbachev said in his closing comments to the Central Committee.
"This conclusion is of principled significance. It follows that we have come to face the necessity of a new drastic change of our entire viewpoint of socialism. We will not find an answer to our queries within the framework of the old model."


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the special effects in the film "Terminator 2: Judgment Day" misstated the founding date of the special-effects company Industrial Light and Magic.
It was 1975, not 1976.


Foreman Drops Suit
The former heavyweight champion GEORGE FOREMAN said yesterday that he was dropping his lawsuit against EVANDER HOLYFIELD and would no longer seek an injunction to block a title fight between Holyfield and MIKE TYSON.  (AP)


Corrections
A report in the Book Notes column on Wednesday about the similarity of new advertisements by Harper Perennial to those used since last year by Vintage misidentified one publication in which they appeared.
It was VLS, the literary supplement of The Village Voice -- not The Voice itself, for which advertising is sold separately.


Ewing Ruling Due
PATRICK EWING will learn the outcome of his arbitration case against the Knicks in a ruling scheduled for Monday at 11 A.M. by DANIEL COLLINS, the New York University law professor who is serving as arbitrator.
Ewing filed a complaint against the Knicks charging that he was not one of the four highest-paid players in the National Basketball Association as of June 1, as his contract calls for.


Japan Criticized On Auto Trade
Japan has not done enough to open its automobile and car- parts markets to American manufacturers and the Bush Administration's patience is wearing thin, a Commerce Department official said today.
"We have told our Japanese counterparts that we are not satisfied with the progress to date in the opening of the Japanese market," said the official, J. Michael Farren, Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade.
"We have waited patiently for years, and we don't have much more patience left to offer."


Rare Sense of Optimism Stirs Anew in Hartford
There was enough optimism in the air at the Connecticut Capitol today for the House, the Senate and the Governor to set a deadline for adopting a budget for the fiscal year that began 26 days ago: one more week.
The feeling that progress is being made has been felt before in this roller-coaster special session, in which legislators have at times worked through the night and over weekends only to have one budget or another defeated or vetoed.


Fight Over Water Rights in India Threatens Government Coalition
A dispute over river water-sharing between two southern Indian states erupted into a bitter confrontation today, shaking the minority Government of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao as the states held rival Government-organized strikes and lawmakers revolted.
The confrontation between a defiant Congress Party Government in Karnataka state and a regional party backed by Congress in the neighboring state of Tamil Nadu gave Mr.
Rao's Government its sharpest political test since it took office last month.


Observer; Looking For Giants
The Port Washington Public Library out on Long Island knows how to dampen a human's spirits.
It has asked 50 people each to choose one or two books of the past 50 years "that have most profoundly affected the thoughts and actions of humankind."
This is a reprise of an exercise the library conducted in 1942 when it asked 20 reading types to identify those books published between 1892 and 1942 that had "most profoundly affected the thoughts and actions of mankind."


Police in Milwaukee Knew About Suspect
The Milwaukee police responded two months ago to reports of a naked and bleeding teen-ager on the street.
The three officers who investigated were apparently persuaded by Jeffrey L. Dahmer, now suspected in 11 killings, that the incident was a domestic dispute.
Yesterday the three officers were suspended.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 27, 1941


California Spill Exposes Gaps in Rail Safety Rules
The train derailment and chemical spill that poisoned 45 miles of the Sacramento River in northern California also exposed gaping weaknesses in the railroad industry's safety program and is causing the Government to consider an array of new rules for hauling hazardous materials.
Experts with the National Transportation Safety Board, Congress, and the Federal Railroad Administration say the accident on July 14 illustrated the almost complete absence of regulations for shipping agricultural weed and insect poisons and raised questions about the safety of that type of tank car and the operating procedures of the railroad.


Political and Press Freedoms Are Instituted in Mauritania
The military Government legalized political opposition and instituted press freedoms today, keeping to a timetable set to create a multiparty democracy by the end of the year.
The reforms would end 13 years of dictatorship in the West African nation.
All parties except Islamic groups will be permitted, reflecting the military's fear of fundamentalist movements.


Staring Hard at South Africa
President F. W. de Klerk can expect a concerned global audience when he reports to South Africa Tuesday about a burgeoning slush-fund scandal.
He has to account for what looks like a determined police effort to divide and destabilize his country's huge black majority.
Mr. de Klerk's Government has now acknowledged that it engaged in covertly funding Inkatha, the Zulu-based movement led by Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, the foremost rival of the militant African National Congress.
And now comes the revelation that Pretoria lavished $35 million in secret subsidies on its allies in neighboring Namibia to tilt the results of Namibia's 1989 independence elections.


Hurry Up, Hansel, The Gang's All Here
In the barns along the backstretch at Saratoga Race Course today, a gathering of Kentucky Derby stars was taking shape as the track headed into its first weekend of all-star racing.
The only absentee of renown was Hansel, winner of the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes, who was at Monmouth Park in New Jersey playing the role of favorite in Saturday's $500,000 Haskell Invitational.
But he was merely taking another route to the major goal of most of the Triple Crown veterans: the $1 million Travers Stakes at Saratoga three weeks from now.


New Jersey Fails to Seize Life Insurer
New Jersey officials failed yesterday to take over the troubled New Jersey Life Insurance Company.
But while a state court judge denied the officials' request to seize the company, he did order New Jersey Life to stop selling new insurance until the dispute can be considered at a court trial next month.
The judge also imposed a moratorium on all policy loans, policy surrenders and other forms of cash withdrawals b New Jersey Life's policyholders.


Don't Make Tobacco Addiction a Civil Right; Everybody's Problem
To the Editor:
Wendi Spuehler, a 17-year-old Iowan, says, "If I choose to ruin my lungs, it's my choice" (news article, July 1).
Well, yes, it is her choice.
And if smokers ruined their lungs and just died, the rest of us wouldn't have much to quibble about as long as we do not have to inhale the smoke.


Free Test for Toilets
To the Editor:
I applaud your July 6 editorial commending Mayor Dinkins for his statesmanship in supporting the experiment to bring new public toilets to New York City.


Todd Shipyards Is Sued by Holders
The Todd Shipyards Corporation said Burton Borman, the leader of a group of dissident shareholders, filed suit against the company and its directors in Delaware Chancery Court in Wilmington.
The suit seeks reinstatement of July 10 as the record date for a special shareholders' meeting and convening of the meeting within 60 days of that date, the company said.
The special meeting, which had been set for Aug. 15, was canceled by the company on Thursday.
Mr.
Borman's group controls 5.1 percent of Todd's common shares and is seeking control of the company.
It told the Securities and Exchange Commission that it planned to solicit proxies for representation on the company's board.
Its slate of nominees included Mr.
Borman and four other members of the group, including the retired Adm.
Elmo Zumwalt Jr.
The company's shares rose 12.5 cents, to $5.75, on the New York Stock Exchange today.


Milwaukee Police Once Queried Suspect
Two months before butchered bodies were discovered in Jeffrey L. Dahmer's apartment in Milwaukee, neighbors called the police and said they had seen a dazed-looking teen-ager shambling on the street outside, naked and bleeding.
The police who investigated left after Mr.
Dahmer apparently persuaded them that the young man was of age, that the two were living together and that the incident was a domestic dispute.


Microsoft Widens Its Split With I.B.M. Over Software
The Microsoft Corporation is moving its software strategy farther away from that of the International Business Machines Corporation, its one-time partner, company executives said.
Microsoft supplies the MS-DOS operating system used on I.B.M. and compatible personal computers.
And the company worked with I.B.M. on OS/2, which was supposed to be a successor to DOS.
But recently Microsoft and I.B.M. have had a bitter divorce, with I.B.M. continuing to support OS/2 while Microsoft supports its own program known as Windows.


Guinness Figure Freed
A British businessman who was one of three executives jailed in the case involving Guinness P.L.C. and the last still in prison was freed today after having served less than a year.
The executive, Anthony K. Parnes, had been sentenced to two and a half years in prison for his part in the 1986 Guinness stock scandal.


The Rockies Were Easy. Jersey Was the Hard Part.
At the start of the week, Kanavis McGhee drove without incident from Denver to New Jersey.
On Thursday, he got lost driving the 28 miles from Giants Stadium to the Giants' training camp here.
He arrived at 6:50 P.M., just in time for the 7 P.M. team meeting.
Today, 12 days after the other Giants first took the practice field, he worked out with the team for the first time.


New Safelite Glass Chief Has Plans for Expansion
Garen K. Staglin, who has been named chairman and chief executive of the Safelite Glass Corporation, a manufacturer and retailer of glass for autos, has plans to extend the company's service to the insurance industry beyond installing new glass in damaged cars.
Safelite, based in Columbus, Ohio, has more than 630 auto-glass replacement shops throughout the country.
Mr.
Staglin, 46 years old, would like the company to do more than just install the auto glass for insurance claims, but also to aid in claim scheduling and to handle some of the administrative claim work.


L. M. Kaganovich, Stalwart of Stalin, Dies at 97
Lazar Moyseyevich Kaganovich, one of Stalin's closest aides and the last surviving Bolshevik leader who joined the Communist Party before the Revolution, died here on Thursday.
He was 97 years old.
Once a towering figure in Kremlin politics, Kaganovich sometimes was regarded as the No. 2 man in the Soviet Union because of his ties to Stalin.


Ambitions Thwarted, Campbell Official Quits
In an unusually frank announcement, the Campbell Soup Company said yesterday that its chief financial officer had resigned because he had not been named chief executive.
Edwin L. Harper, 49 years old, executive vice president and chief financial officer, had been with the food company for five years.
His resignation, effective immediately, comes on the final day of Campbell Soup's fiscal year, which Mr.
Harper described as "a very successful turnaround year." The financial results are due in early September.


A Way to Time Cable Interruptions
A new Los Angeles electronics company has designed a device that lets cable television subscribers calculate how long they are without service every month.
The device, Cable Watch, is about the size of a television remote control and attaches to the main coaxial cable.
Whether the television set is on or off, it registers the time the cable is out of service.


Patents; A Compound of Oils For Treating Arthritis
Combining oil from shark liver, garlic and soybeans, two researchers in Syracuse have patented what they say is a topical compound to relieve the pain and inflammation of arthritis.
The compound was invented by Dr.
Jeffery Wiersum, a family doctor, and Henry E. Troy, a research pharmacologist who spent many years at what is now the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company.
Mr.
Troy said both garlic and shark liver oil had long been used as separate pain relievers in ancient Chinese herbal medicine, and their beneficial effects have been reported in a number of medical journals.


New Influx of Cuban Refugees Is Creating Strains for Florida
Almost daily, newspapers and television stations here tell of Cuban refugees plucked by planes or cruise ships from the Florida Straits as they bob along in rafts or inner tubes.
But deteriorating conditions on the island have also provoked a much larger and virtually invisible emigration -- tourist charter flights from Havana -- that has begun to strain this city's resources.
Because a growing number of Cubans are arriving here as visitors and overstaying their visas, Florida officials are pressing the Federal Government for access to $35 million placed in an Immigration Emergency Fund that was established after the last big influx of Cubans a decade ago.


Rachelle Goldberg Psychiatrist, 90
Dr.
Rachelle Goldberg, a retired New York psychiatrist, died on Wednesday at her room in the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged in Manhattan.
She was 90 years old and had lived in Brooklyn.
Dr. Goldberg died of natural causes, said her daughter, Alla.


Prohibition's Effect
To the Editor:
I find it hard to imagine that Jane H. Krieger (letter, July 14) actually believes that the Iowa law banning underage smoking will have a substantial effect.
No matter what the laws say, seniors in high school will always smoke and drink, and drivers will always go 65 miles an hour.
If anything, the new law will encourage underage smoking.
A 16-year-old Iowan will probably be more likely to try smoking to look older and cooler, knowing that only 18-year-olds are legally permitted to smoke.


Beckhampton Journal; An Invisible Hand Beckons All to the Wheat Fields
For a second summer, farmers across southwestern England are waking to find giant circles and odd, geometric patterns pressed into their fields of ripening wheat, strange symbols that have been attributed to everything from alien beings and forest fairies to the work of rural pranksters.
But while some of the most imaginative minds in Britain continue to debate who, or what, is making the circles, farmers and business people in the county of Wiltshire have succeeded in deciphering part of their cryptic message: to them, the circles mean money in their pockets.


COURT BACKS CURB ON MARIJUANA USE
Massachusetts' highest court has ruled that society's interest in preventing illegal drug use outweighs the suffering of a man who used marijuana to relieve pain and depression caused by a chronic illness.
In a 5-to-2 decision, the state Supreme Judicial Court on Wednesday upheld the man's conviction on drug charges, even though two of his doctors said marijuana seemed to help.
A third doctor said he found no evidence that the drug helped.


Zulu-Based Union Received $500,000 From the Police
The South African police secretly poured more than $500,000 into an ostensibly independent labor union loyal to the Zulu-based political movement Inkatha without knowing where the money went, according to the latest disclosure today in the scandal that has developed over the Government's covert aid to Inkatha.
Law and Order Minister Adriaan Vlok has acknowledged that 1.5 million rand, now about $525,000, was paid to the United Workers Union of South Africa over six years.
But Mr.
Vlok, in a television interview on Sunday, said the spending of "each and every cent" had been accounted for.


Our Treadmill Economy
America's international financial standing seems better than it did six months ago, but we have not made significant progress in solving our fundamental economic problems.
When the sum total of our assets abroad and foreign claims on us were recalculated from their original cost to their present market value, our net international indebtedness at the end of 1990 turned out to be not the more than $600 billion previously reported but $361 billion.
We also learned that in the first quarter, our trade balance showed a small surplus, the first surplus since 1982.


Oliver Gintel, 88, Dies; A Furrier in New York
Oliver Gintel, a furrier in New York for more than 60 years, died on Tuesday at his home in North Miami Beach, Fla.
He was 88 years old.
Mr.
Gintel died of congestive heart failure, his son, Robert, said.
Mr.
Gintel owned the House of Black Diamond in Manhattan, a manufacturer of mink coats that he bought in the early 70's and for which he was also designer.
He sold the business in the early 80's and retired in 1989.


His Other Park
To the Editor:
The resurrection of Bryant Park is a not so small miracle (editorial, July 10).
While a William Cullen Bryant statue occupies a place of honor in this six-acre park, there is no tribute to Bryant in the 843-acre Central Park, of which he was the cultural godfather.


Patents; Faster Way To Measure Odd Shapes
Two mathematicians in Michigan have patented a faster way for computers to calculate the volume or weight of objects with complicated dimensions.
The method could make it easier to make a variety of difficult measurements: the total interior space of an automobile, the amount of oil in a dome-shaped reservoir or the volume of toxic waste in soil on a piece of property.
Calculating the volume of a cube requires multiplying length by height and width.
But the process becomes far more complicated and cumbersome when measuring more irregular shapes that cannot be reduced to a simple formula.


INSIDE
A To Aide To Stalin Dies
Lazar M. Kagannovich, one of Stalin's closest aides, who played a big role in the collectivization of Soviet agriculture, died at age 97.
Obituary, page 11.
A Losing No-Hitter for Expo
Mark Gardner pitched nine no-hit innings against the Dodgers, but lost the game in the 10th.
Sports, page 29.


Pratt &amp; Whitney
The Pratt &amp; Whitney Company is expected to receive a $9 billion engine contract for the Air Force's new Advanced Tactical Fighter, The Washington Post reported today.
The Defense Acquisition Board met on Thursday to make the decision, Pentagon officials said in the report.
The decision is to be announced next week.
But the Justice Department is investigating accusations that Pratt &amp; Whitney, a unit of United Technologies, used stolen information about the competition to win an earlier engine contract.


Encore Reportedly Plans to Shut Plant
Encore Computer, the troubled computer manufacturer based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., is planning to shut its plant in Marlboro, Mass., and lay off nearly all of the 200 workers there, according to a person within the company.
The company, which makes and sells multiprocessing computers used for flight simulation, energy management and nuclear power plant simulation, has been hit hard recently by economic problems exacerbated by continuing delays in shipping its new Gemini computer, said the person, who asked not to be named.


Don't Make Tobacco Addiction a Civil Right; Blame Our Health Care
To the Editor:
"None of an Employer's Business" (editorial, July 7) misses the point.
Employers don't want to hire workers who smoke because their medical bills are higher.
You protest.
But under our system this is to be expected.
If we are going to insist that employers pay for workers' health insurance, it's unreasonable to demand that employers "refrain from invading an employee's personal life."


CONFEREES AGREE TO CURB PRESIDENT ON COVERT ACTION
A House-Senate conference committee today announced agreement on legislation that would clarify and limit the President's authority to approve secret intelligence operations abroad.
The bill is a softer version of a similar measure that President Bush rejected last year on the ground that it infringed on his authority to conduct foreign policy.


Zulu-Based Union Received $500,000 From the Police
The South African police secretly poured more than $500,000 into an ostensibly independent labor union loyal to the Zulu-based political movement Inkatha without knowing where the money went, according to the latest disclosure today in the scandal that has developed over the Government's covert aid to Inkatha.
Law and Order Minister Adriaan Vlok has acknowledged that 1.5 million rand, now about $525,000, was paid to the United Workers Union of South Africa over six years.
But Mr.
Vlok, in a television interview on Sunday, said the spending of "each and every cent" had been accounted for.


Miss Smartt Wed to Richard Novak
Lucy Moore Smartt, the daughter of Lucy Alston Smartt of Charlotte, N.C., and the late Foley V. Smartt, was married last evening in Falls Church, Va., to Richard Laub Novak, the son of Karen Laub-Novak and Michael Novak of Washington.
The Rev.
Floyd Ewalt, performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Robert Sirico, a Roman Catholic priest, at the Falls Church Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Novak, 30 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father was the news radio editor for the Voice of America in Washington.


Par for Tough Course Gives Snead the Lead
The shining star of the 12th United States Senior Open remained the Oakland Hills Country Club course today.
No one in the field of 156 players has been able to beat the course after two rounds.
J.
C.
Snead is the only player to be even with the par-70 course, which is 6,718 yards long with fast and undulating greens.
Today, Snead shot a one-under 69, which gave him a 36-hole total of 140 and a one-stroke lead over a course that a majority of players said Ben Hogan was right to call a monster.


Your Taxes; Charity Tax Effort Is Set to Backfire
Those who counsel that it's better to live with unfavorable elements of the tax code than to risk changes now have fresh ammunition.
Take the issue of deductions for charitable contributions, which the Internal Revenue Service is to address next Thursday when it conducts a hearing on a regulation it proposed in March.
If adopted, the proposal could affect tens of millions of dollars in contributions and possibly impose substantial new recordkeeping burdens.


Reactors to Juice Cartons: Soviet Factory Adjusts
Across the Soviet Union, people are starting their days by popping open milk and juice containers that are produced here thanks to machines that used to produce sophisticated military components too secret to be discussed.
The Luch Experimental Works factory in this industrial city about 15 miles south of Moscow was an integral part of the vast and secretive military industrial complex, producing parts for nuclear reactors, lasers and metal optics used in advanced weapons systems.
Now, as part of a joint venture with a Swedish company, the factory has been partially turned over to manufacturing machines that make cardboard containers for milk, orange juice, apple juice and guava juice.


Review/Film; Five Models on an Island, Easy Prey to Lady-Killers
"Bikini Island," which opened yesterday at the Village East, is a genial piece of cave art about five beautiful, absolutely brainless models who are taken to a not very nice tropical location to pose in swimsuits for a magazine.
It should interest anyone who cares about such technical issues as how models play volleyball in slow motion, or how models shower.
The models are treated more or less as pets by the smug Jack Denton (Jackson Robinson), the magazine's advertising director, whose boss has sternly warned him, "I want those girls in the magazine, not in your bed!" In addition to repeatedly ignoring this order, Jack condescends to the models as a matter of course.
"All right, let's go, girls," he says wearily, herding them into a van.


L. M. Kaganovich, Stalwart of Stalin, Dies at 97
Lazar Moyseyevich Kaganovich, one of Stalin's closest aides and the last surviving Bolshevik leader who joined the Communist Party before the Revolution, died here on Thursday.
He was 97 years old.
Once a towering figure in Kremlin politics, Kaganovich sometimes was regarded as the No. 2 man in the Soviet Union because of his ties to Stalin.


A Denial By United Technologies
The United Technologies Corporation denied a report yesterday that its chairman, Robert F. Daniell, may have known the company had received inside information on the bidding for a military aircraft-engine program from a former Pentagon official.
Frank W. McAbee Jr., a senior vice president at United Technologies, which is based in Hartford, said in a letter to employees that the company "cannot discuss details" of the case because of the continuing investigation into its role in a Pentagon bribery scandal dating to the mid-1980's.
But, Mr.
McAbee said, "I can tell you that Bob Daniell did not receive that information."


U.S.-Soviet Pact Signings
In addition to signing the first treaty reducing long-range nuclear weapons, the United States and the Soviet Union plan to conclude at least three new agreements on cooperation in areas like space and aviation during the summit meeting in Moscow next week.
The White House said today that President Bush was also likely to present President Mikhail S. Gorbachev with the favorable tariff treatment that the Soviet Union has long sought, by announcing in Moscow that he is sending the Soviet-American trade treaty to the Senate for its approval.


Sports of The Times; Mel Hall's Other Drummer
It is the fate of us all to take seriously anyone who is hitting .300 or better.
This includes, of course, Mel Hall, the Yankee outfielder and currently the team's leading batter, who has been around the .320 mark.
Mel Hall, in his ninth full season in the major leagues, first came to the attention of this corner when he was with the Cleveland Indians several years ago and carried three batting gloves in both of the back pockets of his uniform pants.
The gloves were carefully placed in each pocket in such a way that the fingers extended and flapped as he ran.
The purpose, Hall explained, was that after he hit a home run he could "wave goodbye as I'm trotting around the bases."


Hostility in Amazon Drives Makers Of Chico Mendes Movie Out of Brazil
Fighting among heirs and followers of Brazil's slain defender of the rain forest, Francisco (Chico) Mendes, has become so bitter that his life story will now be filmed in another country, rather than in Brazil.
The project is scheduled to begin in November in Ecuador, 1,000 miles from Mr.
Mendes's home in the western Amazon state of Acre.
The film makers changed their plans after encountering a host of problems in Acre.
Rubber tappers from Mr.
Mendes's union movement have threatened to blockade filming, Mr.
Mendes's first wife is suing his second wife, his second wife is suing the state government, and Darli Alves de Silva, one of the ranchers convicted of the 1988 murder, was recently seen outside his maximum-security jail cell, enjoying lunch at a city restaurant.


Judge Disqualifies Gotti's Lawyer From Representing Him at Trial
Bruce Cutler, the flamboyant, forceful lawyer who won three dramatic court victories for John Gotti, was disqualified yesterday from representing the reputed Mafia leader in his next trial.
In a stunning ruling, a Federal judge barred Mr.
Cutler and two other well-known lawyers from appearing for the defense in Mr.
Gotti's racketeering trial scheduled for Sept. 23 in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


States and Cities Fight Recession With New Taxes
Hard hit by recession, state and local governments are raising taxes and fees more steeply than they have in decades.
The total amount to be raised this year may approach the $23 billion in Federal tax increases that Congress enacted last fall.
And despite all the political oratory about avoiding tax increases, public policy specialists say the trend is likely to continue because of the spiraling costs of education and prisons as well as health care and other social services.
A Wider Tax Net
With expenses rising sharply and revenues plummeting, states and cities have cast their tax nets deeper and wider than ever before:


Agreement Is Reached On Holocaust Museum
An agreement was signed yesterday paving the way for the construction of a Holocaust memorial at the foot of Battery Park City that would face the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island.
Architectural designs have yet to be completed on the $50 million, 80,000-square-foot memorial.
Construction is scheduled to get under way in the spring, with completion expected by the spring of 1994.


Bush Praises Rules Aimed at Protecting Disabled Workers
President Bush today urged Federal agencies to lead the way in removing employment obstacles for disabled people, saying the Government "must serve as a model employer" in putting into effect the 1990 law outlawing discrimination against them.
"Now the world is watching to see how we use this act, how we remove the physical barriers we've created, and the social barriers that we've accepted," Mr.
Bush said.


Avoiding Foster Care: New York Looks to Detroit Model
Joyce Anderson, a caseworker, gulped when she saw the family she was supposed to save: the mother, six months pregnant and mildly retarded, had 14 children, with only one bed and three pairs of shoes between them.
Mostly the children slept on the floor.
Often they went unsupervised.
In the month since that day, Miss Anderson has found the family a larger house, ordered bunk beds, posted a chart that divides chores among the children, obtained shoes for them and arranged after-school activities through the Y.M.C.A.


Dow Off 7.60 in Summer Doldrums
Stocks turned mixed yesterday, with the blue chips edging slightly lower and the smaller stocks, particularly the high-technology stocks, heading slightly higher.
Analysts attributed the sluggishness to the much-weaker-than-expected Government figures on the gross national product, widespread sentiment that the mending economy may not be recovering as quickly as many had thought -- and the summer doldrums.


CHRONICLE
FRANCOIS MITTERRAND, the Socialist French President and son of a railroad station manager, may be a distant relative of QUEEN ELIZABETH II, according to the French newspaper Liberation.
It said President Mitterrand's maternal grandmother was Eugenie Faure-Labouharderie, the granddaughter of Bernard de Javrezac, a descendant of the Barbeziere family whose branches include King George II as well as Queen Elizabeth II.


British Air Deal With Aeroflot
British Airways P.L.C. said today that it had agreed to join forces with Aeroflot, the state- owned Soviet airline, as well as other Soviet institutions to create a new international airline.
British Airways will hold 31 percent of the airline, to be called Air Russia and be based in Moscow, and expects to spend $:20 million, or about $34 million, to bring the airline to commercial operation by 1994.


Music in Review
New York Philharmonic
Great Lawn, Central Park


Leadership of Communists Approves Gorbachev Plan
The leadership of the Communist Party overwhelmingly approved President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's proposed new charter today, clearing the way for a full congress in November to transform the former "vanguard of the proletariat" into a broad-based "party of democratic reforms."
"The model that has been imposed on the party and society for decades has suffered a strategic defeat," Mr.
Gorbachev said in his closing comments to the Central Committee.
"This conclusion is of principled significance. It follows that we have come to face the necessity of a new drastic change of our entire viewpoint of socialism. We will not find an answer to our queries within the framework of the old model."


Economy Turns up With Gain of 0.4% in the 2nd Quarter
In its first expansion since last summer, the economy managed a gain of four-tenths of 1 percent at an annual rate during the April-June quarter as inflation pressure subsided, the Commerce Department reported today.
The Bush Administration was quick to hail the advance, which was marked by a surge in consumer spending, as confirmation that the economy has pulled out of the recession after a cumulative decline of 1.1 percent in the gross national product.
That is about half the severity of typical postwar downturns.


Don't Make Tobacco Addiction a Civil Right; The Ford Code
To the Editor:
The penchant of employers for prying into their employees' private lives is not new (editorial, July 7).
Henry Ford would send company investigators to workers' homes to obtain information about their life styles and make sure they were refraining from smoking and drinking, and were attending church regularly.
He was said to want to be sure his men were saving money and not living in sin


Arco Said to Plan Employee Cuts
Arco plans to cut its 27,000-member work force by up to 10 percent, a newspaper has reported.
The cuts would primarily come in Arco's United States petroleum and production operations and its refining and marketing segments, The Wall Street Journal reported.
Calls to Arco's Los Angeles offices were unanswered.
Lodwrick Cook, Arco's chairman, was quoted in the report as saying the planned cuts were "a midcourse correction," adding, "We have some toning up to do." The company reported on Monday that its second-quarter earnings fell 37 percent.
As with other oil companies, the performance of Arco this year has paled in comparison to 1990, when the company had record profits as oil prices surged.
But The Journal reported that Arco was apparently motivated by long-term outlooks on parts of its business rather than the recent earnings decline.


New Twist in Ethics Case of 5 Senators
In the latest political turn in the Senate Ethics Committee's inquiry into five Senators, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts has suggested that the panel's special counsel has a potential conflict problem because of other clients he represents, officials close to the committee said today.
But after reviewing Mr.
Kerry's concerns, stated in a recent letter to the Ethics Committee, the panel concluded in a private session this week that there was no conflict and that the special counsel, Robert S. Bennett, should remain on the job, the officials said.


Lansford Out, Jacoby In
The Oakland Athletics placed third baseman CARNEY LANSFORD on the disabled list yesterday, and then acquired veteran infielder BROOK JACOBY from the Cleveland Indians for two minor-leaguers.
Lansford made his season debut July 19, but was able to get only one hit in 16 at-bats.
He returned to the disabled list due to recurring pain in his left knee.(AP)


Jury Declines to Indict a Doctor Who Said He Aided in a Suicide
A grand jury in Rochester yesterday declined to indict a doctor who had written that he helped a leukemia patient commit suicide.
The decision is expected to have an important bearing on a national debate over how far physicians can go in helping terminally ill patients end their lives.
It may provoke legislators and the medical profession to discuss further whether changes in the law are needed to determine what doctors can and cannot do when treating terminally ill patients.
By publicizing his action, the doctor had challenged the legal system and tested its boundaries.


In One-Two M.T.A. Punch, New Token, Then No Token
In one fell swoop, the Metropolitan Transporation Authority approved two plans yesterday, one to develop a new subway token and one to scrap it eventually for a magnetic prepaid fare card.
While the actions may appear contradictory, both were necessary, transit officials said.
The new token, they said, will thwart counterfeiters and, by making the current token obsolete, prevent hoarding in anticipation of a fare increase next year.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the Justice Department's inquiry into allegations of wrongdoing at the Bank of Credit and Commerce International rendered a comment from a Central Intelligence Agency spokesman incorrectly.
Discussing reports that the agency had begun a review of its dealings with the bank, the spokesman said, "It is our practice to look into allegations of wrongdoing" -- not ". . . to investigate wrongdoing."


Jumping From Norway To the Hall of Fame
He lived his first 19 years in Norway and didn't see a professional football game until he was 21.
He came to the United States on a ski-jumping scholarship to Montana State.
He was discovered by a basketball coach.
And today in Canton, Ohio, JAN STENERUD will become the first pure place-kicker inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.
Stenerud, who scored 1,699 points and kicked a record 373 field goals, will be enshrined along with running back EARL CAMPBELL, offensive guard JOHN HANNAH, offensive and defensive lineman STAN JONES and TEX SCHRAMM, the former Cowboys executive. (AP)


Music in Review
Magic Circle Opera Repertory Ensemble Theater of the Open Eye at the West End Synagogue, 270 West 89th Street Through tonight


Art Adviser Dismissed After Opposing Museum's Sales
In the wake of his protest over the proposed sale of art from the Barnes Collection, the board of the Barnes Foundation in Merion, Pa., has dismissed Richard L. Feigen, the art dealer, as a member of its art advisory committee.
A letter to Mr.
Feigen from the board of the foundation, which is just west of Philadelphia, said his service on the committee "has not been constructive."


A.T.&amp;T. Computer Unit Plan
The American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company yesterday announced its preliminary plans for combining its computer unit employees with those of the NCR Corporation, the computer maker that A.T.&amp; T. agreed to buy in May.
A.T.&amp; T. said NCR would interview A.T.&amp; T. computer systems employees for jobs at NCR, which is to become a subsidiary of A.T.&amp; T. but will retain separate management and run the combined computer operation.


Religious Notes
War Praise Rejected
While President Bush won overwhelming public endorsement for his leadership in the Persian Gulf war, he was unable to muster a show of support from the bishops of his denomination, the Episcopal Church.


Religious Notes
War Praise Rejected
While President Bush won overwhelming public endorsement for his leadership in the Persian Gulf war, he was unable to muster a show of support from the bishops of his denomination, the Episcopal Church.


Review/Dance; A Choreographer's Changes Between '78 and '90 Works
A performance by Jennifer Muller/ The Works on Thursday night in the 1991 Fiorello Summer Dance Festival at La Guardia High School offered an intriguing glimpse of how much Ms.
Muller has developed her craft and style in the 13 years since the program's earliest work was created.
The company also presented one of Ms.
Muller's most interesting and accomplished dances, "Righteous About Passing (on the Left)," a 1990 work set to relatively relaxed rap music by Eric B. and Rakim.
On the evidence of that recent piece, Ms.
Muller's style has hardened and become streamlined.
She has pruned it, though not enough.
There is a good deal of subtlety in the dance, which takes a cool and narrow-edged look at alienation -- qualities that are unusual and welcome in Ms.
Muller's repertory of luscious, mostly upbeat dances.


Coping/With Unwanted Hair
Keeping the skin smooth and hair-free is for some a high priority of summer grooming.
Many women, as well as some men, turn to skilled specialists at skin-care salons.
But far more remove unwanted hair without professional help.
Shaving, the simplest means of removing hair, and the most popular, has one main drawback: the results are short-lived.
Tweezing lasts longer and works well on small areas, but is a slow, impractical and uncomfortable method for areas like the legs or underarms.
And electrolysis, the only permanent method of hair removal, is time-consuming and expensive for large areas.


Review/Film; A Reformed Liar and a Con Man
Gene Wilder's jack-o'-lantern grin and Richard Pryor's glare of hair-raising terror have done wonders to lift many otherwise scattershot comedies above the doldrums.
But bright as they are, their gifts do little to elevate "Another You," a frantically incoherent comedy that opened yesterday at local theaters
In their fourth film together, Mr.
Wilder plays a pathological liar named George Washington who is discharged from a mental hospital after three years and is given an Abe Lincoln top hat as a parting gift to commemorate his hard-won honesty.
Mr.
Pryor is Eddie, a con man sentenced to do community service and whose first assignment is to help George make the transition from hospital to civilian life.
Within minutes, they are sucked into an elaborate scam in which George is mistaken for another Abe, named Fielding, a missing billionaire beer manufacturer.


Dole Will Seek Backing of Bush On Bill Extending Jobless Benefits
The Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole, said today that he was going to try to get the Bush Administration to agree on a plan to extend unemployment benefits for people who have been out of work at least half a year.
A $5.8 billion measure sponsored by Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the Texas Democrat who heads the Senate Finance Committee, will be taken up by the Senate on Monday.
Mr.
Dole still opposes that bill, an aide said, because he considers it too costly and because he believes it is being used as a political device to embarrass Republicans.
But support for it among Republicans is growing.


Religious Notes
War Praise Rejected
While President Bush won overwhelming public endorsement for his leadership in the Persian Gulf war, he was unable to muster a show of support from the bishops of his denomination, the Episcopal Church.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Germany Wins Anyway


BRIEFS
Cargill Inc., Minneapolis, said it would build an ethanol refinery at its plant in Eddyville, Iowa.
The company will also invest $18 million to expand starch production at its plant in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. *
Hughes Aircraft Co., Los Angeles, a G.M. unit, said its Space and Communications Group had awarded a telecommunications contract to BellSouth's Communication Systems unit.
The contract was valued at $11.3 million.


Serbia Sending Supplies to Compatriots in Croatia
The Yugoslav republic of Serbia is directly aiding enclaves of Serbs in their increasingly lethal rebellion in the Croatian republic, senior Serbian government officials say.
The officials said they have sent medicine, communications gear, canteens, clothing and food from civil defense stocks as well as cash to the embattled minority of ethnic Serbs in Croatia.


Couldn't Bryant Park Money Have Kept the Library Open?
To the Editor:
"A Living Room on 42d Street" (editorial, July 10) describes the revival of Bryant Park.
Welcome as this oasis in the midst of grimy Manhattan might be, this seems to me one more case of misapplied priorities.
While Bryant Park was reopening, the New York Public Library announced that it was forced to keep the doors of the 42d St. branch closed Sundays and Mondays from July 1.


Algeria's Islamic Front Meets
The Muslim fundamentalist opposition party, the Islamic Salvation Front, meeting for the first time since the Government cracked down on it in early June, today demanded the release of its jailed leaders and an end to a state of emergency.
About 300 army troops took up positions around the Kouba mosque, a fundamentalist stronghold, but did not interfere with people taking part in prayers.
No violence was reported.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in some editions of Business Day yesterday about the Monarch Life Insurance Company referred incorrectly to its financial state.
It is not bankrupt.
Its former parent, the Monarch Capital Corporation, has agreed to seek Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.


Europe Offers Plan to Limit Imports of Japanese Autos
The European Community today tentatively settled on a plan to limit imports of Japanese cars for seven years after the trading bloc's single market opens in late 1992, officials said.
After 1999, Japanese auto makers would be able to sell their cars in the community without restrictions.
The arrangement is intended to soften the effect of heightened competition in protected car markets, primarily in France, Spain and Italy.


For South Koreans, a Rare Sight on TV


Public &amp; Private; A Slice Of Life
Not much has changed since the last time Margaret Stevens visited Yvette's apartment except that the city put linoleum in the hallways that makes it easier to see the crack vials.
Yvette sweeps them off the landing, little plastic lozenges with colored corks; sometimes she goes up the stairs to the roof and sweeps up the condoms left over from the barter of drugs for personal services.
"The other day I must have swept up 50 condoms, all kinds of colors -- orange, purple," Yvette says.
"I didn't even know about colors till I got here."
"At least they're using them," said Margaret.


Florence Cohen, 70; Ran Israeli Aid Group
Florence Cohen, president emeritus of the Volunteers for Israel, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
She was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs. Cohen died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Benjamin Lichtenberg, Professor, 45
Benjamin Lichtenberg, a professor of philosophy at Caldwell College in Caldwell, N.J., and chairman of its philosophy department, died on Wednesday at Mountainside Hospital in Montclair, N.J.
He was 45 years old and lived in Verona, N.J.
He was being treated for heart disease, said his sister.


Don't Make Tobacco Addiction a Civil Right; Not Smart, but Legal
To the Editor:
I would like to commend you for "None of an Employer's Business" (editorial, July 7), supporting the right of employees to make their own life style decisions on their own time, free from employers' prying eyes.


Senate Passes Foreign Aid Authorization Bill
The Senate approved a foreign aid authorization bill today for the first time in six years, but the measure headed toward a certain veto from President Bush because it would overturn six years of Republican abortion policy.
The two-year, $28 billion bill was passed 74 to 18.
Negotiators will work out a compromise with a $25.4 billion version approved earlier by the House.


RAPE TRIAL DELAY SOUGHT IN FLORIDA
Lawyers for William K. Smith asked for a three-month delay in his rape trial today, saying the prosecutors' release of statements from three women saying that Mr.
Smith had either raped or tried to rape them "has virtually destroyed Wililam Smith's ability to receive a fair trial."
No hearing date was scheduled for the request.
Mr.
Smith's trial is scheduled to begin Aug. 5.


At the Met, Cleaning the Lights Is No Mean Feat


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about a Trans World Airlines offer for assets of Pan American World Airways misidentified Mark E. Daugherty.
He is an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The seven regional Bell companies can now create information services like home banking and electronic shopping, following a Federal judge's decisiion to lift a legal restriction.  [ Page A1. ]  Companies already in the information business were disappointed by the decision.  [ A14. ]


Music in Review
Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra  Avery Fisher Hall


New Twist in Ethics Case of 5 Senators
In the latest political turn in the Senate Ethics Committee's inquiry into five Senators, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts has suggested that the panel's special counsel has a potential conflict problem because of other clients he represents, officials close to the committee said today.
But after reviewing Mr.
Kerry's concerns, stated in a recent letter to the Ethics Committee, the panel concluded in a private session this week that there was no conflict and that the special counsel, Robert S. Bennett, should remain on the job, the officials said.


Marlins Land Barger
Under pressure to end his role as the president of two major league teams, CARL BARGER will resign from the Pittsburgh Pirates next Friday to concentrate on running the expansion Florida Marlins. (AP)


NEW YORK'S PLAN WINS U.S. BACKING
The Justice Department tonight approved a revised plan for redistricting the New York City Council, making it likelier that the city can hold historic elections on schedule later this year.
The action by Assistant Attorney General John R. Dunne came 32 hours after the city's Districting Commission redrew the map for several Council districts to protect the voting rights of Hispanic people in East Harlem, the South Bronx and northern Brooklyn.


Serbia Sending Supplies to Compatriots in Croatia
The Yugoslav republic of Serbia is directly aiding enclaves of Serbs in their increasingly lethal rebellion in the Croatian republic, senior Serbian government officials say.
The officials said they have sent medicine, communications gear, canteens, clothing and food from civil defense stocks as well as cash to the embattled minority of ethnic Serbs in Croatia.
They emphatically denied allegations that the aid has included weapons, but one official said Serbia had no objections if the money provided to breakaway Serbian enclaves in Croatia was spent on weapons or militiamen's salaries.
Six people were killed today near the Croatian town of Glina in clashes pitting Croatian national guardsmen and policemen against Serb rebels and Yugoslav Army units.
Two Croatian militiamen died when the car in which they were riding was crushed by a army tank.
A German journalist was also killed today when gunfire struck his car near Glina.
Presidency Seeks Truce
The federal presidency called for an immediate cease-fire today.
Serbia and Croatia, this country's two largest republics, are not formally at war.
But after a week of ethnic fighting in Croatia that left more than 50 dead and hundreds wounded, tensions are at their highest level since World War II.
Nonetheless, the Serbian government officials said they intended to continue their assistance to the Serbs in Croatia.
They made it clear that if Croatia fulfills its ambition of becoming independent, Serbia will demand a redrawing of borders to move areas of Croatia dominated by Serbs s into the republic of Serbia.
Croatia has adamantly rejected any proposals for remapping boundaries, setting the stage for a direct clash between the two republics.
The extent to which Serbia supports the armed groups of its ethnic kin in Croatia is widely thought to be the main factor that will determine whether the violence degenerates into all-out civil war.
Serbia is home to more than 40 percent of Yugoslavia's population and nearly all of the country's weapons factories.
Called Self-Defense
The comments by the Serbian officials were the most detailed explanation to date of the relationship between the republic's government and the rebel Serbs in Croatia, and they reflect a new desire to make Serbia's case to the world press.
"This is a classical self-defense by the Serbian population, which will, if a broader attack arises, escalate into a broad uprising, which we have to avoid," said Adm.
Miodrag Jokic, the Serbian Defense Minister.
"The state of Serbia has done all it can to help, but as far as I know, the ministry has never furnished them with weapons," he said.
Stanko Cvijan, the Minister in charge of contacts with Serbs outside Serbia, said he has set up a fund to which Serbian businesses could contribute.
The money, which he insisted was a small amount, is then distributed by Serbia to local governments that have declared their independence within Croatia.
"They use these monies for what they want," Mr. Cvijan said. "We don't mix into it."
The Serbian officials said that if Croatia became independent, the price would be a dramatic shift of borders to strip away Croatian counties where Serbs predominate.
The 600,000 Serbs in Croatia make up about 11.5 percent of the population.
"These are administrative borders," Mr.
Cvijan said of Yugoslavia's internal boundaries, which were set by the Communists after World War II.
"They are not based on ethnic or even historic lines. Serbia does not accept them."
Croatia insists the borders are historical and should not be changed.
The officials said much of the assistance to the Serbs was being coordinated by Dusan Pekic, a 70-year-old retired Yugoslav Army general who was once commander of the country's land forces.
A Serb born in Croatia, Mr.
Pekic heads an independent organization called the Association of Serbs from Croatia.
He said he had raised more than $4 million in Yugoslavia and abroad, which has been used to supply thousands of truckloads of medicines, food and clothing.
The Serbian government's assistance to the rebels appears to meet the political needs of Slobodan Milosevic, the former Communist who was elected President of Serbia last year.
Just a few months ago, Mr.
Milosevic was rocked by a wave of widely attended street protests.
The concern over the plight of the Serbs in Croatia, which is heavily covered by the state-controlled television in Serbia, has hobbled the opposition.
Both Serbs in the Government and the more radical groups that have formed militias to fight in Croatia agree that no politician could survive in Serbia if he were perceived as flagging in his fervor to protect Serbs in other republics.
Villages Guarded by Serbs
In eastern Croatia and in the areas south of Zagreb called Krajina, the Croatian government has lost control of significant swaths of territory.
The villages are guarded by Serbian irregulars, who carry guns, man barricades and at times battle the Croatian troops.
At least five separate Serbian militias have been formed in Serbia and Croatia over the last year.
Some of the groups dislike each other, raising the possibility of conflict between armed Serbs.
Vuk Draskovic, a leading opponent of Mr.
Milosevic, has formed what he says is a 5,000-man militia in Serbia.
Such formations are banned under a newly passed Serbian law, which the authorities said they planned to enforce within days.
Mr. Draskovic said his forces would be used if war erupts between Serbia and Croatia.
Vojislav Seselj, a former anti-Communist dissident and leader of the Serbian Radical Party, leads a competing group.
Mr.
Seselj, a former academic, wrote his master's thesis on the theory of guerrilla resistance, and acknowledges training and arming a contingent of fighters he calls Chetniks, named for the World War II Serbian guerrillas.
Bribery and Smuggling
A broad-shouldered man with the build of a football lineman, Mr.
Seselj acknowledged smuggling weapons into Yugoslavia from Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
He said his group bribed corrupt former Communist officials to sell surplus arms, which were then labeled "meat" and trucked across the border by drivers using forged passports in Croatian surnames.
Mr.
Seselj, who has a reputation for boasting, also insisted that the Serbs had bought guns from Croats.
In the last year, the governing party in Croatia has widely distributed arms to members who are Croats, and Mr.
Seselj said some of these had been resold.
At the moment, a standard issue weapon on the Serbian side is the American Thompson submachine gun of World War II vintage.
Serbs also have used light mortar and rocket-propelled grenades.
The Croats are armed mostly with Hungarian-manufactured AK-47 assault rifles.
Typically, there is a wide variety of conflicting explanations of how the Thompsons got into the Serbs' hands.
Mr.
Seselj said he had bought a load of them from a European arms dealer.
But diplomats and some Yugoslav press reports view the guns at least as circumstantial evidence of a direct Serbian government role in arming the rebels.
U.S.
Supplied Guns in 1948
The United States supplied the guns to Yugoslavia shortly after Marshal Tito broke with the Soviet Union in 1948.
As the weapons became obsolete, they were transferred to each republic's territorial defense forces.
Serbia, like the other republics, had stores of Thompsons for years.
But Defense Minister Jokic said the Thompsons controlled by Serbia and all the other republics were reclaimed by the national army last year.
Admiral Jokic said he doubted that the army, whose officer corps is predominantly made up of Serbs, gave weapons to the Serbs.
Asked if they could have been smuggled out of the military arsenal or pilfered, he replied with a shrug, "The Lord moves in mysterious ways."
Croatia has said that some army commanders have provided supplies to the Serbs, and at least one of the self-styled rebel commanders has spoken in interviews of receiving weapons from the army.
In the village of Silas in eastern Croatia, anti-tank weapons with Yugoslav Army markings are in plain sight.
"It's the black market," a Serb fighter insisted. "You can buy anything."


A Worry for Germany: Resurgent Nationalism
In this first summer since German unification, the hottest political debates here are over old questions about Germany's dark past.
Some commentators and political leaders say they see troubling signs of resurgent nationalism in the newly united country, and in the questions that Germans are asking themselves this summer: How should the nation honor a long-dead Prussian king?
How sacred should the sites of Nazi concentration camps be kept?
And what sort of monuments should Germans erect to commemorate their past victories?


L. M. Kaganovich, Stalwart of Stalin, Dies at 97
Lazar Moyseyevich Kaganovich, one of Stalin's closest aides and the last surviving Bolshevik leader who joined the Communist Party before the Revolution, died here on Thursday.
He was 97 years old.
Once a towering figure in Kremlin politics, Kaganovich sometimes was regarded as the No. 2 man in the Soviet Union because of his ties to Stalin.


Court Permits Suit by Lonrho
The British High Court has ruled that Lonrho P.L.C., the mining-based conglomerate, can sue a former Government minister for his handling of its 1985 bid to acquire the House of Fraser Holdings Ltd., owner of the Harrods department store.
Lonrho said the court acted on its claim that the former Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, Norman Tebbit, as well as the department, were negligent in delaying a ruling for its bid.
The move is part of a long and bitter battle between Lonrho, the agency and the Fayed brothers of Egypt who took over the House of Fraser for $:615 million, or about $1 billion.
Lonrho had complained that Mr.
Tebbit and the British agency were negligent in their failure to release Lonrho from a 1981 agreement not to bid for the House of Fraser.
The brothers -- Mohamed, Ali and Salah al-Fayed -- acquired majority control of the House of Fraser on March 11, 1985, three days before Mr.
Tebbit released Lonrho from the agreement.
The department said it would appeal the court's decision.


Chief at Tyco Adds a Title
Tyco Toys Inc. the nation's fourth-largest toy manufacturer, has named its president and chief executive, Richard Grey, to the additional post of chairman.
The move on Thursday came less than a month after the company's chairman, Benson A. Selzer, and his two sons, John and Geoffrey, sold their 6% stake in the company that they helped take public in 1986.
The decision to sell came after a struggle with the board, which accused the Selzers of cronyism and of making deals that benefited them rather than the company.


Bridge
As the summer national championships of the American Contract Bridge League got under way here today, with 10 days of play in prospect, four teams survived in the Grand National Team Championship.
This prestigious event, which began at grass-roots level eight months ago, is a stepping-stone to world championship honors in 1993.
Among the favorites are Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I., Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., Steve Weinstein of Upper Montclair, N.J., and Fred Stewart of Accord, N.Y.
Weinstein and Stewart, a stepson-and-stepfather partnership, have already qualified to represent the United States in the 1991 world team championship in Yokohama, Japan, in October.


Meeting Set by Creditors of Pan Am
After warning that it will not support the current attempts by Trans World Airlines, Delta Air Lines and United Airlines to buy only parts of the Pan Am Corporation, the unsecured creditors committee of Pan Am has scheduled a meeting on Monday to decide whether to support any offers by the three suitors.
In what analysts view as a long shot, the creditors' committee is hoping to keep Pan Am intact, in order to protect if not enhance the value of Pan Am's assets.
But it also wants to oust the management of the carrier, which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in January.


Milwaukee Police Once Queried Suspect
Two months before butchered bodies were discovered in Jeffrey L. Dahmer's apartment in Milwaukee, neighbors called the police and said they had seen a dazed-looking teen-ager shambling on the street outside, naked and bleeding.
The police who investigated left after Mr.
Dahmer apparently persuaded them that the young man was of age, that the two were living together and that the incident was a domestic dispute.


Quotation of the Day
"It is disingenuous to say that states have been popped by an economic cycle. Taxpayers have a legitimate gripe when they ask, 'Why did you spend everything you could take from us in the good times and then raise taxes in the bad times?' " -- Gov.
Richard A. Snelling of Vermont, criticizing the trend of many states and cities to increase taxes in the recession.  [ 8:2. ]


Private Garbage Hauling Fee To Decrease Starting Aug. 1
New York City's 250,000 businesses will soon be paying less for garbage collection, thanks in part to reduced landfill costs.
For the first time, the city has lowered the top rate that it allows private hauling companies to charge their commercial customers.
Beginning Aug. 1, businesses will pay 7.5 percent less for garbage pickup, or $13.60 a cubic yard.


Mysterious (and Lucrative) Doings in Some English Wheatfields


Petty Feud May Have Led to Youth's Death
Lacey Jenkins and Lamont Simmions had what the police often describe as an "ongoing dispute."
It probably wasn't over anything much, they say.
Just something small.
It may have even been as petty as a putdown that witnesses told them Mr.
Jenkins, 15 years old, had once made about the shabby clothing worn by Mr.
Simmions, 20.


Firm of Brother Of Bush Fined
An investment firm owned by President Bush's brother was fined $30,000 and barred from trading with the general public in Massachusetts for a year for failing to register in the state, a regulator said today.
The New York firm of J. Bush &amp; Company, whose only principal is Jonathan J. Bush, the President's brother, agreed to buy back stocks sold to Massachusetts clients over 43 months.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  NATIONAL LEAGUE


Review/Comedy; Reno Is Back and She Still Bites
"I'm an American, and I have my cake and eat it too!" shouted Reno near the end of her new show, "Reno Once Removed," at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday evening.
The declaration, which the platinum-haired actress and comedian repeated several times, rang with an agonized irony, for it capped a political diatribe that portrayed America as a country awash in dishonesty.
Being an American, Reno said, means being a citizen in a land that has turned itself into "a big pyramid scheme." It is a place, she asserted, where being "in denial" is the "upper-class version of lying," where truth is so hard to discern that the literature that passes for truth is labeled "nonfiction."


New Twist in Ethics Case of 5 Senators
In the latest political turn in the Senate Ethics Committee's inquiry into five Senators, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts has suggested that the panel's special counsel has a potential conflict problem because of other clients he represents, officials close to the committee said today.
But after reviewing Mr.
Kerry's concerns, stated in a recent letter to the Ethics Committee, the panel concluded in a private session this week that there was no conflict and that the special counsel, Robert S. Bennett, should remain on the job, the officials said.


Mother of Yankee Draft Pick Says Michael Is Disrespectful
The mother of Brien Taylor, the 19-year-old pitcher and the No. 1 choice in the baseball draft last month, today accused Yankees General Manager Gene Michael of being disrespectful and questioned whether racial and economic considerations had entered into the unsuccessful relationship between the team and the family.
"As things go along, I'm beginning to wonder," Bettie Taylor said in a telephone conference call joined by Scott Boras, an attorney and an adviser to the family.
"Is it because we're back here, we're poor and we're black? I'm not saying that is the case, but if it is I can live with that, too."


Carolyn Dalton Is Married
Carolyn Sophia Dalton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Colin Dalton of Radnor, Pa., was married yesterday in Chapin, S.C., to Timothy Scott Rawlings, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Rawlings of Chapin.
The Rev.
Bert Watson officiated at the Chapin United Methodist Church.
Mr.
Rawlings is an architect with the Stein-Cox Group in Phoenix.


A Fix Too Quick on Unemployment
Congressional Democrats are suddenly seized with the idea that unemployment benefits for the nation's jobless are inadequate, and must be improved by next Friday.
The House is developing a more honest fix than the Senate.
Bills to authorize up to 20 additional weeks of benefits are moving quickly in both houses because (1) members want to go on vacation at the end of the week, and (2) the Democratic leadership wants to show concern for victims of the recession, even if they've been slow to do so.


A Setback for Waterfront Project in Hastings
IN the 10 years Neil P. Hess has been Village Manager here, the question of what would become of the once-bustling industrial waterfront area has occupied many of his working hours.
In the last 18 months alone, there have been impact studies to review, a stepped-up schedule of public hearings to attend and lengthy fact-finding sessions to sit through.
With a controversial proposal from Harbor at Hastings Associates before the Village Board of Trustees to rezone 28.3 waterfront acres for luxury housing, the Village Manager said, he has had little time for other business.


McMahon Avoids Real Issue
To the Sports Editor:
Vince McMahon's saccharine essay on the World Wrestling Federation ("Is Pro Wrestling Down for the Count?" The Times, July 7) diverts attention from the real issue of who or what is behind the ubiquitous steroid abuse within that organization.


Business Diary/July 21-26
THE ECONOMY A Victory -- Perhaps -- for the Baby Bells


The Nation; Locking the Doors in the Electronic Global Village
SINCE the beginning of the personal computer revolution in the 1970's, a small group of utopian programmers has dreamed of a world in which information flows free.
At the vanguard of this populist movement has been the Free Software Foundation, a group in Cambridge, Mass., that takes its cause so seriously that it has allowed anyone to connect to its computers, through the worldwide web of electronic networks, and help themselves to the software they find.
But last month, frustrated because network vandals, reaching in from as far away as the Netherlands, repeatedly destroyed files and secretly used its computers as a launching point for attacks on other systems, the foundation reluctantly decided to lock up the electronic entrances to its machines.


Blowing Up a Breeze


For Los Angeles, an Office District by Consensus
THE plan for Central City West, an ambitious new office district in this city, seems to invite skepticism.
Consider these bare facts: A small number of affluent developers buy land in a Hispanic neighborhood and decide to remake the area into a high-rise office center.
The developers hire their own consultants and pay for their own land-use plan, which is readily approved by City Hall.
They then pay to transform the streets from cramped byways into gracious boulevards suitable for skyscrapers.


The Alligator Rings Twice
MAXIMUM BOB
By Elmore Leonard. 295 pp. New York: Delacorte Press. $20.


Sunday Outing; At Saratoga, a Day at the Races (and Much More)
From Old Westbury, L.I., to Paris, racing fans are packing their bags and heading for Saratoga and the August racing meet.
"It's my treat for the year," Helen B. Chenery of Old Westbury, who owned the 1973 Triple Crown winner Secretariat, said today, opening day of the annual meet.
"The horses look prettier here than they do anywhere else."


Allies
The possibility has been a long time coming, but it's startling nonetheless.
After six years of Mikhail Gorbachev's warming winds, the cold war is over and it is now reasonable, as Presidents Bush and Gorbachev prepare to meet in Moscow Tuesday, for their countries to think of each other, in fundamental ways, as allies.
Not since Yalta has the thought been even thinkable.
For half a century the superpowers stood locked in fearsome, fearful hostility.
Yet now they share four goals, a fact that makes the idea of alliance more than a semantic flourish.
And at this summit meeting, the two leaders can make progress toward all four.


Cynthia D. Hardwick To Wed Peter Chiang
Mr. and Mrs.
Ambrose Hills Hardwick Jr. of Bay Head, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cynthia Duer Hardwick to Peter Chiang, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jui-Wu Chiang of Irvine, Calif.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Hardwick, 36 years old, graduated from Drew University.
She is an interior designer in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was a Merrill Lynch broker in New York.


Fit for a King


The Availability of Obstetricians
Women and couples who choose nurse-midwife-attended hospital or private-home births will tell you that the reason that "Nurse-Midwives are Playing an Increasing Role" more to do with the nature and quality of the care they provide than with cost-efficiency or the fact that obstetricians are leaving the field.
There is no doubt that new advances in obstetrics have had a significant impact on maternal morbidity and mortality rates and improved fetal outcome.


Count the Goals, And Nothing Else
To the Sports Editor:
I can't imagine a future soccer game won "on points" instead of goals as Paul Gardner proposes ("Ending the Ennui: Soccer Can Stop the Stall," The Times, July 21).
Counting corner kicks would unfairly penalize teams playing an intelligent, defensive soccer against blindly attacking teams unable to score.


A la Carte
Most of the East End name restaurants will be represented at the second annual Taste of the Hamptons next Saturday.
The event, sponsored by the Family Service League of Suffolk County, has attracted 25 restaurants, 7 more than last year, when a sell-out crowd of more than 250 attended.
A who's who of East End chefs each prepare one or two dishes for the visitors, who will gather under a tent on Saturday at 5 P.M. at the Orchard, Edge of Hills Road, Southampton.
Once there, they can munch for three hours, eating dishes provided by restaurants like Sapore di Mare, Nick and Toni's and Fresno.


A Carnival of Opposites, and the Musically Absurd
Hal Willner, the record producer, sits in the den of his New York apartment on Avenue B in the East Village, watching television and listening to music at the same time.
His den is set up specifically for these pursuits: a couch takes up one wall of the long, narrow room, the TV a goodly portion of the opposite wall; two enormous stereo speakers are hung from the ceiling and tilted toward the center of the couch.
Mr.
Willner likes to sit right in that vortex of blaring sound and Technicolor image -- engulfed in music, close enough to the TV to be swallowed by it.
At the moment, the set is tuned, volume down, to a network broadcast of "Fatal Attraction," while the stereo plays one of Mr.
Willner's latest projects, a tribute to the late Charles Mingus.
Tentatively scheduled for release by Sony Music in January, the album, "Weird Nightmare," features different musicians' interpretations of works by the earthy and innovative jazz composer; at the moment, Keith Richards and Charlie Watts of the Rolling Stones are playing a version of the Mingus song "Oh Lord Don't Let Them Drop That Atomic Bomb on Me." As Mr.
Richards's lovely guitar lead rises and falls, Glenn Close rants and raves with soundless fury across the TV screen.
Charles Mingus, the Rolling Stones, "Fatal Attraction" -- a carnival of contrasts.


Charlotte M. Hartwell Is Planning to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Adams Hartwell of New York have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Charlotte Meldrum Hartwell and Samuel Jerrold Gesten, a son of Dr.
Robert J. Gesten of Wycoff, N.J., and Anita Gesten of Bellmore, L.I., and Boca Raton, Fla.
Ms.
Hartwell, 32 years old, is an associate at the O'Melveny &amp; Myers law firm in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Brown University and received a J.D. from Boston University.
Her father is a chairman of the G. S. Blodgett Corporation, a stove manufacturer in Burlington, Vt.


For New F.D.A. Drug Policy, Dismay and Delight
In two important decisions this month, the Food and Drug Administration seems to have relaxed its strict requirement that new drugs be proved effective before being allowed on the market.
The new position has shocked some researchers while delighting others.
The agency's critics fear that an alarming precedent is being set and say it could unleash a flood of ineffective drugs on consumers.
Its supporters say that at last the agency is abandoning its conservative stance and overly rigid requirements out of compassion for desperately ill patients who do not have the time to wait for promising drugs to go through every possible test.


92d Street Y Seeking Gift of $40 Million
The 92d Street Y, whose lecturers and performers have included Albert Einstein, Zero Mostel, T. S. Eliot and Yo-Yo Ma, is celebrating its 117th anniversary this year with a $40 million fund-raising campaign.
"The Y never loses sight of its roots and traditions, even as it changes to meet developing needs of the population it serves," said Daniel R. Kaplan, a New York lawyer and the Y's president.
"At a time of fiscal crises and cutbacks in services, we're saying New York City is livable and we are helping to make it more livable."


Gayle Gilman Engaged To Richard J. Ellenson
Mr. and Mrs.
Goodwin O. Gilman of Newport, Me., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Gayle Estelle Gilman, to Richard Jon Ellenson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Ellenson of Merrick, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Gilman, 28 years old, is a program developer for National Geographic Television in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father founded and heads Gilman Electrical Supply in Newport.


Ban the Bard
THE LAST DAYS OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
By Vlady Kociancich.
Translated by Margaret Jull Costa. 297 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.


'A Night in Vienna' With the Pops
THE director of the Empire State Pops Orchestra, Earl Groner, has recovered from the back problem that had sidelined him for several months ("I speak from sad experience," he says. "Always bend your knees when lifting heavy objects.") and is now planning "A Night in Vienna" for Saturday at 8 P.M.
"Ever since the Pepsico Summerfare Festival folded, I have been determined to replace all that wonderful activity with a Pops series at SUNY Purchase," Mr.
Groner said.
"We have to start with just this one concert, but if successful, it could be the entree we have been seeking."
On Saturday, the upper lobby of the Performing Arts Center on the State University of New York campus at Purchase will be transformed into a glittering hall reminiscent of Vienna at the turn of the century.
"The mood will be elegant, the music will sway; the food will tempt and the dance floor will beckon," Mr.
Groner promised.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a letter to the editor last week misidentified the war in which the English nurse Edith Cavell was executed by the Germans.
It was World War I.


The Delightful Foibles of 'Tenor'
ANY suspicions that summer stock means incompetently produced theater are wiped away when seeing the Gateway Playhouse production of "Lend Me a Tenor" by Ken Ludwig.
This comedy with music combines door-slamming farce with comic-opera parody to tell the story of the day the great Italian opera singer Tito Merelli is to make his American debut with the Cleveland Grand Opera Company.
Everything has been carefully prepared for the star's arrival.
A beautiful hotel suite has been prepared.
The opera manager has arranged to have liquor and women kept at a distance.
A luncheon to introduce the tenor to friends of the opera guild has been set up.
The manager's assistant, Max, has been sent to meet the already-late arrival.
Everyone is suffering from nervous excitement, but when Max returns to the hotel room from the train station without the tenor, nerves turn into full-blown hysteria.
Not to worry.
Tito Merelli does show up.
But he is having a furious battle with his short-tempered wife, and he is suffering from indigestion.
He also refuses to go to the rehearsal.


Kerith Stern Weds
Kerith Stern, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey Stern of Plantation, Fla., was married last evening to Philip Jay Rudnicki, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Rudnicki of Bloomfield, Conn.
Rabbi Israel Stein officiated at Temple Beth Shmuel in Miami Beach.
Mrs.
Rudnicki, 22 years old, graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and is a student at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Mr.
Rudnicki, also 22, graduated magna cum laude and received a master's degree in international finance and economics from Brandeis.
He is a customer representative in the New York office of the Industrial Bank of Japan.


Wendy Krupnik Is to Be Married
Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. Krupnik of Riverside, Conn., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Wendy Michelle Krupnik and Andrew Joel Melnick, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Neil H. Melnick of Harrison, N.Y.
Miss Krupnik, 28 years old and a magna cum laude graduate of Duke University, is a product manager for Avon Products in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was the purchasing officer and a director of the Putnam Trust Company Bank in Greenwich, Conn.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a picture window that measures about five feet by four feet.
There is a storm window on the outside of this picture window, and in cold weather the entire inside of this storm window is covered with condensation.
The glass has been replaced in the storm window, and all new rubber stripping has been installed around it.
We have also tried to seal all inside cracks and openings.
What else can we do to get rid of the condensation?
A.
Because the condensation forms on the inner face of the storm window, warm moist air is escaping from inside the house into the space between the two windows.
Inspect all the glazing compound around each pane of glass on the inside window and replace any that is cracked or missing.
Also make sure all the caulking is in good condition.
Finally make sure that there are a couple of small "weep" holes, one-eighth or one-quarter inch, at the bottom of the storm window and that they are not clogged.
The holes allow moisture to escape harmlessly to the outside.


On the Outskirts of Auschwitz
THE CONVENT AT AUSCHWITZ
By Wladyslaw T. Bartoszewski. 169 pp. New York: George Braziller. $17.95.


Joan Babchak Weds
Joan Irene Babchak and Ronald Lee Goldstein were married yesterday at the Inn at Mystic in Mystic, Conn., by Edward Sullivan, a justice of the peace.
The bride, 33 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Boston College.
She is a founder and an executive editor of The New York Production Guide, a trade directory for the film industry.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Babchak Jr. of Westerly, R.I.
Mr.
Goldstein, 33, a Northeastern University graduate, is the son of David Goldstein of Council Bluffs, Iowa, and Audrey Goldstein of Waterford, Conn.
He is a political consultant in New York.


Mutual Funds; Judging a Fund by Its Letter
Can you judge a book by its cover?
In the case of mutual funds, the answer is yes, says Don Phillips, vice president of Morningstar Inc., a mutual fund consulting firm based in Chicago.
Morningstar analysts grade thousands of shareholder reports every year.
The quality of a report -- everything from how thoroughly it assesses a fund's performance to the timeliness of those disclosures -- is not as important as a fund's its total return or risk.
But there is a surprising correlation between the two.
Good reports "demonstrate a concern for shareholders that is apt to carry over into other aspects of the fund, like fee levels and risk avoidance," Mr.
Phillips said.


Emerging From an Unhappy Childhood on L.I.
"DAD, give me $5," demands Maria, a surly flashy 17-year-old with hair out to there as she smears on Mars violet lipstick.
There will be no handout for Maria, though.
She has been thrown out of school.
But "I quit," she insists.
Besides, she is pregnant.
After an exchange of name-calling, Maria slaps her father.
She walks out, slamming the door.
He drops dead.
And then the title appears boldly, "Trust."


The Executive Life; Business Is the Muse, Business People the Poets
This is the world in which he lives: Four walls, a desk, a swivel chair, A doorway with no door to close, Vents to bring in air.
There are two well-marked calendars, Some pencils, and a telephone The women at the front desk answer Leaving him alone.
ROBERT FROST?
Walt Whitman? e.e. cummings?
Try Dana Gioia, marketing manager for General Foods U.S.A.'s Jello dessert division.
Mr.
Gioia is among hundreds of executives who answered a call by the University of Phoenix Press for poetry about the business world to be included in an anthology published next spring.


British Airways
To the Editor: In late November my husband and I and two grandaughters (ages 11 and 12) sailed on the Queen Elizabeth 2 to England, planning to return on British Airways.
After our tickets were purchased, one grandaughter's family (in the military) was deployed to Germany and eventually her father was sent to Saudi Arabia to participate in Desert Storm.
The grandaughter could not return with us, and her mother flew from Germany to London and returned with her to Germany.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about stickball games in Hastings-on-Hudson rendered the name of a resident incorrectly.
The schoolyard's neighbor who described her objections to the games is Veronica Peachman, not Catherine Peachman.


Glorious Feathers: The Relics of a Regal Hawaii
Feather capes, cloaks, helmets and leis satiny soft and gloriously colored -- were worn by Hawaiian chiefs and warriors when Capt.
James Cook arrived here in 1778.
These abstract-patterned garments stunned seamen then as they do today's visitors to the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum, where selections from the largest collection of these status symbols are on view.
"We have the world monopoly," said Roger G. Rose, an associate anthropologist at the Bishop Museum.
The institution's feathered holdings -- 5 ankle-length cloaks, 12 capes, 4 helmets, 2 war-god figures, 250 plumed staves called kahili and hundreds of leis -- are never exhibited at one time or for extended periods.
Because they are so fragile, he said, they are rotated and exhibited under low light.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
A GARDEN ALPHABET.
By Isabel Wilner.
Illustrated by Ashley Wolff.
Dutton. $12.95. (Ages 3 to 7) In this alphabet book a gardening border collie, who generally wears a straw hat, begins work in April.
In high summer a frog in a cowboy hat harvests peas.


To Seal Driveways And Patch Big Holes
ASPHALT driveways need prompt repair and periodic sealing, just like roads.
Summer is a good time for driveway maintenance, because most repair and sealing products work best when applied at temperatures from 50 to 85 degrees.
As soon as temperatures allow, repair damage like cracks and potholes, which usually occur in winter and early spring.
To repair cracks that are less than a half-inch wide, brush loose particles with a whisk broom and fill the cracks with liquid filler.


Commercial Property: The Office Market; The Gloom Persists On Offices
CHEMICAL BANK had ardent suitors.
George Klein hoped it would move to the office complex he plans to build at Times Square.
Douglas Durst hoped it would move to a site that is mostly under his family's control, cater-corner from Bryant Park.
Stanley Stahl hoped it would remain in his skyscraper at 277 Park Avenue.
The courtship ended this month in a striking twist that left the city's commercial landlords with one less headquarters for their rent rolls.
Chemical will simply move its main offices across the avenue and into Manufacturers Hanover Plaza, which is owned by its merger partner.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, the crossword puzzle entitled "Final Changes" in The Times Magazine today carries an erroneous byline.
It was constructed by Richard Silvestri.


The Nation; Bearing Witness to the Unbearable
FOR a woman who charges an acquaintance with sexually assaulting her, the toll may include an inability to provide what she most needs in court: a clear, consistent account of what is typically a traumatic and disorienting encounter.
Contradictions in the account given by the woman who said three St.
John's University students attacked her led to an acquittal on all charges last week, jurors in the case said.
Defense attorneys said the verdict was the only reasonable one, given the evidence.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate


Headliners; Death in Milwaukee
The Milwaukee police visited the apartment of Jeffrey L. Dahmer last week and stumbled upon murders extraordinarily foul.
Scattered around Mr.
Dahmer's stench-filled rooms were human skulls, severed heads and hands, organs and other body parts from 11 men and boys.
Mr.
Dahmer, a 31-year-old convicted child molester, subsequently admitted that he had killed 17 people over the last 10 years or so, the authorities said.
The investigation of Mr.
Dahmer led police to begin an anguished inquiry into their own procedures when it was learned that one victim was a 14-year-old boy who had escaped, naked and bleeding, from the apartment last May.
Passing police intervened, but allowed the man to take the youth back to his apartment after Mr.
Dahmer convinced them that the boy was 19 and his lover.
The youth was in fact the brother of a boy that Mr.
Dahmer had been convicted of molesting in 1989.
Mr.
Dahmer's lawyer described him as "a very sick young man."


The Countryside as It Should Have Been
The display of John Constable's landscapes here at the Tate Gallery, through Sept. 15, is a landmark exhibition.
With some 350 paintings, drawings and prints, and with a 544-page telephone book of a catalogue, it rivals even the Tate's 1976 show, which surveyed the whole of the artist's career on the occasion of the bicentennial of his birth.
There has been no dearth of Constable exhibitions in the last 15 years, including one at the Metropolitan Museum in New York as recently as 1983.
But the current display, which includes dozens of works that have only recently come to public attention, is the kind of show that makes even the most familiar paintings look fresh and magnificent.


STRIKEOUTS AND PSYCH-OUTS
As a former professional baseball player who has a doctorate in sports psychology, I am pleased to see articles like Loren Feldman's "Strikeouts and Psych-Outs" (July 7) that espouse the importance of the mental and emotional dimensions of athletic performance.


Americans Share Soviet Economic Pessimism
Separate polls of the American and Soviet people, released this week, show skepticism about efforts to restructure the Soviet economy and illustrate the differing domestic climates that President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev must contend with as they meet to chart the course of the relations between the two countries.
Soviet citizens, interviewed in the European part of the Russian republic and in the Ukraine, expressed overwhelming concern with economic problems.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Rustic Redding Fears a Transformation
MINUTES away from the noisy commerce of Route 7, the shopping centers of Danbury and the Branchville Metro-North train station, Redding's 7,927 people enjoy the tranquillity of 32 square miles of unspoiled countryside.
But some fear two-acre zoning, the absence of condominiums and little commerce could soon become history.


Sometimes Titles Are the Whole Story
They career on screen at the beginning as if they've taken a wrong turn, pause briefly, then whoosh off -- New York street signs with stars' names on them instead of traffic instructions, caricatures with red slashes through them to communicate some edict like "no interracial couples here."
Or they break in a full 10 minutes after the movie has started, letters rippling into focus over silhouettes of somersaulting women, themselves superimposed over spurting volcanoes.


On the Street; Grandma's Style, Our 90's
Spidery crocheted cotton sweaters, jackets and black over-dresses lend a popular and airy summer look.
These crocheted and macrameed designs, at lower right, turn an old handcraft to a contemporary romantic style.
And there is no hint of grandmother's shawl.
Designers have been presenting this concept on their runways, worn over the nude body.
Women who buy these garments add a variety of their own undergarments: bras, slips and tank tops.
White crocheted designs are effective when worn over black.
And black onblack itself can be dramatic and sophisticated, as in the black crocheted dress over a slip at upper right.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a picture window that measures about five feet by four feet.
There is a storm window on the outside of this picture window, and in cold weather the entire inside of this storm window is covered with condensation.
The glass has been replaced in the storm window, and all new rubber stripping has been installed around it.
We have also tried to seal all inside cracks and openings.
What else can we do to get rid of the condensation?
A.
Because the condensation forms on the inner face of the storm window, warm moist air is escaping from inside the house into the space between the two windows.
Inspect all the glazing compound around each pane of glass on the inside window and replace any that is cracked or missing.
Also make sure all the caulking is in good condition.
Finally make sure that there are a couple of small "weep" holes, one-eighth or one-quarter inch, at the bottom of the storm window and that they are not clogged.
The holes allow moisture to escape harmlessly to the outside.


CLASSICAL MUSIC: 'Cav' and 'Pag' Visit Little Italy; Sunny Villages In Calabria And Sicily . . . Grit and Grime in New York
"If there's any poetic license here, it observes historical authenticity," Mr.
Eaton said in a recent conversation.
"If we used a typical southern Italian rustic village, it would look pretty. That's not what these pieces are about. I wanted gritty, grimy and unforgiving, energetic and rough. Little Italy was the obvious choice."


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
Will anybody ever have a good word to say about Texas oil barons?
Certainly not Robert Moss in MEXICO WAY (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95).
Mr.
Moss, the author of "Moscow Rules" and "Carnival of Spies," follows the approved party line for novelists.
Oil barons are greedy, hypocritical and amoral; they consider themselves above any kind of social contract, including relationships with their own Government.


Headliners; Persisting
For several years, Glen Kealey, an Ottawa businessman, has been telling anyone who would listen that in 1986 a Cabinet minister demanded a $5,000 bribe to help get federal tenants for Mr.
Kealey's $160 million office building project.
He said his refusal to pay cost him the project, his business and even his home.
But Mr.
Kealey's charges were not pursued by the police or by prosecutors.
So, as Canadian citizens may, Mr.
Kealey pursued the case as a private prosecution, and recently he caught the ear of a local justice of the peace.
Mr.
Kealey charged that the bribe solicitation was part of a larger scheme that involved high government officials and was covered up by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
In a ruling that some analysts said could threaten the Government of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, the justice of the peace found reason to suspect that 13 political figures and 3 top Mounties had committed crimes.
He ordered them to face charges in court in September.


Traffic Alert
Park Avenue Street Fair: Park Avenue South will be closed today between 17th and 23d Streets from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.


The Executive Computer; Putting Some Punch Into Management Show-and-Tell
Surely there must be a special meeting room in purgatory where errant executives go, there to sit through an eternity of droning orientations and a constant parade of flip charts, bar graphs, bullet charts and overhead projections.
Oh, you've been there?
There is a temptation to blame personal computers and presentation graphics programs for the proliferation of "visual aids" in business presentations, board rooms, sales meetings, seminars, speeches and conferences.
That's easier than blaming the organizer's design and presentation.


Q and A
Seeing Monument Valley
Q.
We will be at the Grand Canyon and would like to visit Monument Valley.
How far is it?
What does a visit involve?
Cynthia D. Cendoma, New York, N.Y.


CASH IN THE CURL
Stillman seems to have done much of her research by listening to Lance Carson bellyache about crowds at Malibu and shortboards destroying the mellow scene.
She should have spent more time with the versatile and exuberant Fletchers.
They do it all: shortboard, longboard, contest surf, soul surf, sponsor surfers, etc.


The Ecology of Dreams
Shakespeare in Portuguese?
"A Midsummer Night's Dream" in a defoliated forest?
Fairies in costumes that are almost 100 percent makeup and their own flesh?
Well, Caca Rosset's back in town with another provocative interpretation of a stage classic.
The 37-year-old director and his 45-member Teatro de Ornitorrinco from Sao Paulo, Brazil, will stage their version of the Shakespeare comedy Tuesday through Aug. 11 at the Delacorte Theater, part of the Public Theater's Shakespeare in the Park season.


Walter Hetfield 3d, 85, Ex-Judge in New Jersey
Walter L. Hetfield 3d, a retired Union County judge who is believed to have been the youngest person to become a judge in New Jersey, died on Friday at his home in Scotch Plains, N.J.
He was 85 years old.
He died of arteriosclerotic heart disease, a spokesman for the family said.


Headliners; The Prospect of a New Planet
WITH so much universe out there to play with, it is hard to imagine that the forces of creation would have conspired to produce planets only around the star we call the Sun.
But so far astronomers have not found conclusive evidence that there are solar systems other than our own.
Last week when news came that another planet might be spinning outside the solar neighborhood, some 30,000 light-years away, scientists showed an excitement tinged with skepticism.
In a report in the journal Nature, British astronomers said they had detected signs of a planet orbiting around a pulsar -- a star that has collapsed in a violent explosion, or supernova, and now rotates while emitting blasts of radio energy at regular intervals.


As Life Improves in Iraq, Hussein Digs In
An air of normalcy is returning to life in Baghdad nearly a year after President Saddam Hussein annexed Kuwait and five months since the end of the Persian Gulf war.
Traffic lights are working and air-conditioners hum in the summer heat, despite the bombing raids by the American-led coalition against Iraq that crippled the nation's power system.


Danianne Mizzy to Marry
Danianne Pauline Mizzy and Maurice Charles Dana, theatrical lighting designers in New York, plan to marry in September.
Miss Mizzy is the daughter of Jeanne LaMarche-Mizzy of Marion, Ohio, and the late A. Robert Mizzy.
Mr.
Dana is a son of Cross R. Dana and Maurice J. Dana, both of West Chester, Pa.
Miss Mizzy, 30 years old, graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in fine arts from Yale University.
Mr.
Dana, 35, is a graduate of Lycoming College.


Making a Difference; Culture Change at Hughes
The Hughes Aircraft Company has not really been an aircraft company for decades, having concentrated instead on building itself into one of the primary suppliers of military electronics.
And last week, Hughes's chairman, Malcolm R. Currie, unveiled a plan to transform Hughes again, this time into a company supplying technologically sophisticated products to both military and commercial markets.
About 80 percent of the company's sales in recent years have been to the Pentagon, a level of dependence that Mr.
Currie said he considers unhealthy in the long run given the deep cuts being planned for weapons purchases.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE WORLD OF NAGARAJ, by R. K. Narayan. (Penguin, $8.95.) In the fictional south Indian town of Malgudi, a middle-aged man's dream of writing a biography of a Hindu sage is interrupted by the arrival of a wild nephew.
"R. K. Narayan's world conveys a deep humanism quite rare in contemporary writing," Julian Moynahan said in The Book Review last year.
"As for Malgudi, one longs to go there and to stay on. Perhaps in another incarnation."
SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR: A Biography, by Deirdre Bair. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $14.95.) Digging into the life of Simone de Beauvoir, Deirdre Bair provides so many personal details about her vices and habits, sexual and otherwise, that "one may ask oneself if all this is more than one wants to know," our reviewer, Diane Johnson, said last year.
"But in fact, a demystifying biography of de Beauvoir -- the serious, frumpy mother of feminism, the Mother Courage of existentialism and left-wing French politics, the epitome of bourgeois rebelliousness -- leaves its subject better understood and more likable than if one had only read de Beauvoir's own works."


Eva Smith to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Sherwood H. Smith Jr. of Raleigh, N.C., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Eva Hackney Smith and Allen Mattson Davis, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Brack Davis of Rocklin, Calif.
Miss Smith, 27 years old, is a design coordinator at Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill.
Mr.
Davis, also 27, is a vice president of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette in New York.
He graduated from Harvard University.


Ann M. Brooks Engaged to Wed
The engagement of Ann Margaret Brooks to Steven Clay Schiller, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin Schiller of Scarsdale, N.Y., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Brooks of Rye, N.Y.
The wedding is to take place in April.
Miss Brooks, 24 years old, a cum laude graduate of Vanderbilt University, is an account representative in the Stamford, Conn., office of Marsh &amp; McLennan insurance brokerage.
Her father is a retired marketing executive.


'EXCUSE ME,' HE SAID
In her article about the flasher, Berne writes that "men are not forced into this sort of collusion." However, it seems to me that men are regularly "forced into this sort of collusion" by women who display themselves in revealing clothing.
Admittedly, in that situation, both men and women are willing participants, and the women ostensibly are trying to attract men, not shock them.
But if men aren't "being used for someone else's purposes" -- which Berne concludes was the worst part about being flashed -- just what
is
going on?


Teaching Children to Celebrate Diversity
IN their book, "Different and Wonderful: Raising Black Children in a Race-Conscious Society," published by Prentice Hall, Dr.
Darlene Powell Hopson and her husband, Dr.
Derek S. Hopson, advise black parents to face racial issues squarely, promote self-esteem in their children, and be advocates for the celebration of diversity.
The Hopsons say that as black psychologists they especially understand black issues, but that much of their advice relates to people of all colors.
The authors, who operate the Hopson Center for Psychological and Educational Services in Middlefield, said they are working on two other books.
They also advise manufacturers on the creation of products like black dolls.
They said that they are aided in their work by their 4-year-old daughter, Dotteanna, who had noticed that some black dolls do not resemble her; they just seemed to be white dolls with dark paint.


Chopping Down The Stereotypes
To the Editor:
Timothy Egan's article "Northwest Noir: An Art of the Seriously Goofy"  [ July 14 ]  was an amusing study of some of the artists in the Pacific Northwest who have chosen a path that diverges from the American mainstream.


After Central Park Bias Shootings, Many Officers, Few Others
Almost a week after the police disclosed that they were seeking someone who had fired on several men in the Ramble in Central Park, officers in unmarked cars and on scooters canvassed the secluded, wooded area early yesterday morning.
But so far, the police said, their investigation had uncovered few leads in the three, and possibly four, related shootings that occurred in the area in the last nine months.


Nancy Fleming to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Fleming of New Cumberland, Pa., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Nancy Jean Fleming and David Christopher Bird, a son of Anna M. Bird of Trenton and the late Walter T. Bird.
Ms.
Fleming, 29 years old, graduated from Bloomsburg University.
She is the public relations director of JVC of America, the consumer electronics company in Elmwood Park, N.J.
Mr.
Bird, 32, is a reporter for Knight-Ridder Financial News in New York.
He graduated from Rider College.


'Casino Royale' Is an LP Bond With a Gilt Edge
As vinyl verges on extinction, one album has emerged as the prime specimen of the species.
Of all the millions of recordings released in the 114 years since Thomas Edison asked, "What hath God wrought?" this album has come closest to achieving the potential of a vanishing medium.
It represents "the paradigm," says one audiophile, "the paramount, if you will."
It is . . . the original soundtrack of the 1967 movie "Casino Royale."


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a picture window that measures about five feet by four feet.
There is a storm window on the outside of this picture window, and in cold weather the entire inside of this storm window is covered with condensation.
The glass has been replaced in the storm window, and all new rubber stripping has been installed around it.
We have also tried to seal all inside cracks and openings.
What else can we do to get rid of the condensation?
A.
Because the condensation forms on the inner face of the storm window, warm moist air is escaping from inside the house into the space between the two windows.
Inspect all the glazing compound around each pane of glass on the inside window and replace any that is cracked or missing.
Also make sure all the caulking is in good condition.
Finally make sure that there are a couple of small "weep" holes, one-eighth or one-quarter inch, at the bottom of the storm window and that they are not clogged.
The holes allow moisture to escape harmlessly to the outside.


U.S. FACES TROUBLE MAINTAINING UNITY OF ALLIES ON IRAQ
Nearly a year after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the Bush Administration is finding it more and more difficult to forge a consensus among its allies over steps to bring down President Saddam Hussein and pave the way for a successor Government in Baghdad.
The growing strains on the military coalition were most evident this week, when a deadline passed for Iraq to make full disclosure on its nuclear, chemical and biological weapons programs.


Brother Benedict Rolston, Professor, 74
Brother Benedict Francis Rolston of the Christian Schools, who served in the order for nearly six decades and was a professor at Manhattan College, died on Wednesday at his home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
He was 74 years old.
He died of respiratory and cardiac arrest, a spokesman for the order said.


Callers Besiege Hospitals After AIDS Report
Hospitals fielded hundreds of calls today from patients who were worried that they might have been treated by an emergency-room doctor infected with the AIDS virus.
But officials at five of the hospitals where Dr.
Neal Rzepkowski had worked in the last 10 years said they detected little panic from the callers.


Kristina Bieker Wed to David P. Brady
Kristina Lee Bieker, a postdoctoral fellow in biology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday in Portland, Ore., to David Paul Brady, an assistant professor of electrical engineering at Northeastern University in Boston.
The Rev.
Alan G. Deale performed the ceremony at the First Unitarian Church.
The bride, 27 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Fred W. Bieker of Portland.
The bridegroom, 32, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph E. Brady of West Chester, Pa.


With Fresh Corn at Hand, the Simplest Recipes Are the Best
THE season for fresh corn on the cob is now in full swing.
Because of the extremely warm weather in May and June, corn matured quite early in some parts of the tristate region, notably southern New Jersey and eastern Long Island.
The best place to buy corn is from a farm or a farm stand that carries it, freshly picked, every day.
Corn should be purchased in the morning, before it has had a chance to sit out in the heat.
And it should be refrigerated as soon as possible.
Corn treated this way will taste sweeter than the corn purchased closer to dinner time.


Never Too Early to Think of Wool
After a three-month heat wave in the Northeast, this has come to feel like an endless summer.
But in the stores, autumn has arrived.
Oh, no, you may say.
It's too warm to think about woolens and cashmeres.
There's plenty of time for that.
True, but aren't you tired of all your limp summer clothes?
Now is the time to find fresh stock in the stores, and not everything labeled "fall" is heavy.
There are silks and rayons, gabardines and crepes, lightweight wool blends and buttery soft suedes that are virtually seasonless.


The High Cost of a 60-Hour Week
To the Editor:
In "Productivity and the White Collar" (Forum, July 7), P. Ranganath Nayak, a senior vice president at a major accounting firm, asks, "How hard are people working?" and responds, "People should be willing to put in 60-hour weeks. . . ." Perhaps Mr.
Nayak is right.
Perhaps having your employees become total strangers to their children, spouses and friends would make them -- what? -- depressed? bitter? seek another job?
Take your pick.


Oregon's Forests
To the Editor: "Oregon's Ancient and Fragile Forests" by Leslie Allen (Travel, June 9) contained poetic yet accurate descriptions of Oregon's ancient forests and a perceptive accounting of some of the issues.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Purple Lablab
Q.
I have seen a beautiful purple flowering vine called lablab.
Can you tell me something about growing it, and where I can find it?
Angela Apicella, Brooklyn, N.Y.


Putting Together a Plan for Hardy Bulbs
FLOWERS from hardy bulbs do wonders for spring.
Although they will not be planted until late September or early October, now is the time to start thinking about them.
Catalogues are here, and the nurserymen want us to start ordering.
Bulbs may be dormant in growing fields, but soon they will be shipped for sales.
One of the best ways to know what bulbs to order is to make notes while on a tour of the garden.
There often are holes here or spots there where a few bulbs would be appropriate.


Economy Sulks as Gorbachev Enjoys His Encore
Given all the woes of his nation, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is entitled to be as exhausted as any other Soviet citizen this midsummer by the sheer resistance to change that has been drummed into this land by gray decades of Communism.
But, far from it, after six years in office the Soviet President is as indefatigable as a vaudevillian.
Right now, he is moving in a high-stepping executive strut after a two-week chain of successes.


Latin Letters
To the Editor: I find the conclusion that picture postcards might not be dispatched by Latin American postal administrations incorrect (Letters, June 30).
Tons of letters, cards and packages move daily and promptly in and out of Latin America.


Campus Life: Berkeley; Panel Urges Increasing Commitment to Sports
The University of California at Berkeley - noted in recent decades more for the quality of its academic departments than for its athletic teams - is planning to commit itself to success in sports.
A report released recently by the Blue Ribbon Committee on Intercollegiate Athletics recommends that Chancellor Chang-Lin Tien "lead the campus in a clear and augmented commitment to a position of leadership in national athletics." The last time the Golden Bears football team went to the Rose Bowl, a trip emblematic of its Conference championship, was 1958, and the 1960 basketball team was the last to win its Conference title.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
POETRY AND MUSIC
Poetry and chamber music in an idyllic setting will be available this afternoon at Manitoga's woodland gardens in Garrison.
The music will be supplied by members of the Putnam Symphony Orchestra, and the poetry will be provided by the Putnam Poets and members of the audience who want to read from their own works.


Wall Street; The N.Y.S.E.'s Fluid Standards
For less than bus fare you can buy a share of MHI Group, a formerly bankrupt company in Tallahassee, Fla., which owns a collection of funeral homes and cemeteries in the Sunshine State.
But you would not be making your purchase from some penny-stock huckster on the telephone or a free-wheeling market maker in Vancouver.
No, transactions in MHI Group -- trading recently at 75 cents a share -- are conducted on the lofty trading floor of the New York Stock Exchange.
Indeed, MHI is one of more than five dozen companies whose shares are trading for a dollar or less on the Big Board, America's premier stock exchange.
Of those, more than two dozen -- including MHI -- have not closed above a dollar in the past year.


Mapping Out the Steeper Cost
New Englanders are paying more to drive than anyone else in the country, according to figures released this month by the American Automobile Association.
But the figures also show that the national average for motorists has risen by three-tenths of a cent since the end of March.
That means an average annual cost of $5,535 for 15,000 miles of driving, according to the association's study, based on computations made by Runzheimer International, a transportation consulting firm.
The average is determined by combining operating and fixed costs, using a composite of three domestic cars: a subcompact Ford Escort, a mid-size Ford Taurus and a full-size Chevy Caprice.


IN SHORT: FICTION
AND THEY DIDN'T DIE  By Lauretta Ngcobo. Braziller, $19.95.


Back-Road Tours In New England
For those who prefer the back roads, T. J. Harvey of Southbury, Conn., offers Shunpiking, a self-driving tour of inns through the New England countryside.
The word shunpiking has its origins in the Colonial era when travelers sometimes took lengthy detours to avoid paying tolls to property owners.
Mr.
Harvey devises an itinerary and writes a guidebook specifically for a client's trip, tailored to such interests as antiquing, outlet shopping or visiting historic sites.


Having Fun? McRae Says He's Working on It
For Jim Leyland of the Pittsburgh Pirates, the best part of being a manager is the actual managing of the game.
Between the white lines, that's where he finds sanctuary.
For Tom Trebelhorn of the Milwaukee Brewers, it's the same thing.
The managing, he says, is the most fun the skipper of a 25-man crew known as a baseball team has in any given day.


Putting Together a Plan for Hardy Bulbs
FLOWERS from hardy bulbs do wonders for spring.
Although they will not be planted until late September or early October, now is the time to start thinking about them.
Catalogues are here, and the nurserymen want us to start ordering.
Bulbs may be dormant in growing fields, but soon they will be shipped for sales.
One of the best ways to know what bulbs to order is to make notes while on a tour of the garden.
There often are holes here or spots there where a few bulbs would be appropriate.


Price Rises Rule Postwar Cairo's Scuttlebutt
Across this city as summer builds, the talk has turned from war's high drama to far more humdrum scripts -- the cost of gas and taxicabs and most other things afflicted by a scourge of suddenly rising prices.
During the Persian Gulf war, President Hosni Mubarak staked a claim as leader of the so-called moderate Arabs, America's most resolute Arab ally in turbulence that seemed to offer gains to offset the risks.
The economic crisis befalling his land, by contrast, is far less easy to either confront or wish away and has now re-emerged to haunt him.


Data Update
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
May 91
May 90
Change
New York
405.7
475.1
-15%
New Jersey
159.4
191.7
-17%
Connecticut
78.9
83.1
-5%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.77
9.83
10.23
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.30
7.30
8.51
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.62
9.68
10.04
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.21
7.26
8.21
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.66
9.73
10.11
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.11
7.15
8.45
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.92
10.04
10.36
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.68
7.74
8.60
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
6.32
6.30
7.87
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.12
9.23
9.85
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Latin Letters
To the Editor: When some friends and I traveled in South America in 1987 I was warned by a travel agent friend to insist on seeing the stamps on any mail canceled before my eyes.
He informed me that, because of the extreme poverty in South American, it is worth it to some South Americans to steam off the stamps and use them on their own mail.
We found that the postal agents were quite often annoyed and quite resistant to our requests to hand-cancel but usually could be persuaded to do so.
Most
of our mail made it to their destinations. MARLENE KOCAN  Columbus, Ohio


The Cultivated Gardener; A Time to Water Wisely and Well
If you hate the heat, imagine how a plant feels.
A plant can't go to an air-conditioned movie theater.
A plant can't lie down in front of the air-conditioner -- or even a fan -- and take a siesta.
A plant has to stand in the boiling sun, its roots stuck in desert-dry soil, and just wait for rain that doesn't come.
Or for the sprinkler that sprinkles its parched soil for a stingy 20 minutes and then shuts off, which is like telling a plant, "Die!"


Correspondent's Choice; Nepali Dining In Katmandu
THOUSANDS of Americans go to Nepal every year to enjoy trekking in the spectacular Himalayas and to marvel at the unspoiled medieval townscapes of the Katmandu Valley.
But then, more often then not, these travelers pack up and go away without even a taste of Nepali food, a gentle cuisine that has been pushed aside by the Indian, Chinese, Thai and Western dishes that dominate hotel and restaurant menus.
In 1987 Manohar Pandey, a Nepali back from five years of management training in the fast-food chains of California, saw the empty space in Katmandu's expanding restaurant trade, and started looking for the right place to open a Nepali establishment that would be as true to its country's arts and culture as it was to its food.
In a few months he had found six business partners and a deserted, four-story, 90-year-old mansion belonging to an aristocratic Brahmin family who had served a clan of hereditary rulers called the Ranas.
In Hindu Nepal, high-caste Brahmins and Chettris are still powerful and prosperous people, and the inheritors of the house had moved on to what they thought was a better life in a modern home.
"This old house was in very bad shape when we took over," said Mr.
Pandey, who had been a food and beverage manager at Katmandu's Annapurna Hotel before accompanying his wife, Saroj, to California, where she did postgraduate studies in zoology.
"The Brahmin family had  done very well and nobody wanted to live here anymore."
By March 1989 the restored and remodeled house was ready to begin business as Bhanchha Ghar -- the Nepali Kitchen.
Walls had been painted white, old mud floors covered with local brick and the top-floor storeroom turned into a bar.
But the Nepali Kitchen had barely opened before it was dealt a blow by a drop in tourism after a punitive Indian embargo on this landlocked kingdom.
The next year, political protests emptied the town.
Now, with a newly elected democratic Government in Nepal and the promise of a general liberalization of life in Katmandu, the Nepali Kitchen is alive in the evenings with tourists from all over Europe, the Americas and Asia, as well as local people who kept the restaurant going during its impossibly difficult early years.
A new Bhanchha Ghar restaurant will open in Pokhara in west-central Nepal in October and other restaurateurs are reported to be planning similar ventures.
An evening at the Nepali Kitchen -- open every day from noon to about 10 P.M. -- usually begins in the fourth-floor bar, where the environment and decor are completely Nepali.
Guests leave their shoes at the bottom of the wooden staircase and ascend to a large, carpeted room under the eaves furnished with floor pillows, low tables and a huge charcoal brazier for warmth in cool seasons.
The steeply pitched ceilings of the room, which once served as a kitchen as well as storeroom, allowing the cooking odors to rise away from the rest of the old house, are covered with colorful appliqued panels in mandala patterns common to Hindu and Buddhist design.
The Nepali dining experience begins with the bar snacks of peanuts steamed in garlic and spices, dumplings stuffed with spicy minced meat ($1.50), or smoked venison chips, which look like thick potato chips and have a sharp and salty flavor.
The bar also offers imported liquors and locally brewed Tuborg and San Miguel beers ($1.50) as well as Nepal's own beer, Iceberg.
Downstairs, diners occupy two floors, with a few tables in each of the mansion's old rooms.
In keeping with the setting, the food is also intended to be aristocratic.
"The class of food we are reviving here is not ordinary village food, but the high-class food of the Brahmins and the Chettris," Mr.
Pandey said as he explained the menu.
"We also serve some Newari dishes." The Newari people were once the rulers of the Katmandu Valley and built its extraordinary brick temple towns.
The Nepali Kitchen has an a la carte menu as well as a sort of "thali du jour" -- the large metal plate heaped with a variety of dishes that is also found in South India.
A South Indian thali (pronounced TAH-lee) is distinguished by the red-hot spiciness of the food.
The Nepali variety is bland by comparison, with more delicate seasonings.
Two interesting dishes from the a la carte menu are the momocha and chatamari.
Momochas are mutton-filled dumplings served at the Nepali Kitchen with a Newari-style tomato-based dip.
Mr.
Pandey, searching for a way to best describe a chatamari called it a Nepali pizza.
It is a pie with a flat, rice-dough base on which a mixture of ground mutton and egg is piled before baking.
Each dish costs about $1.30.
A la carte dishes include soups, curries, kebabs and marinated and grilled meats (chicken, pork, wild boar, mutton) at prices ranging from $2 to $5.
Meat dishes may be alternately fried, barbecued or curried from day to day.
The restaurant uses no beef, which the Hindu religion forbids.
In fact, Brahmins are expected to forswear all meats, though vegetarianism is not so widely practiced as it once was in South Asia.
The Nepali thali is usually a nice mix of flavors, and a good choice for a first-time diner, Mr.
Pandey said.
Servings are generous and refills instant, so diners can select favorites and stick to them.
A thali dinner costs about $8 a person, without drinks.
On a recent evening the thali, a brass plate heated to keep the food from getting cold, was first filled with the traditional mound of rice, the base for the other dishes.
Around the rice were served curries and stews of wild boar, mutton and vegetables.
A dal (or puree) of black lentils is a specialty at the Nepali Kitchen, and is served with almost every meal.
So is a buckwheat flatbread resembling a chapati or thick tortilla, and several bowls of pickled vegetables or a pickled shredded chicken salad.
To add another traditional touch, a tiny ceramic bowl of rakshi, a strong rice wine, is served with every meal.
Most uninitiated people regard it as lethal.
A sip gives tongue-stinging testimony to its power.
The Nepali Kitchen sticks to three dessert specialties, all under a dollar: a mixed fruit compote, a sweet rice pudding and a spiced yogurt dish called shikarnee, a cool end to an evening of curries and barbecues.
Mr.
Pandey has not stopped with Nepali food or pillows in the bar.
Throughout the restaurant, he has used local pottery, handwoven fabrics and ethnic art.
In the entry foyer at ground level, Mr.
Pandey built a small stall where handicrafts like those used in the restaurant can be bought.
A gallery for Nepali artists is about to open opposite the handicraft stall.
"Wherever we could find Nepali things, we said: 'Let's use them,' " he recalls.
"Let's give these local people a chance."
. . .
The Nepali Kitchen is on Kamaladi Street, a short street off the main Durbar Marg near the center of Katmandu; telephone 225172.


STRIKEOUTS AND PSYCH-OUTS
It is not surprising to learn that, in a business where men are paid as much as $3 million a year for playing a boy's game, psychiatrists have become a necessity.
The overwhelming amount of pressure placed on these men just to hit and catch a ball is amazing.
MARJORIE ARISTIDE
Bronx


Topics of The Times; Crying Wolf About Water
Until the rains came, New York City in July felt as hot and dry as Death Valley with sidewalks.
So far, however, the water level in the city's reservoir system is nothing to worry about.
The system stands at 78 percent of capacity.
Levels normally drop from the beginning of June (they were at 94 percent on June 11) until autumn rains begin the refilling process.
The city will call for conservation measures if the drop exceeds expectations.


Crime Wave: Players Who Steal and Get Caught
At the mere sight of some of the numbers, the tendency is to say, "Why bother?"
If Spike Owen of Montreal steals successfully one time and is caught stealing six times, and if Tim Wallach, his teammate, has one stolen base and has been thrown out four times, there doesn't seem to be any percentage in having them try to steal.


Jets and Redskins Get a Bit Emotional
Although the final score was 25-16 in favor of Washington, it was a winning afternoon for both the Jets and the Redskins, who scrimmaged today on the breezy field of Lehigh University's Murray H. Goodman Stadium.
Each player got a chance to put on the pads and hit someone besides his teammates.


Linda Radovich Is Engaged
September wedding plans for Linda Ann Radovich, the development director of the Princeton Ballet, and John Joseph Reilly, a sales representative for Pfizer Inc. in New York, have been announced by their parents.
Ms.
Radovich, 35 years old, graduated from Rutgers College and has a master's degree from the University of Colorado.
She is a daughter of Mary J. Pardo of Voorhees, N.J., and Samuel A. Radovich of Palmyra, N.J.
Her fiance, 31, graduated from the United States Naval Academy.
He is a son of Joseph and Mary Reilly of Upper Montclair, N.J.


The Economy Lives, but Will It Ever Dance Again?
It May Be a Recovery, But It's Less Than Robust
The recession is over and the recovery is here, according to everyone from Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan to New York real estate agents.
But hold the bubbly and break out the beer.
Most economists expect the kind of slow, shuffling climb that will cause many to wonder if the recovery will stick around come Labor Day.


Presidential Campaign Checkoff Is a Rip-Off; TV vs. Democracy
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb offers in "Why the Political Mess?" (column, July 3) several reasons for our political system's disintegration over the last 20 years.
But in debating whether the biggest changes have taken place in the voter or the politician, he leaves out the change that has been at the core of all the others: the transformation of the political process through television advertising, both the paid variety and the adept use of news coverage by politicians.


Loans for the Elderly Tap the Untapped
AS the owner of a successful beauty shop in Mamaroneck, Josephine Cairo, who now is 71, managed to accumulate enough money to fulfill her fondest wish: owning her own home.
"In 1967 I had a ranch house built in Rye Brook," Miss Cairo said.
"It was my dream come true, and I hope to live in it forever."


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison 203,000
8 Cypress Road  3-bedroom, 1.5-bath, 12-year-old colonial; h/w floors, basement; taxes $3,750.
Howell 141,000
68 Berkshire Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 6-year-old Cape Cod; w/w carpeting, c/a, 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,583.
Maplewood 240,000
31 New England Road  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-half bath, 54-year-old colonial; den, deck, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,540.
Millburn 274,900
7 Southern Slope Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 41-year-old Tudor; stone fireplace, h/w floors, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,879.
Ramsey 245,000
24 Balfour Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 51-year-old colonial; new kitchen, fireplace, full basement; taxes $4,165.
West Orange 139,000
526 Mount Pleasant Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 52-year-old Cape Cod; screened porch, c/a, dining room; taxes $3,268.
OTHER AREAS Somers, N.Y. 280,000
140 Mitchell Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; fireplace, family room, eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $5,770.
Madison, Conn. 190,000
53 Country Way  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old saltbox; pantry, 2-car attached garage, 1.7 acres; taxes $3,193.
Smithtown, L.I. 184,000
7 Timothy Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, porch; taxes $4,000.


Denver's Field Would Be Largest
Proposed dimensions for Denver's new baseball stadium would make it the largest in the major leagues.
Taking into consideration that a ball travels about 10 percent farther in Denver's mile-high altitude, the Colorado Rockies owners have proposed distances of 340-350 feet down the foul lines, 390-405 feet in the power alleys and 425-435 feet to center field.


To Bethlehem by Way of Mexico, With Linda Ronstadt in Wings
For generations, in churches, plazas and schoolyards of the Southwest, Mexican-Americans have performed "La Pastorela," a medieval Spanish miracle play brought to the New World by the Franciscan friars who accompanied the first conquistadors.
Not long ago, the film makers Luis Valdez and Richard Soto had a thought: why not make a television version of the Hispanic classic so that it could be seen in the rest of the country?
The production that resulted has attracted many of the best known Mexican-American entertainers: the comedians Cheech Marin and Paul Rodriguez, the actor Robert Beltran, the singers Linda Ronstadt, Freddy Fender, Flaco Jimenez and Lalo Guerrero in dramatic roles.
Shooting in the same mission church here where James Stewart pursued Kim Novak in the film "Vertigo" and in the hills and meadows surrounding this small farming town 75 miles south of San Francisco, Mr.
Valdez and company spent the better part of June putting a new and decidedly American stamp on this centuries-old morality tale.


Fun and Profit vs. Peace and Quiet at Lake George
According to Chester T. Sims, who lives on Huddle Bay here, the newest machines on the water go "rur-rur-rur-rur, in that fashion" until you are ready to scream, which he said he did the other day in his yard.
They are officially known as personal watercraft.
But people call them water bikes or Jet Skis, the Kawasaki brand name for the maneuverable, jet-pump-propelled craft that are making noise and darting through the waves on waterways everywhere.
Some people, like Mr.
Sims, call them the new scourge of summer.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
The Vanishing Patron
European kings and princes in the Renaissance had their failings, but, Hugh Trevor-Roper reminds us, many did have one admirable quality our modern leaders lack: an appreciation for the arts.
This is from "Princes and Artists: Patronage and Ideology at Four Habsburg Courts, 1517-1633" (Thames and Hudson, paper).


Family Assails Newark Police in Shooting
A Newark police officer shot and wounded an 18-year-old Newark man early Thursday morning in what the police say was self-defense but the teen-ager's family is calling a case of police brutality.
The wounded man, Ronnie L. Smith, who is listed in stable condition in University Hospital in Newark, was charged with aggravated assault and illegally having and firing a weapon.


An October Wedding for Anne Plumb
Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Kelsey of Rumson, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for Mrs.
Kelsey's daughter Anne Hoagland Plumb and Todd Dowling Root, a son of Jeanne D. Root of Princeton, N.J., and Stuart D. Root of Bronxville, N.Y.
Miss Plumb is an assistant vice president of corporate finance at the National Westminster Bank in New York.
She is 30 years old and a graduate of Colby College.
She is also the daughter of the late Robert J. Plumb, who was the treasurer of Asarco, a metals and mining company in New York.
Her stepfather, who is retired, was a managing director at Paine Webber in New York.


West Bank Arabs Bitter Over Talks
Bitterness, dejection and frustration about the course of the American-initiated peace process marked the mood of many West Bank Palestinians in this town south of Jerusalem and in Ramallah to the north this week.
The Palestinians, questioned in two days of random conversations, said they feared that the probable result of the diplomatic efforts of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d will be an arrangement between Israel and Syria similar to the 1979 peace treaty between Israel and Egypt.


Ms. Pierson Wed To T. P. Clephane
Constance Sweeney Pierson was married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn., to Thomas Painter Clephane by the Rev.
Sandra H. Stainer.
The bride is a daughter of Inamary Sweeney of Boston and Dr.
John D. Sweeney of Newton, Mass.
The bridegroom is the son of Helen Clephane of Larchmont, N.Y., and the late Douglas Clephane.
Mrs.
Clephane, a graduate of the University of Texas, is the Eastern sales manager in Greenwich for Enduro architectural products.
Her father, who is retired, was the chief of surgery at Waltham (Mass.) Hospital and president of the Charles Bank Medical Society in Boston.


An Auto Glut That Won't Go Away
Just a stone's throw from the rusting carcass of the Chrysler Corporation's defunct Jefferson Avenue plant on this city's east side, workers are installing machine tools in a gleaming new factory.
Elsewhere in town, many who will work on the assembly lines of the new plant on Jefferson Avenue are attending classes in such subjects as statistical process control and just-in-time inventory.
By the time the first Grand Cherokee Jeep, a new luxury model, is produced here in January, Chrysler will have spent about $1 billion.


For Collectors Who Must Have Everything
If there has been one distinguishing feature in the marketing of the classical compact disk during its first decade, it is the urge for "completism" or "cyclism." Innumerable companies have fought for shelf space -- and buyers -- by issuing the complete everything of everybody or cycles of symphonies, chamber works and solo performances.
The summer-release schedule includes the beginnings, continuations or completions of many such ventures.
While the market is glutted with Beethoven and Mozart cycles, some current issues involve composers whose work is not ordinarily the subject of comprehensive releases.


STRANGER THAN FICTION
At the New York Public Library's 10th Annual Literary Luncheon recently, a panel addressed a question that James Atlas also raises in his article "Stranger Than Fiction" (June 23): Can you believe everything you read?
Here is what some of the N.Y.P.L. panelists had to say: Don Hewitt, executive producer of "60 Minutes," said that people don't necessarily lie to you, they tell you their version of the truth.
Journalist Kati Marton, author of "The Polk Conspiracy," expressed concern about accepting "one voice of officialdom" and preferred to hear "multiple, fallible, flawed voices" in news coverage.
Referring to her interviews with Lyndon Baines Johnson, Doris Kearns Goodwin noted that, for a biographer, "even a lie  [ told as a truth ]  is revealing about a person,
if you think.
" SONNY SLOAN  Trustee, The New York Public Library
New York, N.Y.


Yakovlev, Aide to Gorbachev, Says He Is Leaving His Post
Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, a top adviser to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, said today that he was leaving his job.
"I have submitted to the President an application to relieve me of my job," he told Russian television in a one-sentence statement.
Mr.
Yakovlev, a top Gorbachev aide widely regarded as a champion of change, had not occupied any top state post for several months.


Movie Ad Pulled in Milwaukee
Paramount Pictures has canceled advertisements in Milwaukee for its new movie "Body Parts." "We pulled our TV ads in Milwaukee basically because of the nature of the tragedy," a spokesman for Paramount, Harry Anderson, said Friday.
"It was out of sympathy." The movie, due out Aug. 2, involves a criminal psychologist who receives a limb transplant.


Washington State
To the Editor: Photographs with the article on kayaking in the San Juan Islands of Washington State (Travel, June 9) show kayakers off Lopez and Orcas islands.
Island Kayak Guides, begun in 1983, is the largest kayaking business in the San Juan Islands and the only organized guide service based on both Lopez and Orcas.
Our trips around several dozen of the more than 160 islands in the San Juan Archipelago, including the National Wildlife Refuge islands (of which there are 60), have served more than 8,500 people in the past two and a half years.
Our address and phone number are Island Kayak Guides, Doe Bay Village, Olga, Orcas Island, Wash. 98279; (206) 376-4755.
THOMAS PETER VON BAHR Olga, Orcas Island, Wash.
The writer is the lead guide of Island Kayak Guides.


Hospital Offers a New Treatment for Stubborn Headaches
FOR the bad headache that won't go away after weeks and months, not hours -- consider the new headache treatment program at Northern Westchester Hospital Center here.
Developed by Dr.
Mark W. Green, a neurologist who formerly directed the headache unit at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, the program promises sustained pain relief to most people after one week of hospitalization.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Guilford, Conn. 300,000
95 Den Hollow Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 3-year-old contemporary; great room w/wet bar, deck, screened porch, whirpool bath in master suite, 3.7 acres; taxes $4,846.
Madison, Conn. 190,000
53 Country Way  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old saltbox; pantry, 2-car attached garage, 1.7 acres; taxes $3,193.
Meriden, Conn. 114,000
325 Wall Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; sun room, corner lot, dining room; taxes $1,454.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 330,000
54 Begg Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 64-year-old Tudor; fireplace, den, deck, workshop, new playroom, taxes $6,995.
Ossining, N.Y. 300,000
Spring Valley Road
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 59-year-old ranch; family room, 2 stone fireplaces, 8.3 acres; taxes $5,641.
Somers, N.Y. 280,000
140 Mitchell Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; fireplace, family room, eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $5,770.
OTHER AREAS Edison, N.J. 203,000
8 Cypress Road  3-bedroom, 1.5-bath, 12-year-old colonial; h/w floors, basement; taxes $3,750.
Howell, N.J. 141,000
68 Berkshire Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 6-year-old Cape Cod; w/w carpeting, c/a, 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,583.
Smithtown, L.I. 184,000
7 Timothy Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, porch; taxes $4,000.


To Seal Driveways And Patch Big Holes
ASPHALT driveways need prompt repair and periodic sealing, just like roads.
Summer is a good time for driveway maintenance, because most repair and sealing products work best when applied at temperatures from 50 to 85 degrees.
As soon as temperatures allow, repair damage like cracks and potholes, which usually occur in winter and early spring.
To repair cracks that are less than a half-inch wide, brush loose particles with a whisk broom and fill the cracks with liquid filler.


20 Killed in Quake in Iraq
An earthquake struck northern Iraq, killing 20 people and injuring an undisclosed number of others, the official Iraqi News Agency reported tonight.
The quake destroyed 100 houses in two villages in the Erbil area, said the report, which was monitored in London.
It did not say when the quake struck.


Streetscapes: The Croton Gatehouse; Instead of a Shed, A Fantasy Building
THE castlelike Croton Gatehouse at the southwest corner of 135th Street and Convent Avenue is an unlikely fantasy in the middle of a colossal project of utilitarian engineering.
Completed in 1890 as the connector between the Old and New Croton Aqueduct systems, the asymmetrical, turreted building was phased out in 1989 by the Department of Environmental Protection, which has all but finished cleaning out the structure.
It was designated a landmark in 1981, but its future, if not its survival, is in doubt.


On Language; The Prep-Droppers
WHEN DID
IN
GO OUT?" wonders Mark Burde of St. Louis. He spotted a line in an unusually prescient foreign-affairs column ridiculing the simple-minded view that once Saddam Hussein saw we were serious, "he will cave." Not
cave in
; just
cave
.
Similarly, a CNN report warned that "troops may be pulled"; not
pulled out
, just
pulled
.


Glenny Dunlop Has a Wedding
Glenny Leovy Dunlop, who was until recently a race horse exercise rider and trainer, and Brent Eric Bartram, a jockey on the Kentucky racing circuit, were married yesterday in Edgartown, Mass.
The Rev.
William W. Eddy performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church.
The bride, 26 years old, is the daughter of Courtney Stanley Brady of Edgartown and the late George T. Dunlop 3d.
The bridegroom, 27, is a son of Clara Cornwell Bartram of Marshall, Ill., and the late Marion J. Bartram.


Jennifer Schwarz Has a Wedding
Jennifer Jarrett Schwarz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Schwarz 3d of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday in Rye to Robert Kepner Horne, a son of Dorothy Horne of Chatham, Mass., and the late Dr.
Elwood Horne.
The Rev.
Edward Johnson performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ's Church.
Mrs.
Horne, 31 years old, is a vice president at the Oppenheimer Capital Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Kidder, Peabody in New York.


Henri-Georges Doll; Ex-Engineer Was 89
Henri-Georges Doll, an engineer and inventor, died on Thursday in the Montfort-l'Amaury Medical Center, near Paris.
He was 89 years old and had lived in Manhattan until six months ago, when he moved to Paris.
Mr. Doll died of a heart attack, a family spokesman said.


Gabrielle Costello To Marry in Fall
James E. Costello and Theresa Trouve Caroselli, both of Garden City, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Gabrielle Jeanne Costello, to Dr.
Martin Joseph Herman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Herman of Haddonfield, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Dr.
Costello and Dr.
Herman, both 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received M.D. degrees from Columbia University.
She is a resident in pediatrics at St.
Christopher's Hospital for Children in Philadelphia.
Her father is a vice president in the Garden City office of Paine Webber.
Her mother is an assistant principal at Half Hollow Hills High School in Dix Hills, L.I.


INSIDE
Canarsie Arson Called Bias
A real estate agency that sold houses to blacks was firebombed for the second time in two weeks.
Page 25.
Brady Speaks Out
The Treasury Secretary made some unusal comments on the politics of the stock scandal in Tokyo.
Page 3.
News Summary, Page 2 Obituaries, Page 30 Weather, Page 31 Radio, Late TV, Page 45


Bernard Smith, Salesman, 53
Bernard Smith, a salesman for an international import company and co-owner of a clothing shop, died on Thursday.
He was 53 years old and lived in Manhattan and Lakeville, Conn.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
THIS (VERY) OLD HOUSE


The Mystique of Tibet
TIBET is manifest proof of the smallness of human beings.
The Himalayan landscapes are so vast, so bereft of any inhabitants except the odd nomad, that here it is the land that has shaped the people instead of the other way around.
When Tibetans die, they do not build tombs; they leave the corpse for the vultures to devour.
Occasionally the Government makes an effort to tame the plateau, to show who is boss, by carving a road through the emptiness, but nature gets its revenge by bogging down vehicles in snow or mud.
It is from the roof of the Potala Palace, where the Dalai Lama as a boy rigged a telescope to study ordinary people as they strolled among the yaks on the streets below, that Tibet is at its most magnificent.
As Tibetan pilgrims shuffle by, turning prayer wheels and mumbling chants before disappearing into little chapels to light yak-butter candles, the mysticism and beauty of the land are simply overpowering.


Earl Attlee, 63, Dies; Founded British Party
Earl Attlee, a founding member of Britain's Social Democratic Party and the only son of former Prime Minister Clement Attlee, died today, a spokesman for Southampton Hospital said.
He was 63 years old.
The spokesman did not give any details, but a family friend said Earl Attlee had suffered a stroke on Monday evening and was in a coma.
Both spoke on condition that they not be named.


Ms. Yurke Wed To R. H. Davis Jr.
Alice Freida Yurke, a lawyer, and Robert Harding Davis Jr., a librarian, both in New York, were married yesterday in Sunapee, N.H.
Jean Putonen, a justice of the peace of the State of New Hampshire, officiated at the Seven Hearths Inn.
Ms.
Yurke, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, is an associate at Rogers &amp; Wells.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a J.D. from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Natalia Yurke of Rome, Ga.


Homeboy


European Nervousness
To the Editor:
In reference to Michael Vincent Miller's review of "American Nervousness, 1903" by Tom Lutz (July 7), I should like to point out that neurasthenia was not only an American nervousness but also a popular malady and fashionable diagnosis in Europe in the early part of this century.
As evidence I can offer this witty bit of epigrammatic advice that enjoyed wide circulation in Berlin around the time of World War I:
Haste nie  und raste nie,  dann haste nie  Neurasthenie.
("Never rush and never rest; with no neurasthenia you'll be blessed.") HARRY ZOHN  Waltham, Mass.


Hail Heywood, But By the Way
To the Sports Editor:
I hate to correct such a great sportswriter as Heywood Hale Broun ("From Dugout's Top Step, Superior Thinkers Lifted Teams," The Times, July 14), but, Allie Reynolds did not come to New York until the 1947 season -- after Joe McCarthy had left the Yankees.
Bucky Harris managed the team in 1947.
CLARENCE EDWIN WILLIAMS Short Hills, N.J.


Lori Roth Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Roth of Fair Lawn, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Lori Ellen Roth and David Lawrence Schnadig, a son of Richard Schnadig of Chicago and Frances Schnadig of Glencoe, Ill.
Ms.
Roth, 26 years old, is an associate in the New York office of the Industrial Bank of Japan.
A cum laude graduate of Tufts University, she received an M.B.A. from Northwestern University, as did her fiance.
Mr.
Schnadig, 26, is an associate at Lehman Brothers in New York.
He graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Bawdy Byron
To the Editor:
In the June 23 Noted With Pleasure column, there is a quotation from a letter of Byron's taken from a paperback reprint of Peter Quennell's "Byron: A Self-Portrait." Since it differs in one important respect from the letter as printed from the manuscript in my edition of "Byron's Letters and Journals" (letter of Oct. 26, 1819, to Douglas Kinnaird), some comment seems justified.


Fifth Wheels


Sports People: PRO FOOTBALL; Yanks Back in London
JUDD GARRETT of the Buffalo Bills and MIKE RENNA of the Philadelphia Eagles were in familiar territory yesterday as they prepared for today's American Bowl at Wembley Stadium in London.
Same city, same stadium. Only the teams and the league have changed.
Just last month, Garrett and Renna helped lead the London Monarchs to the championship of the World League of American Football in the World Bowl at Wembley.


Making a Difference; Shown to Nordstrom's Door
Joe Peterson lost a two-year battle against Nordstrom Inc. earlier this month when employees in the company's Seattle-area department stores voted overwhelmingly to oust his union after 60 years of representation.
But Mr.
Peterson, a onetime Nordstrom shoe salesman who is now president of the United Food and Commercial Workers Local 1001, doesn't sound ready to call it quits.


Managing; Insurance for Domestic Partners
Five years ago, Berkeley, Calif., became the first American municipality to offer medical benefits to the live-in partners -- both gay and heterosexual -- of unmarried employees.
The Bay Area's high incidence of AIDS led many doomsayers to predict that Berkeley's insurance claims, and thus its premium costs, would skyrocket.
Neither has happened.
"Our health-care costs haven't gone up any more than anyone else's," said Michael Brown, city manager.


Rhoda Harris Is Married To James M. Irwin in Ohio
Rhoda Jean Harris, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dwight R. Harris of Columbus, Ohio, was married yesterday to James Martin Irwin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin W. Irwin of Carmel, Calif.
The Rev.
Thomas Wolfe performed the ceremony at Christ Lutheran Church in Bexley, Ohio, assisted by the Rev.
David Jordan-Irwin, a Presbyterian minister who is the bridegroom's brother.
Ms.
Harris, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Sweet Briar College and is a vice president at Paine Webber Properties in New York.
Mr.
Irwin, 31, graduated magna cum laude from the University of California at Davis and has an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
He is the automotive analyst at Goldman, Sachs in New York.


Miss McLean Has a Wedding
Samantha McLean, the daughter of Mrs.
Randall W. Hackett of New York and Locke McLean of London, was married yesterday at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York to William Halsey Spruance Jr., the son of Sydney Spruance and Mr.
Spruance, both of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Donald J. Hannan 3d officiated.
The bride, 25 years old, is to receive a master's degree in elementary and special education from Manhattanville College next month and is to begin teaching at the Lab School in Washington in the fall.
She graduated from Miss Porter's School and Hamilton College and was a member of the 1983 New York Junior Assembly.
Her father is a vice president in the London office of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
Her mother, Gay Hackett, is an interior decorator in New York.


Baseball; Yankees Get Gray Hair on Old-Timers' Day
The day was grand.
The play was grander.
The Yankees were cruising to a convincing eight-run victory over the California Angels on Old-Timers' Day at Yankee Stadium yesterday and nothing could ruin this special event.
George Steinbrenner could have showed up.
The fans would have laughed.
Don Mattingly could have played first base with a Boston Red Sox cap.
They would have howled even harder.
It was that pleasant.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
July consumer confidence, in percent
78.0
79.0
New home sales, percent change
-3.3
2.0
Wednesday
Personal consumption expense, percent change
1.1
0.5
Personal income, percent change
0.5
0.6
Factory goods orders, percent change
2.9
1.0
Thursday
Construction spending, percent change
-0.9
0.0
National purchasing managers survey
50.9
52.0
Friday
Leading indicators, percent change
0.8
0.3
Nonfarm payroll, in thousands
-50
50
Unemployment, in percent
7.0
7.1
This Week's Developments Tuesday: Employment cost index  Wednesday: Announcement of August refunding *
Agricultural prices  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Suzanne J. Stone to Marry Philip Cicolello Next Year
Mr. and Mrs.
Alan J. Stone of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Suzanne Joyce Stone to Philip Anthony Cicolello, a son of Anthony Cicolello and Marie Sesa, both of Brooklyn.
The wedding is to be in September 1992.
Ms.
Stone, 23 years old, and her fiance, 24, are graduates of the University of Rhode Island.
She is a prekindergarten teacher at Tots and Toddlers in Armonk, N.Y.
Her father is the executive vice president of Sisti, Zinbarg &amp; Howard, an advertising agency in Paramus, N.J.
Her mother, Ilse Stone, is a personnel coordinator for Xerox in Stamford, Conn.


White Sox Start the Day Right By Downing the Red Sox in 14
Dan Pasqua's two-run single with the bases loaded in the 14th inning gave the White Sox a 10-8 victory over the Red Sox today in the first game of a day-night doubleheader.
Jeff Reardon was one out away from preserving Roger Clemens's 12th victory when Robin Ventura hit his second homer of the game and 13th of the season to tie the score in the ninth at 8-8.


In Search of Perfect Swing: Mattingly and His Ever-Changing Stance
One swing follows the next and the next, and they all become a series of perfect arcs under the afternoon sun.
No one watches.
Workers rake the infield dirt, trim the outfield grass and slowly push the batting cage into position, but Don Mattingly feels all alone in an empty stadium, swinging again and again into a net, with nothing else but a hitting tee and a bag of balls.


Topics of The Times; A Human Mechanical Basket
Driving north from Maryland one recent weekend, a New York woman headed for one of the exact change lanes at the toll plaza for the Delaware Memorial Bridge.
There, standing at the automatic mechanical basket, was a human being.
"No," said the toll taker, who was taking the travelers' change, throwing it into the basket and waving cars through, "the machine isn't broken. This is faster."


3-Year-Olds Enter the Homestretch
With three months to go to the Breeders' Cup championships and three weeks to go to the $1 million Travers Stakes, the prize 3-year-old horses in the United States turned into the second half of the season this weekend on tracks in New Jersey and Saratoga.
Some of the West Coast alumni of the Triple Crown classics, like Best Pal and Mane Minister, weren't here at the northern end of the chase.
Nor was Hansel, who won the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes this spring but ran third today while Lost Mountain was snatching the Haskell Invitational at Monmouth Park in New Jersey.


Love for Animals Runs Deep on L.I.
LONG ISLANDERS' love for their pets is evident in myriad ways.
The emotions unleashed by the disclosures of fake graves and other reported abuses at the Long Island Pet Cemetery last month demonstrate how deep feelings can run.
But animal lovers who believe in saving animal lives can find some good news at the North Shore Animal League, a private nonprofit organization founded in 1944 that takes in strays and other animals from pounds and makes them available for adoption.


Kimberly A. Kiss To Marry in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Kiss of Bay Head, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Kimberly Anne Kiss, and John Henry Morris 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Morris of Mantoloking, N.J.
Miss Kiss, 28 years old, has a degree in merchandising from the Tobe-Coburn School for Fashion Careers in Manhattan and is a men's costume coordinator at Bergdorf Goodman.
Her father owns a resort clothing store, the Wasp, in Bay Head.
Her mother, Evelyn Kiss, is a sales representative in New York for De Weese Designs and Jag Swimwear.


When 'The Nerd' Moves In
NOW that "nerd" has come into the mainstream of language, a pressing question comes up.
Is it necessary to spend an evening with one?
The brazenly titled and shoddily constructed play "The Nerd" by Larry Shue raises other questions as well.
If someone saves your life, does that mean he has a right to ruin it?
How much do you owe him?
Must you also put up with him?


High Technology on a Large Scale
SAY what you will, there is still nothing like a big American sedan, at least for those of us who grew up lusting after Lincolns and Packards and Cadillacs.
True, the likes of the new Lexus coupe make the luxury market a delightfully different ball game, but some of the domestic entries must be given their due.
Lincoln's Town Car is an exercise in quiet mobility, for example, and it is a car that I would happily own.
Cadillacs, too, have been a longtime love, and I have owned a bunch of them, making me a member of a very large club.
The other members have been uncommonly reticent this year, but even with bad days piling up in showroom upon showroom, Cadillac remains the nation's leading luxomobile.


Making a Difference; A Venue for Black Business
"It's a business and cultural event. It's entertainment, education and positive role models," said Jerry Roebuck, the native New Yorker who conceived Black Expo USA.
The event has grown since its 1989 debut in an old passenger ship terminal on Manhattan's West Side into a tour of eight cities.
The fair, in New York a few weeks ago, will open next in Washington on Aug. 24.
Mr.
Roebuck, 37, says the impetus for Black Expo was conversations with entrepreneurs in the black community who were having trouble reaching their markets.
"They wished they had a vehicle to let the African-American consumer know they exist," he said in a phone conversation from his Harlem office.


Martha Steinman Engaged to Wed
September wedding plans for Martha Newmark Steinman and Dr.
Gilbert Zachary Herzberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman J. Herzberg of New Rochelle, N.Y., have been announced by her father, Ralph Steinman of New York.
Ms.
Steinman is also the daughter of the late Pauline N. Steinman.
Ms.
Steinman and her fiance are 27 years old and magna cum laude graduates of the University of Pennsylvania.
She received a law degree from New York University and is an associate in the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin.
Her father is a partner in the accounting firm of Anchin, Block &amp; Anchin in New York.


Kathleen Callo to Wed in September
Kathleen Elizabeth Callo, a correspondent for Reuters in Vietnam, and Peter Wilson-Smith, a journalist in London, plan to marry in September in New York.
Miss Callo, 32 years old, is a daughter of Susan Callo of New Paltz, N.Y., and Joseph F. Callo of Forest Hills, Queens, who have announced her engagement.
The prospective bridegroom, 36, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Wilson-Smith of Nayland, Suffolk, England.


In the Nation; Kuwait Still Burns
Those oil wells in Kuwait are still burning -- more of them than at first reported, with unknown final effects, and probably for a longer period than officially projected.
Not just "about 500," as generally reported, but 732 Kuwaiti oil wells were set afire by retreating Iraqi forces last winter.
A Senate subcommittee, chaired by Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut, received that hard figure on July 11 from Kuwait's Ambassador to the U.S., Sheik Saud Nasir al-Sabah, and E. L. Shannon Jr., chairman of Santa Fe International, an oil drilling company owned by Kuwait.


Football; Five Different Paths Lead to Enshrinement in Canton
Their philosophies differed and their trails to glory did, too, but what the five men who were inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame here today shared was captured by Jan Stenerud, the last person honored.
"I grew up in Norway," said Stenerud, the first former National Football League player to reach the Hall of Fame after a career solely as a place-kicker.
"And my dream was to be a great ski jumper, but I never dreamed my greatest jump would be to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.


The Nation; Tying a Yellow Ribbon 'Round the Election
THE nation's capital lives from news cycle to news cycle action followed by reaction followed by fallout.
For many, the military victory in the Persian Gulf is an old story, quickly superseded by the continued friction with Saddam Hussein, the worries over Iraqi weapons capabilities, all the troublesome aftermath of the war.
But for the public at large, the war remains a powerful memory, and it is likely to have lasting political consequences.
One year after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, President Bush strides the scene as a tested Commander in Chief with extraordinary approval ratings.
Democrats are only beginning to stir from a crippling, months-long defensive crouch.
The Presidential campaign is lurching to one of its latest starts in years.
And in towns and cities across America, there are still banners flying that welcome soldiers home, still local celebrations of victory in the gulf, still yellow ribbons and placards declaring, "We support our troops." The monuments to the war are everywhere in American politics.


Postings: Jefferson Market Courthouse; A Big Clock That Could
It will not earn headlines as big and bold as those chronicling the collapse of New York's infrastructure, but the replacement of one $600 motor has given Greenwich Villagers reason to cheer -- even as it deprived them of an excuse for tardiness.
That is because the motor in question drives the tower clock atop the former Jefferson Market Courthouse, now a branch of the New York Public Library, at 10th Street and the Avenue of the Americas.


Presidential Campaign Checkoff Is a Rip-Off; Get Tough, Democrats
To the Editor:
As a lifelong Democrat, I want to express my disgust with the "leadership" of the Democratic Party.
How long will they play Mr.
Nice Guy when they demonstrably don't get votes?
When will they give George Bush and his handlers a dose of reverse Willie Hortonism?
The Reagan-Bush Presidency spawned plenty of material: the Housing and Urban Development scandal, the savings and loan fiasco, the Iran-contra affair.


When New York State Becomes a Stockholder
WHEN Regeneron Pharmaceuticals announced this month that it was beginning construction of a new plant here, two ranking state officials were on hand for the occasion.
The plant will manufacture drugs that Regeneron will be testing for the treatment of Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Lou Gehrig's diseases, as well as for other nerve disorders.
Vincent Tese, the State Commissioner of Economic Development, and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo came to the company's headquarters here to represent the state's $250,000 support of Regeneron, and to describe government investment techniques that are as up to date as the neuroscientific work being done by Regeneron researchers.


Miss von der Schulenburg to Wed in September
Mrs.
Friedrich-Werner von der Schulenburg of Fishers Island, N.Y., has announced September wedding plans for her daughter Felicia Frederica von der Schulenburg and Christoph Alexander Gerhard Reinhold, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernst Reinhold of Nuremberg, Germany.
The prospective bride, 28 years old, is also a daughter of the late Count Friedrich Werner von der Schulenburg of Cologne, Germany.
A graduate of Cornell University, she is a cartographer in Munich, Germany.
Mr.
Reinhold, 33 and a Munich University graduate, is an architectural engineer in Munich.


Data Bank/July 28, 1991
New Orders for Durable Goods
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
-1.6
2.0
3.6
3-Month Treasury Bills
July 26
July 19
July 12
Rate in percent
5.58
5.58
5.57
Municipal Bonds
Yield in percent
7.11
7.15
7.15
Paperboard
July 19
July 12
July 5
Thousands of tons, weekly total
785.2
743.8
746.8
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,600
1,599
1,573
Weekly Jobless Claims
July 12
July 5
June 28
In thousands
425
395
388
Gross National Product
II Q'91
I Q'91
IV Q'90
Annual rate, in 1982 dollars, in billions
4,128.4
4,124.1
4,153.4
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
0.4
--2.8
--1.6


Corrections
An article on July 7 about Eagle Island, Me., located two places incorrectly.
Mark Island is east of Eagle Island, not west, and Brunswick is north of Eagle Island, not east.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 28
Neither Ted WIlliams nor Joe DiMaggio played today. Both teams had the day off.


Sports of The Times; Old Yankees Still Follow Their Team
THEY wear the striped uniform once every summer, but they never quite take it off, either.
Most of the Yankees who came back for Old-Timers' Day yesterday said they always felt just a little bit better when the new Yankees win a game, which is happening a bit more regularly this season.


Football; Simms and Hostetler Duel as Giants Hold Scrimmage
The auditions continued today, and the lights got a bit hotter.
When the Giants held their second intra-squad scrimmage this afternoon in Giants Stadium, Phil Simms and Jeff Hostetler took center stage, with Coach Ray Handley studying their every act.
In the team's first scrimmage last week, Handley gave Matt Cavanaugh and Mike Perez, who are battling for the third quarterback spot, an opportunity to show off their talents.


All About/Baby Formula; Price-Fixing and Other Charges Roil a Once-Placid Market
For decades, infant formula was a placid, magisterially profitable industry with a captive market of newborns.
It operated pretty much out of the public eye.
But all that has changed dramatically.
Now, formula makers are routinely referred to by critics as an "oligopoly." Two giants, Abbott Laboratories and Bristol-Myers Squibb, share almost 85 percent of the market.
They and the handful of companies who divide what's left stand accused of a variety of misdeeds and sharp practices, ranging from undermining infant health to price-fixing and bid-rigging to gouging the Government to unfair marketing tactics.


In the Footsteps of Fortuny, Rich Venetian Fabrics
MARIANO FORTUNY Y MADRAZO lived a few centuries too late to be a true Renaissance man, but that should not be held against him.
Born in Spain in 1871, he worked in Venice from 1889 until his death in 1949.
Painter, photographer, inventor (he held more than a score of patents), theatrical designer (of lighting, sets and costumes), he is known today chiefly for his wizardry with fabrics.
His printed silks, cottons and velvets evoke the Venice of Carpaccio and Tintoretto, while his pleated silks, shaped into the simplest of columnar dresses and tunics (patented under the name Delphos dresses), are what Aphrodite might have thrown on upon rising from the waves.


Ecotourism
To the Editor: If ecotourism (Travel, May 19) is to succeed as a viable conservation strategy, the tourist must be a partner in the goal of conservation, not just a passive observer of nature.
For example, he or she should understand the value of biodiversity, be informed about locally endangered or threatened species and the products made from them and be aware of local traditions and human and economic needs.


Assessments: Homeowners Feeling Pinch
HOMEOWNERS who have watched their property values decline over the last few years are now finding that the depressed real-estate market means more than just postponed relocations and a multitude of "for sale" signs, real-estate experts say.
Already beset by high property taxes, many property owners are now discovering that the taxes they pay are often based on assessments made in the heyday of the real-estate boom -- assessments that are sometimes significantly higher than the current market value of their homes.


Salmon Play Hooky From Camp
McNAMEE, New Brunswick
On our way to the Home Pool for the start of our third day of fishing for Atlantic salmon, Keith Wilson glanced at some dairy cows in a meadow, pronounced them "haphazard" and predicted success for us.
When pressed, Wilson, the fourth generation of his clan to operate Wilson's Sporting Camps on the southwest Miramichi River, was unable to precisely define a haphazard herd, but we didn't care.
We were willing to embrace any omen, however fanciful, that augured an encounter with fish.


Little House on the Big River
NOW THAT ANTIQUING HAS BECOME ALMOST as popular a sport as fishing or baseball, it is rare to hear of untapped sources -- of places that haven't been discovered by zealous collectors or predatory dealers.
Rarer still is to find a house beautifully furnished by local shops.
"About 70 percent of all the furniture came from within 10 minutes' walking distance of the house," says Joseph A. C. Moore, a designer and antique dealer who furnished this tiny house in Hudson, N.Y., during the year and a half that he was a tenant there.
"There are about 25 antique shops in Hudson with a great variety of things."


Bridge
If one wanted to compile a list of the best American players active in tournaments, there are several plausible procedures, likely to give slightly different results.
One could list the winners of recent major national championships, awarding points for top rankings.
One could poll the top players themselves, or the journalists who write about the game, or the fans who follow it.
The last option was chosen by the magazine Bridge Today, which invited its readers to vote for men and women separately.
Those who topped the rankings were then invited to take part in a special game to be played Aug. 20-22 in Albany.
Sixteen competitors will play four deals with each of the others for cash prizes.
A standard bidding system will be used by all, laid down in advance by the tournament committee.


Putting Together a Plan for Hardy Bulbs
FLOWERS from hardy bulbs do wonders for spring.
Although they will not be planted until late September or early October, now is the time to start thinking about them.
Catalogues are here, and the nurserymen want us to start ordering.
Bulbs may be dormant in growing fields, but soon they will be shipped for sales.
One of the best ways to know what bulbs to order is to make notes while on a tour of the garden.
There often are holes here or spots there where a few bulbs would be appropriate.


Patricia Prager Is Married
Patricia Karon Prager, a lawyer for the New York City government, and Richard King Hehmeyer, a manager for Cirkus Real Estate Groups in Clifton, N.J., were married yesterday at the Wainwright House in Rye, N.Y., by Village Judge William Heil of Mineola, L.I.
Mrs.
Hehmeyer, 27 years old, graduated from Hamilton College and Brooklyn Law School and works in the Bureau of General Services' Division of Real Property.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis E. Prager of Mahopac, N.Y.
Mr.
Hehmeyer, 30, also graduated from Hamilton.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Hehmeyer of Mountain Lakes, N.J.


Presidential Campaign Checkoff Is a Rip-Off
To the Editor:
Insofar as campaign finance reform goes, you are bankrupt in "$2 to Enrich Democracy" (editorial, July 9).
Why triple the rip-off of the checkoff for the Presidential election campaign fund?
The checkoff fund should be chucked, not increased.


The Availability Of Obstetricians
Despite the assertion in "Nurse-Midwives Playing Increased Role"  [ June 9 ] , the practice of obstetrics and gynecology in Nassau and Suffolk Counties is alive and well, with no shortage of qualified and trained physicians for patients to choose from.
As an attorney practicing personal-injury and malpractice litigation, I am annoyed at many of the misstatements which the article repeats and which, simply put, have no basis in fact.


Corrections
A picture caption last week, with an article about photography and American women, misidentified the title of a photograph by Larry Fink.
It was "Maggie Kuhn and Sylvia Kleinman, Gray Panthers."


Beth Gartenberg Is a Bride
Beth Gartenberg, the daughter of Chester Gartenberg of Freehold, N.J., and the late Marlene Gartenberg, was married yesterday in Short Hills, N.J., to Padraic Roger Boyle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Boyle of Laurel Hollow, L.I.
Judge Benedict E. Lucchi of New Jersey State Superior Court officiated at the Chanticler restaurant.
Both are employed by Ziff Davis Publishing in New York, she as a senior account representative with PC Magazine and he as a networking analyst.
Mrs.
Boyle, 25 years old, graduated from Rutgers University, and Mr.
Boyle, 25, from the Grumman Data Systems Institute of Technology.


Pop Radio Suffers a Midlife Crisis
As Wilson Phillips' "You're in Love" booms through the control room of Z100, you would think the New York-area radio station was doing everything right.
At its Secaucus, N.J., headquarters, the "morning zoo" disk jockeys Gary Bryan and Ross Brittain are bustling around making prank phone calls to executives and rattling off traffic and news updates.
Every so often, Mr.
Bryan scans the music log -- a computerized list of songs he must play every hour -- and grabs a pile of tape cartridges, each containing a current hit.
Those marked with blue dots indicate songs that, in the words of the show's producer, Mike Opelka, are "really happening." For a Top 40 station, one that plays the pop hits of the moment, life doesn't get any more normal.
But at Z100, officially known as WHTZ-FM, and many other pop radio stations around the country, things are seriously out of tune.
Z100 had been No. 1 in its market from 1987 through the summer of 1989, three times earning a competition-squelching 6.2 share (percentage of the listening audience, based on Arbitron data).
By the spring, Z100 was lingering at 3.6, lagging behind stations specializing in oldies (WCBS, with a 5.2 share), dance pop (WRKS, with 5.1), soft rock (WLTW, with 4.8) and six others.


The Greeks, With an Accent on the French
One of the most seductive theaters in Europe lies at the end of the Metro on the eastern edges of Paris, a few minutes by shuttle bus from the gaunt towers of the Chateau de Vincennes.
In the former munitions-manufacturing sheds of the Cartoucherie Ariana Mnouchkine's Theatre du Soleil has pioneered a vision of epic narrative theater and applied it to the life of Moliere, the French Revolution, three plays by Shakespeare, the torments of contemporary Cambodia and the partition of India in 1947.
In all of these Miss Mnouchkine's theatrical vision combined a tragic sense of corrupting power with spectacular live music, athletic tirelessness and sumptuous visual display.
At the same time, she is the consummate magpie and synthesist, drawing music, costume, movement and acting styles from Europe, Africa, China, India.
Like Peter Brook, her near-contemporary and fellow director in the same city, Miss Mnouchkine (pronounced Muh-NOOSH-kin) has created a true theater of the world, informed by the elements of human behavior common to all mankind.


A Fall Wedding For Pamela Klem
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Klem Jr. of Canton, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Douglas Klem, to Thomas Israel Harry Dubin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seth Dubin of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Klem, 27 years old, is a manager of Middle East sales for A.T.&amp;T.
Network Systems in Berkeley Heights, N.J.
She graduated from Amherst College, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in public administration from Princeton University.
Her father is the chief financial officer of Simscroft-Echo Farms, a construction company in West Simsbury, Conn.
Her mother, Sheila Klem, is a language consultant in the Canton public school system.


CASH IN THE CURL
With the end of history and the triumph of market forces worldwide, it is no surprise that a sport as easily trivialized as surfing should be subject to destructive commercialization ("Cash in the Curl" by Deanne Stillman, June 30).


Fate of Private Projects In Paterson
The June 23 article about Paterson ("Amid Decay, Paterson Finds Signs of Hope") neglected one critical untouched area necessary for rehabilitation of this city.
The private sector operates in an anti-business, anti-rehabilitation atmosphere.
At a recent meeting before the Planning Board when a request to modernize an existing building was made, it was denied when a Planning Board official said, "I have never recommended a variance in 26 years, and the board has never granted one."


Soviet Economy Defies Improvement
To the Editor:
Several of your July 14 articles taken together expose the predicament of the Soviet economy.
Leonard Silk says in The Week in Review, "The economic disaster in the East has exceeded the gloomiest expectations of Western economists."


The Soviet Free Press
To the Editor:
Of all the problems Marshall I. Goldman could cite about doing business in the Soviet Union (". . . But Don't Toss Money at Problems," Forum, July 14), surely "attacks in the Soviet press" should not be one.
Capitalists should appreciate that a press free to criticize government and business is essential -- both here and in the Soviet Union.
NORA L. MANDEL  Forest Hills, N.Y., July 17


Soviet Economy Defies Improvement; No Fish in Odessa
To the Editor:
Your July 9 report from Astrakhan, U.S.S.R., states, "Incredibly, there is no fish to be bought in the stores of a vibrant riverfront city that is in the heart of the nation's great sturgeon and caviar fields." Alas, it is not the only Soviet waterfront city where fish is unavailable.


Elizabeth Esposito to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Esposito of Ardsley, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Esposito and David Thornton Ellis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony T. Ellis of Hillsborough, Calif.
Miss Esposito, 29 years old, graduated from Smith College and is an account supervisor at Lally McFarland &amp; Pantello, a medical advertising agency in New York.
Mr.
Ellis, 30, is a graduate of Amherst College and a vice president of J. P. Morgan Securities in New York.


Political Memo; Reshaping of New York City Hits Black-Hispanic Alliance
Merely remaking the maps was as simple as playing with blocks.
But the process of redistricting New York City's Council opened old wounds between black and Hispanic politicians that may take years to heal.
The purpose behind expanding the City Council was to greatly enhance the representation of minority groups, from nine of the existing 35 members who are black or Hispanic to a larger proportion among the 51 new ones.


Ellen Ferguson Weds Robert Keleman
Ellen Patrice Ferguson, a senior advertising copywriter in New York, and Robert Scott Keleman, a fine-arts photographer, were married yesterday at the Armonk (N.Y.) United Methodist Church.
The Rev.
Eric Fjeldal and Rabbi Joseph Gelberman officiated.
Mrs.
Keleman, 32 years old, graduated from Albion College.
She works for Bozell Direct, a subsidiary of Bozell Jacobs Kenyon &amp; Eckhart.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Ferguson of Armonk.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Nynex.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a picture window that measures about five feet by four feet.
There is a storm window on the outside of this picture window, and in cold weather the entire inside of this storm window is covered with condensation.
The glass has been replaced in the storm window, and all new rubber stripping has been installed around it.
We have also tried to seal all inside cracks and openings.
What else can we do to get rid of the condensation?
A.
Because the condensation forms on the inner face of the storm window, warm moist air is escaping from inside the house into the space between the two windows.
Inspect all the glazing compound around each pane of glass on the inside window and replace any that is cracked or missing.
Also make sure all the caulking is in good condition.
Finally make sure that there are a couple of small "weep" holes, one-eighth or one-quarter inch, at the bottom of the storm window and that they are not clogged.
The holes allow moisture to escape harmlessly to the outside.


Impressionist's Views of Branchville Are Gathered at the Benton Museum
AMERICAN Impressionism is in vogue.
The Montclair Art Museum in New Jersey recently exhibited Californian Impressionists; the James Michener Art Museum in Doylestown, Pa., is focusing on Elmer Schofield, a leading light in the New Hope School.
Now the University of Connecticut is offering "J. Alden Weir: A Place of His Own."
This is the first major Weir show to be held in the state where he summered for the last 37 years of his life and, appropriately, it is at the William Benton Museum in Storrs, which masterminded the statewide revival of the movement a decade ago.
The "place," by the way, is the Weir farm at Branchville, which last year was designed a National Historic Site, the first in Connecticut and the only one in the country to honor an American painter.


Talking: Landmarks; Don't Panic If a Home Is 'Historic'
ANYONE setting out to buy an antique or older home is increasingly likely to find the property in a historic district or carrying national, state or municipal landmark designation.
There are 1,700 municipal historic preservation commissions around the country, compared with 800 just 10 years ago, according to the National Alliance of Preservation Commissions in Athens, Ga.
And the number of private homes included on the National Register of Historic Places runs into the tens of thousands.


HAPPY FACE, E-MAIL STYLE
In his essay on non-alphanumeric characters found on typewriters and computers, William Safire might have mentioned the growing use in electronic mail sent between computers of the colon, dash, right parenthesis, otherwise known as the sideways happy face. (On Language: "# @ / / ( ) ! = Hash, At, Slash, Backslash, Open, Close, Bang," June 30).


Borden Recalls Chowder
Borden Inc. is recalling cans of clam chowder saying some of the chowder was not processed completely.
Borden said that the batch of Snow's New England Clam Chowder may not be sterile and that it could cause illness.


Paper, Paper Everywhere, but Who Wants It?
JAMES DeVIVO watched as newsprint was unloaded from a garbage truck at his Willimantic plant, and he pointed out the egg cartons, plastic-foam plates, cereal boxes, plastic bags and paper towels that were mixed in the shipment.
"One of the problems we're having is the quality of paper from the towns has gone way down, to the point it's almost worthless," said Mr.
DeVivo, 55 years old, who has spent 40 years in the recycling business, the last 35 with his own company.


Young, Hip and Well Heeled
THE IRONY TOWER
Soviet Artists in a Time of Glasnost.
By Andrew Solomon.
Illustrated. 310 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Headliners; Magnetizing
It started out with a few magnets in animal shapes.
"Within a year, every square inch of my refrigerator was covered," said Marlou Freeman, a waitress and bartender at O'Toole's Road House restaurant in Laurel, Md.
That was 10 years ago.
Ms.
Freeman's collection grew to include more than 2,300 refrigerator magnets.
Now "Marlou's Magnets" are on exhibit at a SoHo gallery until Oct. 25.
"This is American folk art!" said Alesh Loren of Loren &amp; Pere art gallery and the collection's new owner.
"There's food, Americana, sports, baseball things, football stuff." Mr.
Loren, who said the magnets will tour the United States, Europe and Japan, valued the collection at $24,000, a little more than $10 a magnet.
Ms.
Freeman paid from 75 cents to $4 apiece.
Ms.
Freeman, who once collected Dallas Cowboys memorabilia, sold the magnets because they would not fit in a mobile home she is planning to buy.
"There were so many different ones that I couldn't resist buying them all," she said.
"I'd put them on a credit card."


Miss Diamond, Executive, Wed
Caroline Blach Diamond, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Diamond of Todt Hill, S.I., was married last evening to Timothy Colton Harrison, the son of Mrs.
Stanley L. Harrison of Norfolk, Va., and the late Mr.
Harrison.
Rabbi David Katz officiated at the Richmond County Country Club in Dongan Hills, S.I.
The bride, 26 years old, is the general manager of The Harrisburg (Pa.) Patriot-News.
She and her husband graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the publisher of The Staten Island Advance.
Her mother, Alice B. Diamond, is a trustee of the Snug Harbor Cultural Center on Staten Island and the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Doctors Have Success Treating a Blood Disease by Altering Genes
The first child to be treated for a hereditary disease by the insertion of new genes into her blood cells completed the initial phase of the trial last week, and scientists have described her progress in enthusiastic terms.
"She's done beautifully," said Dr.
W.
French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md., who runs the project.
"She's healthy, she's happy, she's growing like a weed."


In the Swim


Europeans Try Again to Calm Yugoslavs
The European Community has begun a new effort to end the violence in Yugoslavia in the midst of the sharpest fighting between ethnic groups since the country's crisis began.
The Italian Foreign Minister, Gianni De Michelis, said here today that members of Yugoslavia's collective federal presidency had been invited to Brussels for urgent talks with the European Community.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 28, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
10
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
2
5
THE VOICE OF THE NIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.95.) A reprint of a 1980 novel about a shy boy and his evil best friend.
3 *
5
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Guests from many parts of the world get together in a small Scottish town.
4
2
THE PRIZE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.50.) In 1066, a lovely Saxon woman chooses a fierce Norman warrior as her husband.
5
2
LADY BOSS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $5.95.) Lucky Santangelo schemes and maneuvers to get control of a major movie studio.
6
6
DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $5.95.) Dirk Pitt tries to save America from an extremist.
7
4
DYING YOUNG, by Marti Leimbach. (Ivy, $5.95.) While devotedly caring for a man dying of leukemia, a woman has an affair with a stranger.
8
6
SECOND CHILD, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) A horrible crime committed 100 years ago comes back to haunt a quiet Maine village.
9
2
LEGACY, by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $4.95.) Spock battles an old enemy in a new "Star Trek" novel.
10
5
BREATH OF SCANDAL, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) The nightmare a woman suffered in a Texas town and how she gets even years later.
11
10
SECRETS OF THE MORNING, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.95.) A young music student is haunted by the ghosts of her lovers, present and past.
12
41
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
13 *
27
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers.
14
2
ALWAYS AND FOREVER, by Cynthia Freeman. (Jove, $5.95.) When a woman's comfortable marriage turns sour, she flees it, only to find happiness with an old, long-lost flame.
15
1
TEXAS!
CHASE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.99.) The romance of a despondent widower and an old friend who was involved in the accident that killed his wife.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
10
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
5
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
3
2
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
4
88
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
5 *
403
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
6
9
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
7
19
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
8
43
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
9 *
3
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
10
49
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) The Arab-Israeli conflict over the past decade.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
52
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
32
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
9
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
4 *
14
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
5
19
THE REVENGE OF THE BABY-SAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Dana Smith Weds Geoffrey Beringer
Dana Katherine Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger S. Smith of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married yesterday to Geoffrey Marshall Beringer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce N. Beringer of Larchmont, N.Y., at the Rye, N.Y., Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
David Uhl and the Rev.
Michael Drake officiated.
Mrs.
Beringer, 25 years old, graduated from Catholic University of America and is studying for a master's in art therapy at the College of New Rochelle.
She is a recreational therapist at Westchester Jewish Community Services.
Her father is an appraiser at the Landmark Appraisals Group in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Her mother, Marcia Smith, heads the mathematics department at the School of the Holy Child in Rye.


CLASSICAL MUSIC: 'Cav' and 'Pag' Visit Little Italy; Sunny Villages In Calabria And Sicily . . .
As you have undoubtedly heard, "Cavalleria Rustica na" and "I Pagliacci" are moving.
By Saturday eve ning, assuming all goes well, the New York City Opera will have completed the relocation of Mascagni's and Leoncavallo's perennial verismo twins -- cartons unpacked, curtains hung, dishes put away, breakage and loss tallied -- from their ancestral homes in, respectively, Sicily and Calabria to New York's Little Italy.
Actually, City Opera is becoming a practiced hand at these long-distance hauls.
Only last night, Verdi's "Traviata," formerly resident in stodgy old Paris, was safely ensconced in present-day New York and Paris.


The Man Act
WOMEN HAVE ALWAYS GOT A kick out of wearing men's clothes, or at least those with a mannish mien.
In the 30's and 40's, Marlene Dietrich and Katharine Hepburn exuded sex appeal and daring on and off the screen by dressing in real men's attire.
Ever since, the notion of cross-dressing has had an irresistible allure for many women.
Crisp shirts, neatly tailored jackets, comfortable pants, swashbuckling leather coats, spiffy hats and dramatic mufflers are undeniably appealing.
And the downright practical aspects of men's wear make good sense for modern women.
In high-fashion circles, the fad for gender-bending style comes and goes.
This fall, it returns again.
In Paris, Yves Saint Laurent has updated his famous "smoking" evening looks, while in New York, Isaac Mizrahi's curvy coat dress is a sexy turn on the classic pin-stripe suit.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13
New steps to topple Saddam Hussein are the aim of consultations between the United States and its allies.
But holding together the international alliance that defeated Iraq is proving to be a formidable task.
Page 1


Chess
When it's gone, it's gone, but it's even worse when you don't realize it.
It doesn't matter whether you had the advantage or not.
When you reach the moment when an opponent's clever defense has brought your attack to a stop, it is high time to reconsider your strategy.
To stumble on in a sort of vague, unformulated belief that your attack must crash through is to invite disaster.


'A Midsummer Night's Dream' With Brio
WHAT play invites freer flights of fancy than "A Midsummer Night's Dream"?
With its interweaving of the mundane and the idyllic, the airborne and the lowdown, all within an inexact time, Shakespeare's tangled pageant of lunatics, lovers and poets, in disparate subplot, demands a director with brio.
In Dylan Baker, the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival has come up with just the one.
Mr.
Baker was up for a couple of awards for his sweeping performance as the flamboyant patron of a 17th-century performing troupe in last season's undeservedly short-lived Broadway play, "La Bete." Here, he appears as touched by a fine madness in his staging as in his acting.


For 9 Innings Unhittable, But a Loss Comes in 10th
Mark Gardner didn't surrender a hit in nine innings against the Los Angeles Dodgers on Friday night.
The only problem was, his Montreal teammates failed to score a run in that time, and in the bottom of the 10th, Gardner gave up two hits and wound up a 1-0 loser.


Sports of The Times; The Spitter Versus the Hustler
"I am puzzled," writes John H. F. Hoving, a reader in Washington, "how Gaylord Perry, who cheated on the field, gets into the Baseball Hall of Fame while Pete Rose, who cheated off but not on the field, is banned."
This puzzles a lot of people, so I called the president of the Baseball Hall of Fame, a man named Ed Stack, and asked him.


Carol Steacy to Wed in Fall
Carol Pierce Steacy and David Alan Kosse have announced October wedding plans.
Both are marketing managers in New York: Ms.
Steacy, 28 years old, at Self Magazine, a Conde Nast publication, and Mr.
Kosse, 28, at HBO Video, a division of Time-Warner.


'With Fire and Sword'
To the Editor:
In his review of "With Fire and Sword," Norman Davies notes that this 19th-century Polish novel is the Slavic equivalent of "Gone With the Wind." "But Americans," he continues, "who know Sienkiewicz's 'Quo Vadis,' know nothing of 'With Fire and Sword.' "


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Wrapped Up in History
Summer for a college professor means having the time for the little chores, like taking the mummy to the dentist.


The Region; After 14 Years, Is It Time For Another Look at Love?
Since 1686, this has been the official seal of New York City.
Each element recalls a bit of history: the sailor on the left holds a plummet for testing depths when seeking a good harbor like New York's, and he stands beneath a cross-shaft, the early navigating instrument Henry Hudson is supposed to have used to plot the local latitude.
On the right is one of the Algonquian Indians who lived in Manhattan.
In the center are Dutch windmills and the beaver skins they traded, and the barrels of flour the English later exported.
In 1977, the City Council changed the date on the seal.
It had been 1664, the year four English warships took New Amsterdam from Peter Stuyvesant in the name of the Duke of York.
Now it is 1625, the year New Amsterdam was founded after it was purchased for 60 guilders by Peter Minuit on behalf of his employers, the upstart Dutch West India Company.
But over the years, other images -- sometimes even their mere silhouettes -- have come to say "New York City" far more effectively: The lady at right.
The Brooklyn Bridge.
The Flatiron Building.
The Empire State Building, sometimes accessorized with a large ape.
Even the Coney Island Parachute Jump.


Erica L. Marks To Marry in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred M. Marks of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Erica Louise Marks, to Dr.
David Panush, a son of Cantor Hyman Panush of the Bronx and the late Zelda Panush.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Marks, 28 years old, graduated from Wellesley College.
She develops teaching materials used in computer programs provided to schools by Learning Link, a public television project based in New York.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Brumbaugh Graves Donahue &amp; Raymond.


Black Journalists Fear Setbacks From Recession
Members of the National Association of Black Journalists attending its annual convention here say the group made great strides in the last decade in promoting diversity in newsrooms around the country.
But at the same time the members are worrying that the recession could impair the future hiring of blacks and undercut past accomplishments.
"One of the things that is discouraging about this year is that we are revisiting, as if it was brand new, the issue of affirmative action," said Reginald Stuart, political editor for The Philadelphia Daily News.
"There had been a half-dozen reports presented at this convention on that issue, and they say nothing that we didn't know 20 years ago when the first generation of journalists were entering the newsrooms."


Judge Bars Group From Leafleting in Malls
A state judge today refused to allow an antiwar group to distribute leaflets in 10 shopping malls.
The group had argued that the malls have become public gathering spots akin to village greens or town squares and that political organizations, under the rights of free speech and assembly in the State Constitution, are entitled to hand out pamphlets in the centers.


Man Held in Thumb-Gluing
A man who is reported to have glued another man's thumb to a seat on a commuter train was charged with reckless assault on Friday, the police said.
Andre Perkins, 43 years old, of Brentwood, was using Krazy Glue to fix his ring as he rode a Long Island Rail Road train at 7:30 P.M.
Friday, said Detective Joseph Orlich of the Nassau County police.
At Hicksville, Mr.
Perkins reportedly spread some glue onto the headrest in front of him, where another passenger, Leonard DeStefano, 30, was resting his hand.


Ms. Morgenstein To Marry in 1992
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Morgenstein of Chevy Chase, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Leah Gallant Morgenstein, to Christopher K. Tahbaz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Tahbaz of Salt Lake City.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Morgenstein, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is studying law at American University, where she is an editor of The Law Review.
Her father is a pediatric dentist in Rockville, Md.
Her mother, Susan W. Morgenstein, is the director of special events at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington.


Candidates Still Troubled by Redrawing of Districts
Just days ago, if C. Virginia Fields, a City Council incumbent, and William Perkins, a grass-roots campaigner for the Council, had met on the street, they would have greeted each other as candidates in adjoining Harlem districts.
But yesterday, when their paths crossed on the northern stretch of Fifth Avenue that once separated their districts, they found themselves rivals for the same job.
A revised plan that the city's Districting Committee completed on Friday and rushed off to Washington won approval within hours from Justice Department officials.
But the new lines failed to satisfy many of the people who criticized the original plan and brought new complaints from candidates who, like Mrs.
Fields and Mr.
Perkins, were affected by the shift in some lines.
Balloting May Still Be Threatened
Racing toward a September primary and a Nov. 5 general election that would expand the City Council to 51 seats from 35, the city cleared a big hurdle by winning approval of the revised districting map a week after the original one was rejected as unfair to Hispanic voters.
But lawsuits, pending and threatened, may still block the balloting.


Style Makers; Elliot and Ivan Schwartz, Sculptors
Among the attractions at the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis, which opened on July 4, are Rosa Parks -- seated, of course -- and Orval Faubus, once Governor of Arkansas.
At the Richard Nixon Library in Yorba Linda, Calif., the public can hobnob with Golda Meir and Charles de Gaulle.
The life-size sculptured figures in both museums were made by Studio E.I.S. in Brooklyn, founded in 1977 by Elliot and Ivan Schwartz.
The brothers were born in Brooklyn, but for a number of years they were "itinerant sculptors," Ivan said.
In 1975, Ivan, now 39 years old, who was trained as a sculptor at Boston University, went to Minnesota to create figures for the Iron Range Interpretative Center in Hibbing.
In 1978, he took his brother Elliot, now 42, a painter and photographer, to Tokyo, where they made figures for an exhibition on space and science.


Dr. John Golfinos Weds Miss Cogan
Stephanie Merle Cogan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall S. Cogan of New York, and Dr.
John George Golfinos, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Argyrios Golfinos of Atlantic Beach, L.I., were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents in Southampton, L.I.
Justice Theodore R. Kupferman of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court officiated.
Mrs.
Golfinos, 26 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Duke University.
She is an administrative assistant at the Elaine Horwitch art gallery in Phoenix.
Her father owns the "21" Club and her mother owns Art &amp; Auction magazine, both in New York.


The Poet Who Kick-Started A Stalled Cezanne
One of the most quietly controversial of all 20th-century books on a great painter was published in Paris in 1921 and is now available for the first time in a complete English translation, published by Thames &amp; Hudson.
Entitled "Joachim Gasquet's Cezanne: A Memoir With Conversations," it comes with a properly wary preface by John Rewald, the dean of Cezanne scholars, and an introduction by the English art historian Richard Shiff.
The translation is by Richard Pemberton, who is also allowed his say as to the authenticity or otherwise of Gasquet's text.
It is relevant that although Gasquet lived for literature all his life and practiced it himself in ways that are now irremediably dated, he never claimed to know anything about painting.
But he did for a time have access to Cezanne at a moment when Cezanne needed someone new, young and eager to talk to.


E-Shows: All Fluff, All the Time
If you had a dollar for every time a clip from the hit film "City Slickers" turned up on television, you could buy your own dude ranch.
If you lifted small weights every time "Terminator 2" was mentioned, you'd have muscles as big as Arnold Schwarzenegger's.
More than ever, shows like the successful, syndicated "Entertainment Tonight" are bombarding viewers with celebrity interviews, box-office figures, sneak previews of television movies and other bits of show-biz trivia and puffery.
The content may be fluff -- more than you ever thought you'd know about Cher's tattoos.
But this overload of behind-the-scenes details is cluttering up and sometimes even distorting viewers' responses to movies and television shows.


Putting Together a Plan for Hardy Bulbs
FLOWERS from hardy bulbs do wonders for spring.
Although they will not be planted until late September or early October, now is the time to start thinking about them.
Catalogues are here, and the nurserymen want us to start ordering.
Bulbs may be dormant in growing fields, but soon they will be shipped for sales.
One of the best ways to know what bulbs to order is to make notes while on a tour of the garden.
There often are holes here or spots there where a few bulbs would be appropriate.


Cold Soups, Cool Kitchens
WHEN I WAS A LITTLE girl in patent leather Mary Janes that buttoned at the instep, short white socks, white cotton gloves and a neat pale-peach linen dress with discreet appliques at the neck, a sophisticated older woman -- at least 40 -- took me by the hand to lunch at the old Ritz-Carlton in New York, the Louis Diat Ritz.
Too awed to order by myself, I accepted suggestions of foods of which I had never heard.
The first to arrive was a two-handled cup of cold, ivory-colored liquid velvet, topped with specks of jade green.
It was vichyssoise, and I fell in love.
Ever since, I've thought the ideal opener for a summer meal was a cold soup.
Sadly, many of the best French cold soups, like vichyssoise or madrilene, require a fair amount of hot cooking, a process that dilutes their pleasure.
Spurred by laziness, a dislike of heat and my own love of the genre, I set out to devise a group of cold soups that can be made virtually without heat, in a kind of international journey of reading and remembering.
As I searched existing recipes, I omitted all but one that uses stock.
I find canned broths too salty, and homemade broth -- though one of my favorite things -- takes too long to prepare and must then be chilled for cold soup, adding time-intensive labor.
This led me to soups based on milk products and on fruits and vegetables.
My first stop was Malaga, south of gazpacho land on the southern Mediterranean coast of Spain.
There I discovered a grape gazpacho -- no tomatoes here but a soup strong with garlic and vinegar and topped with floating, peeled and seeded grapes.
Even though it met my specifications for an almost total lack of cooking, peeling grapes hardly seemed a lazy person's solution.
Ever expedient, I put the grapes through a food mill, which gave me a lovely pale green, fruity liquid as the base.
If you feel like peeling some grapes for a garnish, go right ahead.
I'd borrow from another version of this soup and use pieces of ripe, cut-up melon -- much less work.
All the other recipes below followed a similar route of adaptation.
The peanut soup is based on African models but served cold instead of hot, which is the traditional version.
This is the one soup I kept that used broth, but I ended up mixing it with milk to make it a little richer.
The spinach soup is lightly based on the many Russian cold soups made with greens.
The traditional base is kvass, a lightly alcoholic brew made by fermenting beets or dark bread in water.
Since it's rare in this country, I substituted beer diluted with water.
The Russians have a decided taste for the acidic, which can be provided in soups by vinegar, sorrel and even chopped pickles -- surprisingly good.
If good dill pickles aren't available, substitute cucumbers for crunch and increase the amounts of vinegar and salt.
Since sorrel is often hard to come by, I've suggested a version made only with spinach.
To compensate for the missing acidity of the sorrel, I use yogurt instead of sour cream.
Hungary offered me an illustrious tradition of cold fruit soups, though most of the recipes require cooking the fruit first.
Since ripe peaches puree easily and require no cooking, a ginger-peach milk-based soup seemed the best solution.
It has a surprisingly intense peach flavor and a beautiful pale-peach color.
If you can find unsprayed roses of an appropriate color (pale pink would be nice), a few petals make a sensational garnish.
It's a perfect introduction to a simple grilled fish.
The Moroccan seasonings in a Moroccan tomato soup make this one a recipe to cherish.
If you don't have a food mill, it's almost as easy to peel and seed the tomatoes by hand.
When ripe, they don't need to be blanched before peeling.
Simply run the back edge of a table knife firmly over the skin of the entire tomato.
This loosens the skin and makes it possible to pull it away from the flesh.
Halve the tomato and squeeze gently to remove the seeds or remove them with a demitasse spoon or the handle of a coffee spoon.
Southwestern pea soup is an odd one, weirder even than the grape gazpacho but decidedly delicious.
I use frozen peas to avoid cooking; but if you have the time to shell fresh peas -- which are so good at this time of year -- it really takes only a few minutes to steam them in a little water before pureeing.
One caveat: Most of the soups need to be made ahead so they can get very cold in the refrigerator and so the flavors have a chance to develop and combine.
It's a small price, really.
GRAPE GAZPACHO  4 1/2 ounces whole blanched almonds  3 tablespoons water  1 pound stemmed, seedless green grapes  2 ounces French or Italian bread, crusts removed, torn in small pieces  2 to 3 large cloves garlic, smashed and peeled  1/3 cup olive oil  2 2/3 cups ice water  3 tablespoons white wine vinegar  4 teaspoons kosher salt or to taste  Freshly ground black pepper to taste
The garnish:
4 to 5 peeled, seedless green grapes or use 1 1/2 ounces peeled and seeded honeydew melon, cut in 1/2-by- 1/4-inch pieces (a heaping 1/4 cup).
1.
If using a microwave oven, place almonds and water in a 1-cup glass measure.
Cover tightly with microwave plastic wrap.
Cook at 100 percent power in a high-power oven for 2 minutes.
Prick plastic to release steam.
If using a conventional oven, place the almonds and the water in a small saucepan and cook over low heat until the almonds plump up slightly and just soften.
Remove from heat; drain and set aside.
2.
Pass the grapes through a food mill fitted with a medium disk placed over a bowl to catch the juice.
Reserve juice and pulp.
3.
Place the bread in a small bowl.
Add enough of the grape juice to just cover the bread, reserving 1 cup.
Lightly press down on the bread so that it absorbs the juice.
4.
Place cooked almonds, soaked bread and garlic in a blender.
With machine running, slowly pour in the reserved cup of grape juice.
Continue blending, scraping down the sides from time to time, until the mixture is smooth.
5.
With the machine still running, slowly pour in any remaining juice and the olive oil.
Scrape the mixture into a large metal bowl.
Stir in remaining ingredients.
Refrigerate until cold.
Served garnished with grapes or melon.
Yield: Four servings.
PEANUT SOUP 1 cup unsalted peanuts  1 1/2 jalapeno peppers, seeded  2 tablespoons curry powder  2 cups chicken broth  1 1/3 cups lowfat milk  1 cup water  1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice  1 1/2 teaspoon kosher salt  10 to 15 slivers red bell pepper, if desired, for garnish.
1.
Place peanuts, jalapenos curry and 1 cup of the broth in a blender and process until smooth.
Scrape down the sides.
With the machine running, slowly pour in remaining broth.
2.
Scrape mixture into a metal bowl.
Stir in remaining ingredients, except the garnish.
Refrigerate for several hours or overnight.
Serve garnished with the peppers if desired.
Yield: Four servings.
1.
Wash spinach and place in a large skillet with the adhering water.
Cover.
Cook over medium heat for 10 minutes, stirring once or twice, just until wilted.
Drain.
Place the spinach and the dill in a food processor and process until finely chopped.
2.
Scrape mixture into a metal bowl.
Stir in scallion, pickles, beer, horseradish, water and salt.
3.
If using sorrel, heat the butter in a large skillet over medium heat until just melted.
Add the sorrel and cook 4 to 5 minutes, or until color turns.
Remove from heat.
Stir sorrel, 1 1/2 cups sour cream and 1 1/2 cups heavy cream into spinach mixture.
If not using sorrel, stir in 1/2 cup yogurt instead of heavy cream and 1/2 cup sour cream.
Refrigerate until cold.
Just before serving, stir in vinegar.
Add more salt if needed.
Yield: Eight servings without sorrel; twelve servings with.
GINGER-PEACH SOUP  1 1/2 pounds peaches  2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice  1 1/2 cups buttermilk  2/3 cup apple juice 1/2 teaspoon peeled, freshly grated ginger  1 teaspoon honey  Scant 1 teaspoon kosher salt
The garnish for each serving:
1 aromatic geranium leaf or 1 unsprayed rose petal or 3 to 4 slices peeled, pitted peach.
1.
Peel and pit the peaches, rubbing them with 2 tablespoons of the lemon juice to prevent discoloration as you work.
Place peaches in a food processor and process until smooth.
2.
Scrape peach puree into a medium bowl.
Stir in remaining ingredients.
Refrigerate until cold.
Serve garnished as desired.
Yield: Four servings.
MOROCCAN TOMATO SOUP  5 medium cloves garlic, smashed, peeled and minced  2 1/2 teaspoons sweet paprika  1 1/2 teaspoons ground cumin  Large pinch cayenne pepper  4 teaspoons olive oil  2 1/4 pounds tomatoes, cored and cut in 1-inch pieces  1/4 cup packed cilantro leaves, chopped, plus additional leaves for garnish  1 tablespoon white wine vinegar  2 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice  2 tablespoons water  5 teaspoons kosher salt  4 stalks celery, diced.
1.
Stir together garlic, paprika, cumin, cayenne and olive oil in a small saucepan.
Place over low heat and cook, stirring constantly, for 2 minutes.
Remove from heat and set aside.
2.
Pass tomatoes through a food mill fitted with a large disk.
Stir in cooked spice mixture and remaining ingredients.
Refrigerate until cold.
Serve garnished with cilantro leaves.
Yield: Four servings.
SOUTHWESTERN PEA SOUP  2 10-ounce packages frozen peas, defrosted in a sieve under warm running water (reserve 1/2 cup for garnish)  2 cups plain yogurt  1/2 cup olive oil  1/2 cup fresh lime juice  4 medium cloves garlic, smashed and peeled  1 tablespoon chili powder  2 cups ice water  2 tablespoons kosher salt
The garnish:
1/2 cup of the reserved peas  1/2 cup finely chopped tomato  1/2 cup finely chopped red bell pepper  2 teaspoons minced jalapeno pepper  Scant 3 tablespoons loosely packed cilantro or Italian parsley leaves.
1.
Place the peas in a food processor and process until smooth, stopping from time to time to scrape sides of bowl.
Add the yogurt, olive oil, lime juice, garlic and chili powder.
Process until smooth.
2.
Scrape mixture into a large metal bowl.
Stir in water and salt.
Refrigerate until cold.
Pour into bowls and pass garnish ingredients separately.
Yield: Seven servings.


Norway Village Is Honored
The tiny island community of Lyngor (population 110) on Norway's southeast coast has been voted the best-preserved village in Europe ahead of other idyllic communities in Switzerland, the Netherlands, Finland, Britain, Ireland, Belgium and Denmark.
The selection was made by a committee of European tourism officials.
Lyngor is made up of three islands near the town of Tvedestrand about 150 miles south of Oslo.
It has no cars -- all transport is by boat -- well-tended houses, a small lighthouse and, apart from a hotel and restaurant, one workplace, a sailmaker's loft.


Lidiya Ivanyushenko To Wed R. P. Belknap
Lieut.
Col. and Mrs.
Vladlen V. Ivanyushenko of Moscow have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Lidiya Vladlenovna Ivanyushenko, to Randall Page Belknap, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norton Belknap of New York.
The couple, who are 30 years old, are with the Soviet Pan Am Travel Effort in Moscow, which is under contract to the American State Department to help emigrating Soviet citizens.
She is a counselor, and he is the manager for systems development.
Miss Ivanyushenko graduated from the Technological Institute of Light Industry in Moscow and the Institute of Foreign Languages in Tashkent, U.S.S.R.
Her father is retired from the Soviet Air Force.


With Fresh Corn at Hand, the Simplest Recipes Are the Best
THE season for fresh corn on the cob is now in full swing.
Because of the extremely warm weather in May and June, corn matured quite early in some parts of the tristate region, notably southern New Jersey and eastern Long Island.
The best place to buy corn is from a farm or a farm stand that carries it, freshly picked, every day.
Corn should be purchased in the morning, before it has had a chance to sit out in the heat.
And it should be refrigerated as soon as possible.
Corn treated this way will taste sweeter than the corn purchased closer to dinner time.


For Families of M.I.A.'s, New Hope, Old Despair
Last year, 17 years after her husband, an Air Force pilot, disappeared without a trace over Hanoi, Barbara Cleary O'Connor received from Vietnam a rubbing of his dog tag, complete with his serial number and blood type.
"It was a shock," said Mrs.
O'Connor, who lives in Wayland, Mass.
"It meant there was some information about him. I truly thought he had not survived. I never would have remarried if I had thought there was the slightest glimmer of hope."


Fun on a Bucks County Farm for Child in Fresh Air Fund
Tyhe Walker, 11 years old, grimaced as the black-and-white calf he was petting mistook his fingers for udders.
Since going to the countryside as a part of the Fresh Air Fund program for inner-city children, Tyhe had played soccer, made bows and arrows and wrestled with the host family's dog, Kelsa.
But this was new.
"The tongue was soft, and the calf had little square teeth," said Tyhe, who lives with his parents in the Gowanus housing projects in Brooklyn.


Joseph Faber to Marry Jill Fink in Fall
Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold Fink of Riverdale, the Bronx, have announced the engagement of their daughter Jill Leslie Fink to Joseph Leonard Faber, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Faber of Rockland, Me.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fink, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received a J.D. from Northeastern University.
Her father is a dentist who practices in New York and is on the staff at Lenox Hill Hospital.
Her mother, Roberta Fink, teaches the first grade at Salanter Akiba of Riverdale Academy in Riverdale.


Camera
Having opened on May 3 with photography's stars present -- among them Doug Kirkland, Jay Maisel, Greg Heisler and Jean-Pierre Laffont -- the Eastman Kodak Center of Creative Imaging in Camden, Me., is ready for its premiere program, "Summer Festival of Images," Aug. 8-10.
Ray DeMoulin, director of the center and general manager of Kodak's Professional Photography Division, is overseeing a program developed by Joan Rosenberg, the center's creative consultant.
Ms.
Rosenberg brings together top talent and great pictures, both contemporary and experimental.


Violence Was Not In His Quiver
To the Editor:
I don't know how many medieval ballads Chris Chase read about a Robin Hood who "didn't mind how many sheriffs he beheaded"  [ "Robin Hood Adds Up to a Thief for the Ages," June 23 ] , but the quintessential medieval Robin would never behead a sheriff if he could nonviolently roast him instead.
Robin would typically waylay his class enemies, take all their money, serve them an excellent meal, make fun of them and send them on their way humiliated.
This Robin was portrayed in authentic spirit by Richard Todd in the Disney film version and by Richard Greene on television.


Where to Wander Off the Beaten Paths
WITH its proximity to New York City, it is sometimes easy to forget that Westchester County has a distinctly rural character in many places.
Its topography extends from the woodlands and meadows of lower Westchester to the hillier reaches of the county's northern areas, and includes the shorelines of the Hudson River as well as Long Island Sound.
Not only are there 15,000 acres of greenery in the county's 30 parks, but nearly every municipality has its own park or two to relieve suburban congestion.
Then there are the educational nature preserves, as well as sanctuaries and conservancies, to offer other encounters with nature.


To Seal Driveways And Patch Big Holes
ASPHALT driveways need prompt repair and periodic sealing, just like roads.
Summer is a good time for driveway maintenance, because most repair and sealing products work best when applied at temperatures from 50 to 85 degrees.
As soon as temperatures allow, repair damage like cracks and potholes, which usually occur in winter and early spring.
To repair cracks that are less than a half-inch wide, brush loose particles with a whisk broom and fill the cracks with liquid filler.


The Region; Page Two on Birth Certificates: The Confidential Portion
MOST new mothers know they will get a birth certificate saying when, where, and to whom the baby was born.
But few know that, if the baby was born in New York City, the doctor or midwife also fills out a form detailing the mother's drug, alcohol and tobacco use during pregnancy, how many pregnancies and abortions she has had, how much education she has, what she does for a living, and whether she had any sexually transmitted diseases.


Susan Lynn Kvam, Editor, Marries James A. Carpenter Jr., Art Director
Susan Lynn Kvam, an editor at Rizzoli International Publications, and James Anderson Carpenter Jr., an art director and vice president at St.
Martin's Press, were married yesterday at his parents' summer home in Greensboro, Vt.
The Rev.
Dr.
James A. Carpenter, an Episcopalian and father of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Carpenter, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Minnesota/Twin Cities.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Garth Lappin and Franklin Kvam, both of Minneapolis, where her father is a program manager at Honeywell and her mother, Caroline Lappin, teaches emotionally troubled adolescents.


Informer Insists Bid-Rigging Testimony Was Truth
Completing more than two months of testimony with several weeks of answering challenges to his credibility, a Mafia informer has left the witness stand insisting that the Mafia used rigged bids and labor payoffs to control the window-installation industry.
"Everything I said up here was truthful," the informer, Peter Savino, said last week, testifying as the prosecution's main witness in the racketeering trial of nine defendants in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


'EXCUSE ME,' HE SAID
Berne's article did not move me in the way I believe she intended it to.
Berne was unfortunately surprised by a man who exposed himself.
She will get over it, I suspect, if she can control her propensity to ruminate on the incident indefinitely.
The man's prognosis is not as good.
He is apparently the victim of a complex obsessive-compulsive disorder that is difficult to treat and that can cause lifelong torment and humiliation for those who suffer from it and their families.
MYRA S. MILLER
Great Neck, L.I.


Campus Life: University of Michigan; Enacting Bans On Skate Boarders And Bladers
Skateboarders, roller bladers and roller skaters at the University of Michigan will be less than free-wheeling when a ban gainst them starts this month.
The university regents approved a rule last month to ban skateboarding from the campus and prohibit roller skating and roller blading in garages and buildings.
Violations will be punishable with $25 fines.
Officials have pointed to $105,000 of damage to unversity property, including chipped walls, cracked sidewalks and sratched cars, as a reason for the bans.
Roller blading and roller skating are less restricted because the wheels do not inflict the damage that skate boards do, said the chief financial officer of the university, Farris Womack, who framed the ban.
"The wheels of roller blades are so soft that the ordinary maneuvers performed on roller blades cause no aggravation to property whatsoever," said Marc Beginin, a senior political science major from Canton, who said he was an avid roller blader.
Roller blades, like hockey skates with wheels, have become popular with many students.
Young people often wear them in stores and restaurants.
The university's director of safety, Leo Heatley, said that when roller bladers sped down garage ramps, they often crashed into cars and pedestrians.
A former student, David Sleeman, a roller blader, said he was not happy with the restriction but could accept it.
He said he supported the ban on skateboarding, though.
"Those skateboards," he said.
"I don't understand those guys. Wrecking property is just not a cool thing to do."
But skateboarders said the ban and the threat of $25 fines seemed unnecessary and would not stop them.
"We're still going to skate here," Mark Smith, 16, of nearby Livonia, said.
"This is a cool place to come, because all the sidewalks are waxed from all the skaters."


Headliners; Spy Story
As German prosecutors last week announced their intentions to try five former officials of the Stasi, the old East German intelligence service, the name of Markus Wolf, perhaps the Stasi's best-known spy boss, was conspicuously missing.
The discovery in 1974 that Gunter Guillaume, a chief aide to Chancellor Willy Brandt, was one of Mr.
Wolf's operatives, forced Mr.
Brandt's resignation.
Last year Mr.
Wolf, who had directed East Germany's spying for 33 years until his resignation in 1986, fled to the Soviet Union fearing prosecution and has refused to return without assurances he will not be tried.
So far, the Bonn Government has said no.
Since 1989, and the first signs of reunification, officials and Western diplomats have reported misgivings in the West German intelligence community over the prospect of prosecuting such high-ranking spies, given that Western espionage agencies engage in the same activity.
Among the defendants is Mr.
Wolf's successor, Werner Grossmann, who is to be tried for high treason.


Otherwise Engaged
To the Editor:
Conrad L. Osborne's article about the recent release of videotapes of "The Voice of Firestone" television show  [ "Nostalgic Echoes From 'The Voice of Firestone,' " July 14 ]  calls up a story told to me by an old NBC space salesman.


Technology; When Clean-Air, Methanol-Powered Cars Hit the Road
The clean-air car of the future might operate like the five experimental Volvo 940 sedans now undergoing testing by California's South Coast Air Quality Management District.
The cars burn a mixture of gasoline and methanol and have an electrically heated catalytic converter to treat the big blast of pollution that cars typically emit when a cold engine is started.
Executives at Volvo Cars of North America say the vehicles are the only flexible-fuel, heated-catalyst cars on the road today.
California air pollution control officials report that the Volvos appear to be the cleanest liquid-fueled vehicles they have ever tested.
Preliminary tests indicate that emissions from the cars meet even California's upcoming standards for ultra-low emissions.


Unknown Rapper Gets a Shot
HE goes by the name J. T., and if some record-company executives are right, he will be the biggest white rap artist since Vanilla Ice.
Never mind that the young man from Roslyn has no performing experience.
He looks like Steven Segal, the actor, rhymes like M. C. Hammer, the rapper, and has a record deal with EastWest America, a subsidiary of Atlantic Records.


Priscilla Stampa Weds
Priscilla Rose Stampa, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederik McClory Stampa of Cliffside Park, N.J., was married last evening in New York to Michael Stephen Brown, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Brown of Peekskill, N.Y.
Rabbi Charles J. Davidson officiated at the Sign of the Dove.
The bride, a magna cum laude graduate of New York University, is an actress and a receptionist at Solow Building Company, which owns and manages buildings in New York.
The bridegroom, a cum laude graduate of the University of Florida, is a sales manager at the Rolm telecommunications company in Stamford, Conn.


Still Looking: The Changing Job Market/A special report.; For Forlorn Millions, the Recession Goes On
The experts say the economy is growing again after a year in a recession, but tell that to Charles Moreira.
A despairing 22-year-old waiting for yet another job counseling session in the New Bedford office of the Massachusetts state employment agency, Mr.
Moreira is his family's sole wage earner because his wife stays home with their 3-year-old child.
Mr.
Moreira, a mechanic, lost a $6.75-an-hour job in an automobile dealership last December and has been looking fruitlessly for work since.
His $170 a week in unemployment benefits has run out.
He is vying with scores of similarly strapped contenders for a warehouse job that pays $6 an hour.


In Midtown, Bowling a Few Games While Going Into and Out of the City
Jane Cohen hadn't bowled since -- well, she honestly couldn't remember.
She had certainly never bowled in the Port Authority Bus Terminal or known there was such a thing as computerized scoring or synthetic wood lanes or screens with directional arrows that show players where to lay down their second shot.
But one recent evening, she and some friends were on the second floor of the building in search of a Fanny Farmer when they heard the unmistakable thud of rolling bowling balls and the clank of knocked-over pins.


When 'The Nerd' Moves In
NOW that "nerd" has come into the mainstream of language, a pressing question comes up.
Is it necessary to spend an evening with one?
The brazenly titled and shoddily constructed play "The Nerd" by Larry Shue raises other questions as well.
If someone saves your life, does that mean he has a right to ruin it?
How much do you owe him?
Must you also put up with him?


Knicks Shouldn't Stand Pat
To the Sports Editor:
About Ewing and the Knicks:


Review/Cabaret; The Familiar and Obscure Cole Porter
From a satirist of high society to a smitten lover to a purveyor of verbal pyrotechics, Cole Porter had so many sides to his songwriting personality that any revue hoping to take his artistic measure would have to include a wide range of singers representing different attitudes.
And in casting "What a Swell Party! The Cole Porter Revue," an ambitious survey of Porter's songs that opened a six-week engagement on Tuesday at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza), the producers have chosen five voices that range from the coolly debonair (Ronny Whyte) to the flamingly dramatic (Helen Schneider).
About the only thing that Mr.
Whyte, Ms.
Schneider, Mary Cleere Haran, Terri Klausner and Bruce Coyle, the revue's performers, have in common is the fact that they are all respected cabaret veterans.
When they come together on a stage that has been specially enlarged for the show, one has a sense of attending a formal party whose guests come from different walks of life.


Mutual Funds; New Offerings on the Rebound
New mutual funds were created at a dizzying rate during the bull market of the 1980's, peaking in 1987, when nearly 500 new funds hit the street.
After a lull, new funds seem to be on the rise again, with 211 entries through May of this year, already outstripping the total for all of 1990.
This may seem to be bad news to investors, who are already struggling to sort out the hundreds of varieties of funds out there.
Yet the recent flurry shouldn't create too much 1/3 1/5 #usion.
Many of the new funds are "dual-class" clones, that is, they are identical funds with different pricing strategies.
Others are versions of existing types of funds offered by banks eager to share in the profitable fund business.


That Sometime Actor, Big City, Is a Star
"Book of the Night," the ambitious musical-theater piece having its world premiere at the Goodman Theater, wants to show us life, as it unfolds in an American city from the time the sun goes down on a hot and bothered Saturday night until it comes up on the forgiving Sunday morning that banishes the demons.
"The dark has secrets/ Daylight never knows," sing the 13 cast members in the opening number, which gives us our first glimpse of the agitated souls who'll presumably be revealing a few of those secrets in the ensuing 100 minutes.
They're all part of a feverish mass, surging back and forth across the stage like a restless tide.
Behind them, fueling their excitement and anxiety over what's to come, is the changeable city itself, revealed in a series of rear-screen color projections.


Despite Daughter's Death, Parents Pursue Right-to-Die Case
Sue Ann Lawrance, who had been brain-damaged since childhood and unconscious since she fell from a wheelchair in 1987, died of pneumonia on July 18, only a few days before the Indiana Supreme Court was to hear arguments on her parents' request to remove the feeding tube that had been keeping her alive.
But the case is to be argued this Wednesday anyway, and it could provide legal guidance on some of the thorniest issues of medicine and law, issues left open by the United States Supreme Court's decision last year in the case of Nancy Cruzan, a Missouri woman who died after her feeding tube was removed.


Boating; U.S. Team Buoyant for Admiral's Cup
A United States team has not won England's Admiral's Cup offshore regatta in 22 years.
But this year, the American squad has reason to be optimistic.
The 45-member team has been training for months in their home waters and in Europe.
Recent victories, including one in the One-Ton Cup, a world championship for the 40-foot yacht, Vibes, has shored up confidence.
The yachtsmen are to begin the two-week Admiral's Cup series Thursday near Cowes, England.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SLEEPING WITH THE DEVIL  By Suzanne Finstad. Morrow, $20.


Cycling; Indurain Strengthens Hold on the Tour
With an admirable sense of symmetry, Miguel Indurain of Spain completed his domination of the Tour de France today by easily winning a long individual time trial through the Burgundy countryside.
"He's the strongest man in the race, that's for sure," Greg LeMond said later in tribute.
"He deserves his victory."


With Fresh Corn at Hand, the Simplest Recipes Are the Best
THE season for fresh corn on the cob is now in full swing.
Because of the extremely warm weather in May and June, corn matured quite early in some parts of the tristate region, notably southern New Jersey and eastern Long Island.
The best place to buy corn is from a farm or a farm stand that carries it, freshly picked, every day.
Corn should be purchased in the morning, before it has had a chance to sit out in the heat.
And it should be refrigerated as soon as possible.
Corn treated this way will taste sweeter than the corn purchased closer to dinner time.


And About Those Accordionists . . .
To the Editor:
It should be pointed out that the Seattle Skid Road bar mentioned in Timothy Egan's article as the spot where the cartoonist Lynda Barry spent the happiest times of her life listening to oompah music remains the Doubleheader, one of America's oldest gay bars.
Those "couple of guys on accordion" she heard there are actually women who still entertain on weekends at the Doubleheader, though less often now than when Ms.
Barry lived here.
CHARLES KRAFFT  Seattle


A Talent for Grilling Steaks and Chops
HAMPTONITES who know restaurants know Carol's.
Prominently situated on Route 27 in Southampton, it opened a dozen or so years ago as a fancy French spot.
Seven years ago, Carol Rosenwald switched from haute cuisine to down home and renamed her restaurant Carol's Great Hampton Chicken and Rib Company.


Aid From the Lewyts
ALEXANDER LEWYT often said he channeled his considerable energies into the North Shore Animal League because "my wife adores animals, and I adore my wife."
Mr.
Lewyt, creator of the Lewyt vacuum cleaner, and his wife, Elisabeth, are credited with being the driving force behind the shelter.


Wall Street; More of the Gross Goes for Interest and Dividends
The bite that interest and dividend payments took out of corporate cash flow in the recent recession hit a post-World War II high, ringing alarms bells for Jack W. Lavery, director of Merrill Lynch's Global Securities Research and Economics Group.
In an analysis of the investment climate, Mr.
Lavery noted that debt payments and dividends now consume more than 34 percent of gross cash flow, down somewhat from late last year, but still high by historical standards.
Add the anticipated problems of lackluster international demand and widespread resistence to price increases, Mr.
Lavery said, and you've got a situation that seems unlikely to produce stellar corporate earnings in the year ahead.


Paris on No Dollars a Day? East Europeans Find a Way?
They stand out immediately because their squat, centrally planned buses look positively intimidated by the air-conditioned, toilet-equipped giants that carry Danes, Germans, Italians and the like around the obligatory tourist sights of Paris.
But for tens of thousands of Eastern Europeans visiting for the first time, what really counts is that they are no longer so different.
Since the fall of Communism, they too can visit the Louvre, take pictures of the Arc de Triomphe and pray at Notre-Dame.


Brady Backs Japan Finance Minister
In a highly unusual move in international relations, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady spoke out about the growing public furor over the Japanese stock market scandal, expressing support for Japan's Finance Minister.
In a telephone interview today from Washington, Mr.
Brady said he was alarmed at signs that the political survival of Ryutaro Hashimoto, the Finance Minister, was suddenly being threatened by the Japanese Government's handling of the scandal.


Amanda North and Tyrone Pike Marry
Amanda Allan North, the daughter of Helen North of Lyme, N.H., and Cecil J. North Jr. of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday in St.
Helena, Calif., to Tyrone Farrar Pike, the son of Mrs.
Dixon Wecter of New York and John J. Pike of Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Frederick Smale officiated at Grace Episcopal Church.
The bride, 34 years old, is the vice president of marketing at Raster Ops, a computer company in Santa Clara, Calif.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is the president of MICA Inc., a publisher of neighborhood telephone books in Purdys, N.Y.
She is a granddaughter of Mrs.
Cecil J. North of Jupiter, Fla., and the late Mr.
North, who was the president of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.


Presidents on Parade
To the Editor:
Theodore Roosevelt was not the first President filmed by a movie camera, as George F. Will wrote in his review of Donald A. Ritchie's "Press Gallery: Congress and the Washington Correspondents" (June 30).


Sheryl Lynn Watts to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
John Watts of Ellington, Conn., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Sheryl Lynn Watts and Timothy Byrne O'Connell, a son of John J. O'Connell of Sosua, the Dominican Republic, and Patricia O'Connell of East Hampton, L.I.
Miss Watts, 23 years old, and her fiance, 26, graduated from West Virginia Wesleyan College.
She is an accountant for the American Red Cross in Farmington, Conn., where he is the assistant manager of the Williams-Sonoma store.


STRIKEOUTS AND PSYCH-OUTS
I'm jealous.
As a salesman, I deal with intense pressure, rejection and failure on a daily basis.
It would be wonderful if my employer included a staff psychiatrist for me and my colleagues.
There's many a day I could use a few words of comfort.
MARK KIERSTEIN
Yorktown Heights, N.Y.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Denver
For a long time, Denver has been trying to rub some cosmopolitan polish onto its cattle-trod heritage.
And, in fact, wonderful art museums, ballet, opera and one of the country's outstanding bookstores make Denver a cultural gem.
But it's the wooly legacy as a place for rowdy cowboys that makes Denver so distinctive historically, and it still offers visitors a taste of the Old West.


The World; For Castro, the Hemisphere Gets Smaller and Lonelier
AT the height of his power, Fidel Castro was hardly a welcome guest at most Latin American political functions.
The revolutionary fervor of Cuban society and the fragility of their own regimes caused most regional leaders to view Mr.
Castro with mistrust, if not outright fear.
So it was a sign of something other than strength or prestige when Mr.
Castro took his place this month at the first summit meeting of 21 Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking nations in Guadalajara, Mexico.
Fortified by a region-wide turn toward democracy and market economics, other participating heads of state felt they could safely regard Mr.
Castro at close range.
Shorn of his socialist allies and caged by his own failing economy, Cuba's aging revolutionary lion could roar but he could no longer bite.


Gail Walker Wed To Bruce Zieper
Gail Robin Walker, the daughter of Stanley Walker of Newtown Square, Pa., and Mrs.
Derek Jackson of White Plains, was married in Harrison, N.Y., last evening to Bruce Zieper, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Zieper of Westwood, Mass.
Rabbi Stephen Klein officiated at the Jewish Community Center.
Mrs.
Zieper, 28 years old, is a social worker.
She graduated from Clark University and received a master's degree in counseling from the University of Massachusetts.
Her father is the vice president for marketing at R. R. Bowker/Martindale-Hubbell, a publishing concern in New Providence, N.J.
Her mother, Linda Jackson, teaches psychology as an adjunct at Mercy College in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


Real-Estate Agency Firebombed Again
A real-estate office in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn known for selling homes in the mostly white neighborhood to blacks was firebombed early yesterday for the second time in two weeks.
The police called it a bias crime.
The agency, Fillmore Real Estate, at 9301 Flatlands Avenue, was also bombed on July 16, two days after an unidentified caller told an employee that the agency would be punished for selling houses in the southeast Brooklyn neighborhood to minorities.


Christina Fanlo Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Saturnino Fanlo of London have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Christina Maria Fanlo, and Michael Joseph Russell Jr., the son of Mr.
Russell of North Plainfield, N.J., and the late Alice P. Russell.
Miss Fanlo, 25 years old, graduated from Haverford College and is an assistant marketing manager for Sports Illustrated magazine.
Her father, a senior engineering consultant for Exxon, is based in London.


Correction
A map last Sunday with an article about clean-air rules in the United States carried erroneous shading in designating states that have moved in varying degrees toward standards set by California.
The states that have pledged to adopt California standards are the six New England states and New York and New Jersey.
Those that have recently taken some action toward adopting the standards are Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia and the District of Columbia.
Other states considering the California standards are Colorado, Illinois and Texas.


Tennis; Gildemeister Able to Merge Career With Family Life
The kid was very naughty on Wednesday.
When Laura Gildemeister walked on the court for a doubles match with her partner, Catarina Lindqvist, 3-year-old Heinz Andre Gildemeister wanted to join his mother at the net.


A Call to Humans For Restraint
The July 14 article "A Highway Campaign to Save Animals" is a testament to human hubris.
Our attitude that "we own the world" leads to the practice of relegating all other species of fauna -- and flora too -- to mere embellishments for our edification as desired.
Destroy them if they annoy us or hamper our plans.


Mary Ellen Meara To Wed S. R. Nehrbas
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward F. Meara 3d of Trenton have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Mary Ellen Meara and Stanley Reimann Nehrbas, a son of Mrs.
George Y. Nehrbas of Coopersburg, Pa., and the late Mr.
Nehrbas.
Miss Meara, 31 years old, and Mr.
Nehrbas, 35, are fruit growers in Coopersburg.
She graduated from the Delaware Valley College of Science and Agriculture.
Her father is the president of the Mercer County, N.J., Chamber of Commerce.
Mr.
Nehrbas graduated from Franklin and Marshall College and has a master's in fruit cultivation from Cornell University.
His father was a managing editor of The Morning Call in Allentown, Pa.


FOOTBALL: Notebook; Talks Are Reported In Free-Agent Suit
Paul Tagliabue, the commissioner of the National Football League, has picked up the pace of his behind-the-scenes efforts to settle the Freeman McNeil lawsuit, which seeks unlimited free agency for N.F.L. players, before it goes to trial in Minneapolis on Feb. 19, an N.F.L. club executive said last week.
The club executive, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said Tagliabue had been negotiating with Jim Quinn of the Manhattan law firm of Weil Gotshal &amp; Manges.
Quinn, whose firm is representing McNeil and four other players, was instrumental in the settlement of a similar suit against the National Basketball Association in 1988 that led to the present collective bargaining agreement between the N.B.A. and its players.


Foreign Affairs; Summits Still Matter
This week's Bush-Gorbachev meeting has the air of a last superpower summit, the farewell to the dramatic days when Washington and Moscow seemed to hold the worldwide reins of war and peace, the ritual end to a titanic bipolar struggle that sucked up energies and resources and lives, yet effectively maintained a nuclear peace.
Compared to the cold war meetings, this will be a Potemkin summit.
The United States and the Soviet Union -- separately and together -- no longer shape global destiny.


Sports People: BOXING; Tyson Camp Dismisses Allegation of Rape
Representatives of MIKE TYSON say that allegations that he raped a woman at the Canterbury Hotel in Indianapolis last weekend are just another in a series of cheap shots against the former heavyweight champion.
Tyson's promoter, DON KING, said yesterday that such allegations against Tyson were common.


Eryn Oberlander Weds S. W. Mandel
Dr.
Eryn L. Oberlander, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn S. Oberlander of Lawrence, L.I., was married last evening at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I., to Dr.
Scott Wayne Mandel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald Mandel of North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbis Joel Y. Zion and Morris S. Friedman officiated.
Dr.
Mandel, 29 years old, is a resident in psychiatry at Columbia Presbyterian New York State Psychiatric Institute at the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.
A summa cum laude graduate of Amherst College and a member of Phi Beta Kappa, she received her M.D. from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
Her father is a lawyer and her mother, Norma Oberlander, is a real-estate broker, both in Lawrence.


Britain Exported Radioactive Material to Baghdad
The British Government said today that it had allowed exports to Iraq of "tiny quantities" of radioactive materials, as well as chemicals that scientists said could be used to make nerve gas, between 1987 and last Aug. 5.
But the Government denied that these things could be put to offensive military use.
Peter Lilley, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, said a rising political uproar over the Government's acknowledgement to a Parliamentary committee on Friday night that uranium, plutonium, thorium and sensitive chemicals had been among materials on the list of goods permitted for sale to Iraq was "a lot of fuss over nothing."


Rerouted


Historic Boathouse Imperiled
IN 1936, Robert Moses paved over the Waverly Yacht Club boathouse at the foot of West 167th Street in Manhattan because it stood in the path of Riverside Drive.
Fifty-five years later, the Sagamore Rowing Association of Huntington and Lloyd Harbor is concerned that it, too, may lose its boathouse to development.


Style Makers; Susan Sloan, Antiques Guide Publisher
Susan Sloan is convinced that undiscovered treasures are sitting in antiques shops all over New England.
The trick, she says, is to look beyond the quilts and weathervanes.
"There is wonderful potential for discoveries if you look for items outside the scope of Americana, like continental and Asian antiques," said Miss Sloan, author of "Sloan's Green Guide to Antiquing in New England." "A lot of trade was done here in previous centuries."


G. G. King to Wed Anne P. Downey
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert N. Downey of New York have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Anne Paddock Downey and Glenn Gary King, the son of Walter W. King of Concord, N.H., and Jeannette Langley of Enfield, N.H.
Ms.
Downey, 28 years old, graduated from Kenyon College.
She is the projects coordinator for the Institute on Canada and the United States at Dartmouth College, where she is studying for a master's degree in environmental studies.
Her father is a limited partner in Goldman, Sachs in New York and was the chairman of the Securities Industry Association for 1990.


A Trek of One's Own in Nepal
FASCINATED by Nepal after first trekking there several years ago, my husband and I were ready to return at once.
However, most adventure travel companies offer organized, regularly scheduled treks in Nepal only in the spring or fall, the optimal trekking seasons, and we are rarely free to travel together at those times of year.
Last winter, however, we were able to arrange our own private trek, supported by a Sherpa crew, and we discovered there are several advantages to this arrangement.
My husband and I and an artist friend, Leslie Bostrom, requested an itinerary combining standard routes, modified for our own particular interests.


Results Plus
TENNIS


Tech Notes; Rigged Up to Glow in the Dark
Landstar System, a trucking company based in Stamford, Conn., wants its trucks to stick out at night.
So it is spending upward of $800,000 to wrap its more than 10,000 vehicles with strips of reflective tape (inset, below) nine times brighter than an average stop sign.
The tape, made by the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company, reflects light hitting it at angles up to almost 90 degrees, which makes the trucks visible to vehicles viewing it from unusual angles (lower photo, above).
Federal statistics show that there are more than 1,000 fatal accidents a year involving cars hitting the back or side of trucks, 70 percent of them at night.
Often the cars drive under the trailers.
Industry executives say trailers are most likely to be struck when a truck is making a U-turn, re-entering a highway or turning left at the end of a highway exit ramp.
By placing the reflective material at a height where it will reflect auto headlights, Landstar hopes to reduce the accident rate.


Quotation of the Day
"I must receive five to ten dog- tag stories a week. It's a cottage industry, let me tell you, and its a terrible emotional roller coaster for the families." -- Maureen Dunn, a member of National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia.  [ 20:1. ]


Mary Piccotti and William De Vries Are Married
Mary Ellen Jacquelin Piccotti, an operating-room nurse at Alexandria (Va.) Hospital, was married yesterday to Dr.
William Henry De Vries, an orthopedic resident at Walter Reed Army Hospital in Washington.
Msgr.
Piero Vergari officiated at St.
Mary's Church in Old Forge, Pa.
Mrs.
De Vries, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Bridgeport.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Piccotti of Old Forge.
Dr.
De Vries, 28, graduated from Drew University and received his medical degree from George Washington University.
He is a captain in the Army Medical Corps.
His mother, Dr.
Marie Hanache of Old Westbury, L.I., is the medical director of Hofstra University in Hempstead, L.I.


Postings: Low-Income Units a Bonus; Grace Church Rebuilds
It took more than a year just to work out the financing details, but Grace United Methodist Church, at 123 West 104th Street off Columbus Avenue, is nearing completion of a $10 million rebuilding.
Fire had destroyed it in December 1983.
Besides the new church, 56 apartments for low-income renters and 12 apartments for clergy have also been constructed.
Insurance paid for the new 299-seat sanctuary and the dozen apartments for church clergy, while a complicated exchange of subsidies helped pay for the low-income units.
The 21 studios, 14 one-bedroom and 21 two-bedroom apartments will rent for an average of $350 a month to people who earn 60 percent or less of the area's median income of $35,000.


Sounds of Music


James Brown Is Up to His Old Tricks
Here's a concept: write songs and arrangements, convene a band, rehearse it hard, take it into a big room and record it.
It's been a long time since that was standard operating procedure for a rock album, now that producers are hooked on the convenience of machines and performers like to tinker with endless overdubs.
But James Brown knows he made his best music that way.
On "Love Overdue" (Scotti Brothers 79392 75225; all three formats), his first album since he was paroled from imprisonment for aggravated assault and weapons violations, he ignores high-tech pop fashion to make the funk he wants.
It's a wise choice, wiser than the one Aretha Franklin makes on her new "What You See Is What You Sweat" (Arista 8628; all three formats).
Any pop performer whose career stretches into the decades, like Mr.
Brown or Ms.
Franklin, sooner or later has to decide whether to continually update the music -- to try and keep up with the market -- or to follow private instincts and see whether the public pays attention.
In trying to stay contemporary, Ms.
Franklin, one of America's greatest singers, has landed in a limbo somewhere between Whitney Houston and Patti Labelle.
And while "Love Overdue" won't eclipse Mr.
Brown's finest music of the 1960's and 1970's, its better songs prove he can still summon his old vitality.


Crowds Gather at Billboard for a Glimpse of Light or Vision


Justice for Henry Miller
To the Editor:
Perry Meisel's review of two biographies of Henry Miller (June 23) accomplishes what reviews ought to: revealing the context of the books and offering the reviewer's opinion.
Justice for Henry Miller!
Justice often denied during his long career.


A Winsome Final Twosome: Trevino and Nicklaus
The 12th edition of the United States Senior Open probably couldn't get much better than this for golf aficionados.
The fourth round on Sunday will renew one of the sport's greatest rivalries when Lee Trevino and Jack Nicklaus play together in the final twosome.
Starting the day, Trevino will have a one-stroke edge.
A birdie on the 54th hole this afternoon gave him a two-under-par 68 for a three-round total of even-par 210.
Nicklaus, who shot 70, is tied for second at 211 with Chi Chi Rodriguez and J. C. Snead.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week that ended July 13 MANHATTAN East Village 546,000
439 Lafayette Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 3,500-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, 1,500-sq.-ft. of private roof space, wood-burning stove, 2 skylights, 4 exposures; maintenance $1,167, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia-Corcoran Group)  Greenwich Village 775,000
247 West 12th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, fireplace, c/a, private garage space; maintenance $1,700, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group-Kingman Associates)  Fort Washington 100,000
200 Cabrini Boulevard  (Castle Village)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; part-time doorman, windowed kitchen, 7-acres of private grounds; maintenance $623, includes gas and electricity, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: Simone Song Properties)  TriBeCa 390,000
41 Worth Avenue  2,300-sq.-ft. open loft; elevator, exposed-brick walls, common roof deck, original maple floors; maintenance $702, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Sinvin Realty)  Upper East Side 1.8 million
1035 Fifth Avenue (85th St.)  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 4,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, 2 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $3,024, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  West Side 340,000
65 Central Park West (66th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, windowed kitchen, partial Central Park view; maintenance $1,018, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty)  BRONX  Riverdale 220,000
3001 Henry Hudson Parkway  (Linden House)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,750-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; part-time doorman, dining room, den; maintenance $610, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Shelley Scherman, Realtor)  Spuyten Duyvil Area 100,000
629 Kappock Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 980-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; part-time doorman, dining area; maintenance $548, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Brooklyn Heights 500,000
96 Remsen Street  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 2,600-sq.-ft. duplex-co-op in a brownstone; dining room, terrace, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,200, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Harbor View Realty)  Prospect Heights 110,000
240 Prospect Place  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; dining room, fireplace, Jacuzzi; maintenance $520, 58% tax-deductible (Broker: Aguayo &amp; Knox)  QUEENS  Elmhurst 169,000
92-38 55th Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 30- by 120-ft. lot; taxes $941 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Real Estate)  Jackson Heights 265,000
25-47 70th Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath; finished basement, 1-car garage, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,114 (Broker: Century 21/Metalios Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Grant City 120,000
44 Clawson Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; eat-in kitchen, two, 1-car garages; 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $952 (Broker: Rand Properties-Warren Crapo Realtors)  St.
George 69,663
10 Bay Street Landing  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,048-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; dining area, library, Manhattan skyline view; maintenance $576, 57% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty Corp.)


Baghdad Bustling Once Again
An air of normalcy is returning to Baghdad nearly a year after President Saddam Hussein of Iraq annexed Kuwait and five months after the end of the war in the gulf.
Page 12.


Charity Handler To Marry in June
The engagement of Charity May Handler to David Hollerith Lefferts, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gillet Lefferts Jr. of Darien, Conn., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Handler 3d of Short Hills, N.J.
The wedding is planned for June.
Miss Handler, 24 years old, graduated from the Loomis Chaffee School.
She and the prospective bridegroom, 24, are 1989 graduates of Skidmore College.
She is the manager of the women's department at the Jos A. Bank clothing shop in Boston.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Kenyon &amp; Kenyon.


Evelyn R. Swett Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Steven C. Swett of Norwich, Vt., have announced the engagement of their daughter Evelyn Randall Swett to Dr.
Donald McElwain Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald F. Miller of Greenwich, Conn.
The wedding is planned for September 1992.
Miss Swett, 25 years old, is a marketing associate at High Performance Systems, a computer software developer in Hanover, N.H.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she became a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the business reporter for the Valley News in West Lebanon, N.H.
Her mother, Shiela Swett, is a computer specialist with the Woodstock, Vt., school system.


Too Early to Ski But Not to Save
While visitors to the Berkshires of western Massachusetts sweltered in the heat this month, one of the region's ski areas announced a 20 percent discount on season passes for next winter.
The offer was from Jiminy Peak in Hancock, which said the discount is available to skiers who purchase their passes by Tuesday.
Season passes are available for weekends, midweek and night skiing as well as combinations of these periods.
For a ski-anytime season pass, individuals will pay $394; the prices then gradually rise until Nov. 16, when it is $492.
Two adults in a family will pay $675 instead of the Nov. 16 price of $844 and a family of five will pay $1,342 instead of $1,677.
The area described the discounts as a response to "tough economic times." Passes can be purchased at Jiminy Peak's main ticket office or by telephone, (413) 738-5500, with a credit card.
The number of weekend passes is being limited to 900.


G. A. Allen to Wed Ms. Stauderman
Mr. and Mrs.
Albert P. Stauderman Jr. of Wilton, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Dodd Stauderman to Glenn Allison Allen, a son of Prof. and Mrs.
Wayne A. Allen of Ewing, N.J.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stauderman, 28 years old, graduated from Amherst College and is a development officer at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago.
Her father is the president of Bird Bonette Stauderman Inc., advertising production consultants in Westport, Conn.
Her mother, Helen Stauderman, is the director of the Mark Twain Library in Redding, Conn.


Postings: Investing in Art; A New Center in New Milford
"What do you do when you buy an absolutely charming, historic, turn-of-the-century building and then the real estate market collapses?" asked Jack N. Bonne, a developer and investor from Pound Ridge, N.Y.
His answer: Designate the building an arts center.
At the end of 1986 Mr.
Bonne purchased 22 Railroad Street, an 85-year-old structure directly across the street from the picturesque railroad station in New Milford, Conn.
He declined to say how much he paid.


Ultimate Reruns
They were the days of Lucy and Desi and Hoss and Little Joe.
Ralph and Alice tangled in Brooklyn, and in a place called the Twilight Zone pool sharks rose from the dead and tiny spacemen turned up in Agnes Moorehead's kitchen.
Series like "Morton &amp; Hayes," Rob Reiner's new show on CBS, and "Dream On," on HBO, recall early television fondly.
Some of the real stuff is available on cassette (the latest example being the Ernie Kovacs set introduced by White Star).
Here are a few vintage series from the 50's, 60's and 70's that may be viewed once more, if only for an episode or two, on tape.
Some are released by more than one distributor, and prices vary from $10 to $30.


Dollar Steady Last Week
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
137.60
136.41
148.55
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7440
1.7470
1.6378
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1491
1.1585
1.1556
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6817
1.6943
1.8185
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$366.00
$370.40
$360.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


The World; Germany's East Wing of the Common European Home
WHENEVER Russia has opened a window to the West, it has looked to Germany.
Germany, too, has always been drawn more east than west -- as an agent of trade and enlightenment in past centuries, of destruction and disaster in this.
Now, with the cold war finally dissipating, not only the Soviet Union but all the countries of Eastern Europe are looking again to the Germans for economic help, despite their considerable political misgivings stemming from memories of Hitler and World War II.


Swiss Protester Fighting for World's Forests
By climbing to the top of a lamppost in front of Westminster Abbey and chaining himself there during the recent economic summit conference, a Swiss protester named Bruno Manser has further enhanced his status as Europe's newest environmental celebrity.
Mr.
Manser sat at his perch for 90 minutes before a poice crane arrived.
He was cut loose, arrested and brought to a nearby police station.


September Bridal For Miss Harkins
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Harkins of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Anne Harkins and Peter Jay Baughan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Jay Baughan of Westport, Mass.
Miss Harkins, 24 years old, graduated from St.
Michael's College in Winooski, Vt.
She is a marketing intern at the Madrid Economic Development Agency in Madrid.
Her father is president of Nott Manufacturing, a maker of garden chemicals in Pleasant Valley, N.Y.
Her mother is the assistant to the headmaster of the Millbrook School.


Inadvertent Invention in Tarrytown Creates a New Deodorizer
THE chemists and engineers at UOP Laboratories were working on a way to eliminate vapor in automobile paint shops a few years ago, when something serendipitous happened.
They noticed that a white powder they had produced out of the process was eliminating not vapors, but odors, said Raymond A. Rieber, a chemical engineer who directs research and development at the laboratories, which is a joint venture of United Carbide Corporation and Allied-Signal Inc. and develops industrial products for oil, gas and automotive companies.


Money to Burn?
To the Editor:
I was appalled to read that the average cost of a wedding is $19,000 ("It's One Party Even the Recession Can't Spoil," June 23).
Do these people have money to burn?
Don't they realize that such a sum would do a lot more good in a house fund, a college fund or a retirement fund?
If they have such poor judgment about money, it is no wonder that they have their noses to the grindstone all their lives and go crying to the government for help when they get old or have other problems.
CHARLES E. COHN  Austell, Ga., July 1


U.S. Wondering if Interests Lie in a United or Divided U.S.S.R.
As President Bush approaches a Moscow summit meeting that has been billed as a turning point in Soviet-American relations, the Administration is grappling with the fundamental question of whether American interests are best served by a united Soviet Union or a group of smaller states built from its 15 republics.
Should Mr.
Bush go beyond his overtures to the Soviet republics and encourage the Baltics, the Ukraine, Georgia and other restive areas to withdraw from the union?
Or should Washington help President Mikhail S. Gorbachev hold his country together -- peacefully -- as it gropes for a new economic and political path?


Making a Difference; Bill and Ed's Incredible New Adventure
The Chiron Corporation's announcement last week that it would buy the Cetus Corporation is a bold gamble by William J. Rutter, Chiron's chairman, and Edward E. Penhoet, its chief executive.
The acquisition, for about $600 million in stock, could vault Chiron into the front ranks of the biotechnology industry, joining the better-known Amgen and Genentech.
But some analysts say Chiron was approaching the front ranks anyway and might now be dragged down by the problems of money-losing Cetus.


C. C. Smith Jr. to Wed Alexandra K. Vanneck
John B. Vanneck of New York and Isabelle K. Vanneck of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alexandra Knipe Vanneck to Charles Capel Smith Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Smith of Greenwich.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Vanneck, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Vermont and is the editorial assistant at Motor Boating &amp; Sailing magazine in New York.
Her father is a principal in the Equitable Holding Corporation, a family enterprise, and her mother is a fashion consultant with Elizabeth Arden, both in New York.


Susanne Murphy, A Teacher, Weds
Susanne Ruth Murphy, a daughter of Margaret H. Murphy of North Bennington, Vt., and Joseph S. Murphy of New York, was married yesterday to Timothy Dwight, a son of Sara Dwight of New York and the late Everett Dwight.
The Rev.
Orlanda Brugnola, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Murray Hill Townhouse in New York.
The bride, 30, taught at the Barrow Street Nursery School in New York and is to join the faculty of the Bank Street School for Children in New York in September.
She graduated from Bard College and received a master's degree in education from Hunter College.
Her father is a University Professor of political science at the City University of New York, where he was the chancellor from 1982 to 1990.
Her mother is a client service specialist with the Vermont Department of Employment and Training in Bennington.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Northport 235,000
3 Frontier Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; den, fireplace, greenhouse, pool, 2-car attached garage; taxes $4,900.
Commack 230,000
15 Wichard Boulevard  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, Jacuzzi, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $5,800.
Glen Cove 365,000
2 Eastland Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 17-year-old colonial; family room, sunporch, 2 fireplaces, pool, 0.75 acres; taxes $7,200.
Rocky Point 335,000
9 Wildwood Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old contemporary; den, fireplace, 2-car garage, water views; taxes $3,600.
Smithtown 184,000
7 Timothy Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, porch; taxes $4,000.
West Sayville 147,500
115 Bucknell Road, 3-bedroom, 1-bath, 32-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, dining room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
OTHER AREAS Somers, N.Y. 280,000
140 Mitchell Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; fireplace, family room, eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $5,770.
Madison, Conn. 190,000
53 Country Way  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old saltbox; pantry, 2-car attached garage, 1.7 acres; taxes $3,193.
Edison, N.J. 203,000
8 Cypress Road  3-bedroom, 1.5-bath, 12-year-old colonial; h/w floors, full basement, water softener, humidifier; taxes $3,750.


Laura Levine and Kenneth Silver Wed
Laura Jill Levine, an associate at the Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett law firm, and Kenneth Lawrence Silver, an associate in corporate finance at Kidder, Peabody, both in New York, were married last evening at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Rabbi Susan Einbinder officiated.
Ms.
Levine, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree magna cum laude from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Seymour Levine of North Brunswick, N.J.
Her father is the executive director of worldwide research services for the R. W. Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute in Raritan, N.J.
Her mother, Susan Levine, is a psychotherapist for the board of education in Milltown, N.J.


Campus Life: Wisconsin; They Dig History: Students Learn How to Mark Time
University of Wisconsin students are learning archeology from the ground up as they search for evidence to reconstruct prehistoric Indian cultures in the area where the Mississippi and Wisconsin Rivers meet.
A 17-member group from the Madison campus, led by James Stoltman, an anthropology professor, is spending eight weeks surveying and excavating the cornfields and flood plains of Prairie du Chien, where Louis Joliet and the Rev.
Jacques Marquette are said to have discovered the Mississippi River in 1673.


Football; Raiders: Black and Silver And Controversy All Over
Mornings fade into afternoons reluctantly, as if they were part of the training-camp conspiracy.
The Raiders proceed slowly, methodically, even as they sidestep their recent past: a triumphant season that ended suddenly last January in Buffalo.
But as they look ahead, they find the Lyle Alzado issue floating above them like some kind of distant and disdainful cloud, the latest in the layers of controversy that seem to trail the team each season.


Mary Ellen Pierson and Robert A. La Banca Wed
Mary Ellen Pierson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest C. Pierson of Hopkins, Minn., was married yesterday to Robert Alfred La Banca, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred F. La Banca of Darien, Conn.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Stephen Cornils and the Rev.
George Weinman, Lutheran ministers, and by the Rev.
James P. McConville, a Roman Catholic priest, at Central Lutheran Church in Minneapolis.
Mrs.
La Banca, 31 years old, graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
She is a national accounts supervisor in New York at Major League Baseball Properties, the licensing agent for items relating to players of the 26 major-league clubs.
The bridegroom, 31, graduated from Nichols College.
He founded and heads the Mailex Corporation, a direct-mail advertising concern in Stamford, Conn.


Football; A Pair of Ex-49ers Learn How to Lose
The intrigue was not in the game -- it was just an exhibition, nothing more -- but in the players.
Ronnie Lott and Roger Craig walked through the tunnel today at the Coliseum, and the transformation was suddenly complete.
Lott and Craig, as much a part of San Francisco 49er lore as, say, Joe Montana, moved across a football spectrum when they signed this off season with the Los Angeles Raiders through Plan B free agency.
But the image didn't take shape until Lott, now the Raiders' strong safety, wrapped his arms around Dexter Carter on the second play of the game and threw the 49er running back to the ground.


Scrutiny of Police Sought in Milwaukee
Black elected officials here said today that they planned to ask the state Attorney General to investigate the Milwaukee Police Department, which has been embarrassed by the way it handled complaints in May about a man now accused of mass murder.
Gwendolynne Moore, a Democratic State Representative who lives two blocks from where the 11 bodies were found in the apartment of Jeffrey L. Dahmer, said that such an inquiry was necessary to deal with longstanding friction between the police and the city's minority residents, who assert that the authorities have been insensitive to them and their needs.


Creations by Fellowship Winners
FOLLOWING on the New Jersey Arts Annual, a show assembled by the Montclair Art Museum from State Council on the Arts resources, there is the roundup of artists awarded fellowships by the council, held this year at the Bristol-Myers Squibb Gallery here.
And, given the present hard times, there is the feeling that its reviewers should pick their words with extra care.
After all, the council is a government body that still gives substantial support to the arts.
These artists, 28 of them, have each received $5,000 to $12,000 with only nominal strings attached.


Old-World Imaginations in a New-World Setting
Without plunging into hyperbole, a viewer could still find something historic about the four commissioned premieres that were presented this month at the American Dance Festival in Durham, N.C., by choreographers from Indonesia, the Soviet Union, Venezuela and China.
The fact that both young and experienced dance-makers, to use the old term, would come from abroad for extended creative residencies in the United States underscores how radically times have changed since the festival's founding.


'EXCUSE ME,' HE SAID
Berne describes her encounter with a flasher with grace and pathos.
She might have exposed the flasher for what he is -- a visual rapist.
Flashing is not at all "harmless." Berne's psyche has been penetrated by the perpetrator as surely as if she had been raped.
SUSAN CROWELL
Ann Arbor, Mich.


Am I the Diner or Am I the Dish?
THE RITUALS OF DINNER
The Origins, Evolution, Eccentricities, and Meaning of Table Manners.
By Margaret Visser. 432 pp.
New York: Grove Weidenfeld. $22.95.


Correction Captain Accuses Supervisor of Harassing Her
Two years ago Capt.
Kathleen C. Ladalia got a plum assignment, especially for a woman in New York City's Correction Department.
She was appointed to head the K-9 unit that searches for narcotics smuggled into the city's jails.
But now Captain Ladalia charges that she was removed as commander of the unit last month because of sexual bias by her supervising officer.
The president of her union, the Correction Captain's Association, backs her up.
He says that in a conversation he had with the supervisor, the supervisor twice referred to Captain Ladalia as "a bitch."


Ms. Frind to Wed Malcolm Delaney
September wedding plans for Karen Frind and Malcolm Emil Delaney, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm J. Delaney of Somers, N.Y., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Denis B. Frind of Ardsley-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Ms.
Frind, 27 years old, is a lawyer with the New York City Campaign Finance Board.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley and received a law degree from Cornell University.
Her father is a principal in the New York law firm of Altieri, Kushner, Miuccio &amp; Frind.


Inflation and Taxes Eat Up Treasury Bills
To the Editor:
"Interest Rates, the Real Ones," a July 2 Business Scene column, points out that the 6.3 percent return on one-year Treasury bills is actually a 1.8 percent rate after adjusting for inflation at the current rate of 4.5 percent.
From this the article then concludes that these investments of savings are "winners" because they yield a net return after inflation.


Sunday Menu; Italian Sausages, Used Sparingly
A recipe including sausages would hardly seem to fit in with the healthful message this column tries to convey.
But even sausages can fit into a healthful diet if they are used sparingly -- as a flavoring, not as the centerpiece of the meal.
I recommend sausages from the Aidells Sausage Company in San Francisco, which makes four kinds of sausages weighing 2 to 3.2 ounces each and containing 6.6 to 9.9 grams of fat.
Traditional sausages of the same weight contain half again as much fat.


Style Makers; Gretchen Wilson and Colleen Charleston, Doll Designers
Twenty-five years ago Gretchen Wilson was young and poor and in search of a doll for her daughter.
She found a few scraps of muslin, an old hat, toddler's shoes and hand-me-down clothes.
She sat at her kitchen table with a needle and thread, and a doll was born.
This year Ms.
Wilson expects to sell 20,000 similar dolls.
They are made by Little Souls, the company Ms.
Wilson, 45 years old, started in 1986 with her partner, Colleen Charleston, 38, in Ardmore, Pa.


Focus: Hilton Head, S.C.; With Expansion, What of the Ecology?
WHEN Lois Richardson moved to this sea island 35 years ago, one road and one combination gas station/grocery served the needs of about 600 people.
The five or six white families who lived on the island had retired from corporate careers elsewhere and most of the residents were the descendants of slaves, who, after the Civil War, earned the rights to the rice plantations on which they had worked.


If Nothing Else, Try Sudden Death
To the Sports Editor:
Here's my suggestion for breaking ties in soccer: Play a 10-minute overtime.
If the game remains tied, switch to sudden death and remove a player from each team after each additional five minutes until a minimum of seven players (including the goalies) remains on the field.
JOHN DEPPEN North Haven, Conn.


Sports People: BOXING; Bout Is Rescheduled
The World Boxing Organization heavyweight bout between RAY MERCER and TOMMY MORRISON, which was canceled because of a sparring injury to Morrison, has been rescheduled for Oct. 18.
BOB ARUM, the promoter, made the announcement Friday in Kansas City, Mo., Morrison's hometown.
The 12-round bout for Mercer's W.B.O. heavyweight title will be held at the Atlantic City Convention Center. (AP)


The Waitron's Knife and Fork
Sexist language often gives offense if only because it is careless and easy to avoid.
"He" is not the only pronoun available to generalize about the typical citizen.
Pluralizing to "they" usually offers convenient neutrality, or the problem can be skirted by frequently using "she."
The new Random House Webster's College Dictionary includes two pages of such sensible suggestions in an essay, "Avoiding Sexist Language." One need not be an ardent feminist to take such pains, merely a careful writer who respects all her readers.


Adirondack Boating History
The Adirondack Museum, in Blue Mountain Lake, N.Y., recently reopened its boat exhibit, "Boats and Boating in the Adirondacks, 1840-1940," featuring the museum's extensive collection of powerboats, canoes and rowing craft.
After complete redecoration, the museum's Callahan Memorial Boat Building is ready to accommodate close to 200 boats.


Dinner-Dances And Eighth Graders
As parents of primary-school children who are or will soon be eighth graders, we would like to publicly express our objection to dinner-dances for eighth-grade graduates ("Eighth-Grade Parties: Tuxedos, Gowns and an Uneasy Air," June 23).
We noted that many parents found the escalation of the "dress code" unacceptable, but have to ask what parents expect when they not only condone but also sponsor an activity that is inappropriate for 13-year-old children.


Modifying A Designer's Intent
To the Editor:
Vincent Scully's discussion of Maya Lin's Vietnam Memorial  [ "The Terrible Art of Designing a War Memorial," July 14 ]  brought a profound sense of recollection of that extraordinary place.
However, his description of how Ms.
Lin "leads us gently into the ground, enveloping us slowly in the war" is more a description of how we experience the memorial rather than what the designer intended.


Flights of Chardonnay
A DOZEN YEARS AGO, WINE drinkers would belly up to the bar and ask for "a glass of Chablis." When it became apparent that there were plenty of white wines other than Chablis and that what the place was serving probably wasn't Chablis anyway, the call changed to "a glass of white wine."
What bartenders hear now is, "What kind of chardonnay do you have?" From almost total obscurity 30 years ago, chardonnay has become America's favorite wine.
The range of chardonnay wines available to the American consumer is little short of staggering.
By informal count, there are more than 600 wineries in this country making wine from chardonnay grapes.
They range from the rich, complex, almost dramatic wines produced in small quantities by Chalone Vineyard in the Gavilan Mountains in California to the fruity, uncomplicated wines made in substantial quantities by producers like Fetzer, Sutter Home and Glen Ellen.
Chardonnay is a European grape, and no one seems to know when it first turned up in this country.
Chances are it arrived in the 19th century, when viticulturists brought cuttings of hundreds of different European vines to the New World to learn which would thrive best.
It probably came under another name, to be identified years later.
In "California's Great Chardonnays" (Wine Spectator Press), James Laube traces the commercial production of chardonnay as a varietal wine -- chardonnay alone, unblended -- back to the Wente Brothers in the Livermore Valley, east of San Francisco.
The Wentes first planted chardonnay in the 1920's, during Prohibition.
Their first bottling of pinot chardonnay, as the grape was known then, came in 1936, three years after repeal.
Through the 1950's, many wineries experimented with chardonnay, almost all of them using cuttings from the Wente vineyard.
Even today, the so-called Wente clone is responsible for much of California's best chardonnay.
In the late 1940's and early 1950's, a handful of wine makers in the North Coast counties of Napa and Sonoma made the first truly great California chardonnays.
The McCreas at Stony Hill, the Taylors at Mayacamas and James Zellerbach at Hanzell produced wines that set the standards for the hundreds of wine makers to follow.
Zellerbach, who tried to recreate Burgundy's Clos de Vougeot in the hills outside the town of Sonoma, was the first to use small French oak barrels to age his wines.
Today, hundreds of American wine makers, from Long Island to Washington State, routinely use French oak not only for aging their wine but for fermenting it as well.
Despite protestations to the contrary, white Burgundy has long been the model most serious American wine makers strive to emulate.
Originally, California wine makers insisted they were taking a different path.
Some of their overblown, high-alcohol wines supported their claim.
There was a feeling that the Burgundians looked down on the American efforts.
After discovering that the Burgundians were fascinated by American wines, the Californians loss their inferiority complex and began exploring French methods.
Today it's easy to mistake top California chardonnays for fine Meursaults and Puligny-Montrachets.
The Sonoma-Cutrer winery, which makes only chardonnay, has sponsored two chardonnay conferences for American and European producers.
The first was held in California in 1986.
The second, held in Beaune last year, even attracted a famous Italian chardonnay maker, Angelo Gaja.
Chardonnay is not widely produced in France; there is 10 times more ugni blanc, the French name for Italy's trebbiano.
But the chardonnay grape is used in virtually all of France's best white wines, from Champagne, where it can be blended with meunier and pinot noir or used alone, south through Chablis, where it is the only approved grape, on through the Cote d'Or, where it reigns supreme, and down to the Maconnais, where it turns up in everything from Pouilly-Fuisse to that singular anomaly, Beaujolais blanc.
Those are chardonnay's traditional boundaries.
But there is no holding the grape back.
These days, it turns up in the Rhone, the Loire Valley and the long-forgotten Ardeche.
Starting in the north of Italy, it has crept south to the point where it seems ready to jump across the straits to Sicily.
Some of the barrel-aged chardonnays from the Piedmont can compete with the best of France and California.
In Spain the grape is being used with considerable success in the Penedes, west of Barcelona, by Jean Leon and Miguel Torres.
Below the Equator, Australia offers a wide selection of chardonnays, a few of which are outstanding.
New Zealand makes a leaner variety, more in the style of French Chablis.
Back in this country, chardonnay is also produced, with varying degrees of success, in Virginia, New Jersey, Texas, New Mexico and Idaho, as well as Washington and Oregon.
Chardonnay is known as a wine maker's wine.
It's not a hard grape to grow and no more difficult to harvest than most.
What counts is what happens after that.
And in fact, for every Chalone or Sonoma-Cutrer, there are dozens of uninspiring California chardonnays on the market at high prices.
In France, for every Vincent Leflaive or Etienne Sauzet, there are dozens of wine makers turning out characterless, watery concoctions that do not deserve to be called Burgundy.
Vladimir Horowitz once said that the piano is the easiest instrument to play but the hardest instrument to play well.
He might have been a pretty good chardonnay maker.


Mets, Distant Second, Get That Floundering Feeling
On Friday night, after their enervating 8-2 loss to the Padres, the Mets would not offer cliches in explanation.
And so, neither could they offer much hope.
The loss, their fourth in a row and the latest in a series of hopeless routs, left the Mets seven games behind the Pirates in the National League East.
The deficit is the largest the Mets have stared at all season, and it's the farthest they've been from first place since June 16, 1990.


Midway Trims Refund Charge To 10% From 50%
In a new policy it says is unique in the airline industry, Midway Airlines has made all fares on its discounted excursion flights fully refundable except for a 10 percent service fee on cancellations or changes.
The carrier, based at Midway Airport in Chicago, also has cut the advance booking requirement for its lowest fares from 30 days to 7 days.
Both changes took effect July 2.


New York Grand Prix? Decision in 90 Days
The decision on whether the Meadowlands Indy-car race will move next year to a site using the streets around the World Trade Center is fewer than 90 days away.
And the fate of the proposal rests on the resolution of three issues.
The three key elements are whether the revenue projections are enough for the city of New York to justify the expense in a time of fiscal crisis, how much of a disruption would the race create in lower Manhattan and whether the race's current sponsor, a cigarette company, would prove unpalatable to the city government.


The Car That Has Everything
WE were driving to the South Carolina Low Country when it hit me: my cousin, a woman of otherwise impeccable taste, manners and sense, had transformed her car.
I began to notice this when it was my turn to drive.


An Out-of-Shape Hansel Is Only No. 3 in Haskell
Unraced for seven weeks following his Belmont Stakes victory, Hansel ran as if he were an out-of-shape athlete in the Monmouth Park stretch today.
The sleek-looking bay finished more than 13 lengths back, in third place, in the $500,000 Haskell Invitational Handicap, which was captured by Lost Mountain.
Corporate Report was second by a head.


Yes, It Was Hot. But Not in Here.
Heat or no heat, fashion survived the fund-raising dinner dance at the Parrish Art Museum in Southampton on July 20.
Drenching humidity and a temperature in the 90's did not deter the women partygoers who wore the requested red evening dresses, long or short, and carried fans in keeping with the Chinese fandango theme of the cocktail reception for 500 guests.
Many of the men wore red trousers, shirts or jackets or carried red handkerchiefs.
The party was held in a large air-conditioned tent in the museum garden that fully enclosed the garden's old oak tree.
Earlier that Saturday, on a private Southampton estate, informally dressed guests gathered under a yellow and aqua striped tent decorated with balloons and cardboard giraffes, elephants and gorillas.
The event benefited the Hamptons' Animal Rescue Fund, a private organization dedicated to the care of pets on Long Island's South Fork.


Stamps
Anyone who is angry with the United States Postal Service can find catharsis in setting up a local postal service.
You can design and print your own stamps, and you even get to cancel United States stamps with your own handstamp.
It's legal, free and fun.
Local posts, as they are known, have a long history, beginning in the 1840's, when mail went almost entirely from one post office to another rather than to individual businesses and residences and when rural areas often had no service at all.


Laura Stewart Is to Wed John Bauman
Leslie D. Stewart and Margery Cowan Stewart, both of New York, have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Laura Harding Stewart and John Stuart Bauman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John David Bauman of New Hartford, N.Y.
Miss Stewart, 28 years old, is an assistant vice president at Sotheby's in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from William Smith College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a vice president at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette in New York.


Q and A
M.C.I.
Increase in a Co-op Question: Our co-op is about 60 percent owner-occupied and 40 percent rental.
We are contemplating putting new windows in our building.
Can a shareholder who leases his apartment to a rent-regulated tenant pass on his portion of an assessment for the windows to his tenant?? . . .
Laura Weinstein, Manhattan


Scientist Champions Cause of Natural Gas as Fuel
BACK in 1982, Prof.
Enoch Durbin was pondering an offer to study solar energy in the Negev in Israel when one of his engineering students at Princeton University stopped by to ask him to breakfast with his father, a high-ranking government official in British Columbia.
That casual invitation eventually led Professor Durbin to forgo his desert expedition to spend his sabbatical leave instead in the cooler climes of western Canada.
There, he took up a challenge issued over coffee that morning in Princeton -- to help wean the province off its dependence on imported oil.


Corrections
The Connecticut Q&amp;A column on June 23, about studies of taste and smell, omitted a word in a discussion of salt substitutes by Dr.
Linda Bartoshuk of the Yale University School of Medicine.
In a letter received by The Times on July 16, Dr.
Bartoshuk said the affected sentence should have read, "Kosher sour salt is tartaric acid" -- inserting the word "sour."


Robert R. Preato, Art Historian, 49
Robert R. Preato, an art historian, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 49 years old.
He died of heart failure, his brother, Dennis, said.


Sunday Brunch; For Fancy Eggs-Any-Style, Serve Them With Music
To lure more customers to weekend brunch, many restaurants are offering live music with the eggs Benedict.
At hotels and formal dining rooms, it may be a pianist, while more casual places offer everything from classical guitar to gospel singers.
Here is a sampling.
La Bonne Soupe&gt;
48 West 55th Street, Manhattan (212) 586-7650 -- This popular, humble French bistro in midtown offers pleasing fare at bargain prices.
The downstairs dining room, with a small bar in the center, is lined with neighborly banquettes; two dining rooms upstairs are festooned with Haitian primitive-style paintings.
On weekends, John Lehmann-Haupt, plays classical and popular guitar music.


CASH IN THE CURL
Competitive surfing is great and breathes fresh life into the sport.
It's a showcase for the new.
Tennis improves on the public courts because of inspirational matches at the competitions.
This musing about soul, etc. is invention; most surfers couldn't give a damn.
PATON MILLER
Southampton, L.I.


Murky Tale of Coffee and Copters Reveals Long Arm of Seized Bank
A series of cases unfolding here involving the Bank of Credit and Commerce International are giving new meaning to the old cliche about the friendly banker.
Joining with a Jordanian coffee trader, the bank helped finance a scheme to smuggle coffee from Guatemala to the United States, according to an investigation by Lloyd's of London.
The coffee dealer even filed a claim for a lost shipment, which Lloyd's said was initially listed as bound for Jordan.
Sometime after the scheme was uncovered by Lloyd's, the commerce bank helped finance a sale of three helicopters to Guatemala from Jordan.
The helicopter sales were brokered by Munther Bilbeisi, the same man involved in the coffee deal.
Guatemalan officials are now investigating whether the copter sales were an effort to channel hush money to people in Guatemala to thwart Lloyd's inquiry into the coffee smuggling scheme.


Pamela Knapp to Wed D. N. Burdett
September wedding plans for Dr.
Pamela Hay Knapp and Douglas Norwood Burdett, a son of Antoinette S. Burdett of Asheville, N.C., and the late Allen M. Burdett Jr., have been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Knapp of Penn Valley, Pa.
The prospective bride, 33 years old, is a resident in radiology at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
A cum laude graduate of Yale University, she received a master's degree in English from the University of California at Berkeley and an M.D. from the University of Rochester.
Her father is a psychoanalyst and a professor of psychiatry at Hahnemann University in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Nancy Knapp, a retired psychologist, was the director of consultation and education at Crozer Chester Medical Center Community Health Services in Chester, Pa.


Beijing Cracks Down on Mongol Dissidents
Internal Government documents made available today show that the security forces have suppressed two dissident organizations in the Chinese region of Inner Mongolia and detained their leaders.
The documents, obtained and made public by Asia Watch, a New York-based human rights group, report that the two organizations "sowed dissension" and opposed socialism while encouraging a rebirth of Mongol culture.
Two leaders were arrested in May, and 26 members of one of the groups were kept under house arrest.
Some of those detained were Communist Party members, the documents say.


A World Trade Center For Westchester
On June 30, the Westchester Weekly featured an article under the headline "With Soaring Taxes Forecast, Development Can Offer The Answer." Then Business Day printed a seemingly unrelated Careers column  [ July 2 ] entitled "Creating Jobs By Building Export Trade." These articles, on closer look, are intimately entwined.
In 1989, the Work In Westchester Task Force sounded a clarion call to cure the deficiencies in the workforce or face the unpleasant fact that "Westchester will become a less attractive place to live and work."
In just two short years, the focus of economic alarm has shifted to the stagnation of new business development in the county.
We continue on a very troubled path.


U.S. Limits Adoptions of Romanian Children
Immigration officials have moved to restrict adoptions of Romanian babies by Americans, saying that only orphans or abandoned children will be allowed in the United States after Aug. 15.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service said on Friday that the authorities generally would make exceptions.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about a pesticide spill at Shasta Lake in northern California misstated the trade name of the chemical involved.
It was Alco, manufactured by the Amvac Chemical corporation of Las Angeles - not Vapam, which is manufactured by ICI Americas Inc. of Willington, Del.


Henie Finkelstein Marries
Henie Finkelstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Finkelstein of Forest Hills, Queens, was married last evening at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., to Gregory Simon, a son of Myra Simon of Hollywood, Fla., and the late Harold Simon.
Rabbi Mayer Perelmuter officiated.
The bride, 23 years old, is studying for a master's degree in nutrition at New York University.
She and the bridegroom, 24, are graduates of Emory University.
He is completing studies at the Kent College of Law in Chicago.


The Nation; New Rows to Hoe in the 'Harvest of Shame'
IN his famous 1960 CBS documentary, "Harvest of Shame," Edward R. Murrow pleaded for Federal legislation to protect, house, and educate the "workers in the sweatshops of the soil," migrant farm laborers.
In dribs and drabs, the years that followed produced a succession of laws designed to lessen the worst abuses against farm workers caught in a life Mr.
Murrow likened to bondage.
But despite decades of intended reforms, Government investigators are finding that farm workers are still denied the basic health, safety, and income protections enjoyed by most other Americans.


St. Ann's Church
To the Editor:
The June 23 Streetscapes column about the deconsecrated 1869 church in Brooklyn Heights now owned by Packer Collegiate Institute referred to it as St.
Ann's Church.
Technically, that is correct.
This
was
St.
Ann's Church.
For in 1967, St.
Ann's parish moved down Clinton Street into the Church of the Holy Trinity, now officially known as the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity.
In actuality, it is the only Episcopal St.
Ann's Church, now the focus of a $16-million restoration effort and home to the prestigious Arts at St.
Ann's performance series.


New Yorkers, etc.
It's been well documented that an increasing number of young adults are returning home to live with their parents, almost always for financial reasons.
They've lost their jobs, they can't afford current rents or they're simply cutting down on expenses.
As a great many parents know, even when their sons and daughters left home, a good percentage of their possessions didn't.
The reason was twofold: the young people usually ended up living in apartments with less than ample space, and even if they were among the fortunate few with adequate room for all their possessions, they wanted to leave a tangible presence, a reminder of themselves, in the family home.


Keep Big Brother Out of Pathmark
To the Editor:
I was surprised and dismayed that the Big Brother surveillance aspect of computerized grocery carts was not mentioned in "Push M for Mayo, Sales Pitch Included" (July 7).
Invisible infrared triggers on the grocery store ceiling record exactly where customers take their videocarts in each aisle.
Data-hungry marketeers will know exactly what goods Jane Doe of 20 Main Street purchased, and when, on a regular basis.


Kirsten E. Luther Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Lars C. Luther of Bethlehem, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kirsten Elizabeth Luther to Jonathan Steven Myers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth R. Myers of Elkins Park, Pa.
An April 1992 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Luther, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from Princeton University and is a Ph.D. candidate in physics at Stanford University.
Her father is a researcher at A.T.&amp;T.
Bell Laboratories in Breinigsville, Pa.
Her mother, Janet Luther, is the treasurer of the Fannie E. Rippel Foundation in Clinton, N.J., a private agency supporting cancer and heart-disease research.


Dr. H. F. Wood, 72, Strep-Infection Expert
Dr.
Harrison F. Wood, a physician who did research into rheumatic fever and streptococcal infection, died on Friday at the Hebrew Home and Hospital in West Hartford, Conn.
He was 72 years old and lived in West Hartford.
He died of emphysema, family members said.


The World; Beneath The Rocks on Japan Inc.'s Playing Field
JAPAN'S stock market scandal has simmered for weeks as a kind of mid-summer diversion, a spectacle of deep bows and ritualized resignations.
But any lingering sense that it reflected nothing more than the quirkier side of Japan Inc. was shattered by a series of events last week that are likely to profoundly affect Japan's financial system, and maybe its political system.
For years, some foreign experts have contended that Japan's stock market is rigged to reinforce the interrelations that hold the Japanese business and political worlds together, with the authorities an integral part of the secretive system.
Last week, the attempts to contain the scandal and prevent it from exposing these interrelations began to break down.
There were increasing public demands for a full accounting of abuses by big brokerage houses, and growing pressure on the ruling Liberal Democratic Party to attack the system's basic unfairness.


Ecotourism
To the Editor: We read the article about ecotourism ("A Sampling of Expeditions," Travel, May 19) with great interest, but we were disappointed that Overseas Adventure Travel was not mentioned among the tour operators.


The Last Word
It's hard not to giggle at a photograph of a tombstone in Paris, Tenn., inscribed with an off-the-hook telephone and the message "Jesus Called and My Darling Sugarbabe Answered." The picture occurs early on in SCORING IN HEAVEN: Gravestones and Cemetery Art of the American Sunbelt States (Aperture, $40) -- the title is taken from a bowler's epitaph -- a collection of more than 200 photographs by Lucinda Bunnen and Virginia Warren Smith.
But you shouldn't laugh.
The monuments shown here commemorate, for the most part, such traditional American values as pride in work and worldly achievement or devotion to God, country or family.
Consider the memorial to the twin sailors, buried at sea, who died in 1945 at the age of 20, or the angel-topped tomb with the photograph of a very young man in uniform and the inscription "Daddy / Our Beloved Father / He Was Too Perfect to Live." The grave of a biker who died in 1977 in Vietnam, which includes the motto "God Forgives, Outlaws Don't," is decorated with fraternal graffiti and empty whisky bottles.
Most touching are the simpler grave sites.
Many, particularly those in the poorer parts of the Southwest, are marked with sun-bleached wooden crosses and adorned with homemade wreaths and plaster statues of Jesus.
These memorials are clearly fragile, themselves returning to dust.
It's good to have them so splendidly documented in this book -- "A Noble Purpose Served Well," to quote another tombstone.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE GENERAL OF THE DEAD ARMY
By Ismail Kadare.  Translated by Derek Coltman.  New Amsterdam Books, $18.95.


Lee Hawley Plans September Bridal
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Hawley Jr. have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Alethea Stewart Hawley and George W. Elkins 4th, a son of Mrs.
Leigh Turner and George W. Elkins, both of Wolfeboro, N.H.
Miss Hawley, who is known as Lee, is 20 years old and is entering her junior year at the University of Richmond.
Her father is the founder of and the managing partner in Saugatuck Associates, a venture-capital firm in Stamford, Conn.


World Markets; How the Dollar Spells Relief
This month's break in the dollar's rally could offer some relief to global investors, even if the pause is brief.
For starters, the decline in the dollar will help the German Bundesbank, which is struggling with rising inflation, and could also take some pressure off interest rates throughout the rest of Europe.


Communing With the Comtesse
Henry Clay Frick, with a modest education and no evident interest in art, had made $1 million in the Pittsburgh steel business by the time he was 30.
That year, 1879, he traveled to Europe for the first time; soon thereafter, he began buying paintings.
Today the Frick Collection, housed in an elegant mansion the industrialist built in 1914 on Fifth Avenue in New York City, is one of the world's most exquisite and important small museums.
PAINTINGS FROM THE FRICK COLLECTION (Abrams, $39.95) is a comprehensive full-color record of paintings in the collection, with 121 pictures reproduced and several additional plates devoted to enlarged details of some of these masterpieces.
With a range from the early 14th century to the late 19th century, paintings at the Frick include remarkable pictures by Boucher, Chardin, Van Dyck, Fragonard, Gainsborough, Goya, Hals, Holbein, Ingres, Piero della Francesca, Rembrandt, Tiepolo, Titian, Turner, Velasquez, Vermeer, Veronese and Whistler.
At the Frick, as almost nowhere else, paintings, sculpture, bronzes, porcelains, silver and period furniture are displayed intimately in spaces for living, with no ropes or glass.
The book provides helpful biographical sketches and invitingly readable brief texts on each painting, written by the museum's curator, Edgar Munhall, its research curator, Bernice Davidson, and its assistant curator, Nadia Tscherny.


Elizabeth O'Brien Weds J. J. Ward
Elizabeth Alliott O'Brien, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. O'Brien of Newton, Mass., was married yesterday at the chapel of Wellesley College in Wellesley, Mass., to James Jay Ward, a son of Suzanne Ward of Middlebury, Vt., and the late Artemas Ward.
The Rev.
John Colloty, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, is the associate director of the Annual Fund at Choate Rosemary Hall School in Wallingford, Conn.
She is a cum laude graduate of the Dana Hall School and Bowdoin College.
Her father is a lawyer in Boston.
Her mother, Nancy Payson O'Brien, teaches piano.


Peace Now?; There's a New Era. Then There's the Mideast.
CONSIDERING this week's American-Soviet summit in Moscow, where the first treaty reducing long-range nuclear arms will be signed, and considering the breakthrough in efforts to convene a Middle East peace conference, it is tempting to wonder whether peace isn't breaking out all over.
Peace is a word that evokes images of handshakes and bear hugs, of treaties and toasts and of enmities forgotten for a spirit of live and let live.
But as every statesman knows, peace in the real world of diplomacy is usually born of very different stuff.


Chestnut Hill Concerts Bring Cellist to Madison
RONALD THOMAS, a cellist, comes to Madison on Friday evening to begin his third season as artistic director of the Chestnut Hill Concerts.
More than a dozen colleagues will be joining him at the four weekly recitals in First Congregational Church.
At the opener at 8:30 P.M. on Friday, the pianist Mihae Lee partners Robert Routch in Schumann's Adagio and Allegro for Horn, Mr.
Thomas in Schubert's "Arpeggione" Sonata, and the violinist Stephanie Chase and Mr.
Thomas in the Shostakovich E minor Trio.
As for the later programs, Brahms, Beethoven and Ravel are offered on Aug. 9, works of Mozart, Debussy, Mendelssohn and Leon Kirchner on Aug. 16, and more Brahms and Shostakovich, plus the Handel-Halvorsen "Passacaglia" at the Aug. 23 finale.


P. B. Wilson Jr. to Wed Karen Leslie Peterson
September wedding plans for Karen Leslie Peterson and Peter Burgis Wilson Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilson of Rome and Greenwich, Conn., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth L. Peterson Jr. of Huntington, L.I.
Miss Peterson, 25 years old, is a research assistant at Standish, Ayer &amp; Wood, investment counselors in Boston.
She is a graduate of William Smith College.
Her father is a principal in Scudder Stevens &amp; Clark, investment counselors in New York.


Miss Doran to Wed Donald Trone Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Doran of Philadelphia have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Melissa Lockwood Doran and Donald Burnell Trone Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Trone of West Chester, Pa.
Miss Doran, 28 years old, graduated from Yale University and received an M.B.A. degree from Villanova University.
She is a client adviser at SEI Capital Resources, an investment service company in Wayne, Pa., where her fiance is the vice president for marketing at SEI Wealth Management.
Her father is a partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius.
Her mother, Susan Doran, is an owner of the Two Susans Boutique in the Chestnut Hill section of Philadelphia.


Owner of Happy Land Building Faces Foreclosure on Properties
Alexander DiLorenzo 3d, the owner of the Bronx building that housed the Happy Land social club and an heir to one of New York's larger real-estate empires, faces foreclosure proceedings on about 100 properties.
Some real-estate professionals say they believe he may have provoked the foreclosures, which affect about 40 percent of his holdings, to force the renegotiation of his debts.


In the 30's, Black Swing Was Golden
American music always looks for its past in all the wrong places.
The latest instance is an attempt to revive symphonies from the "Golden Age," the 1930's.
It's a noble effort to dredge up these waterlogged vessels in search of sunken treasures.
But except for Copland's Short Symphony, a 24-karat nugget, this Golden Age yields only fool's gold.
A symphony is more than a display of orchestral know-how and developmental skill; it's a vision of human experience on an epic scale, like a novel.
Though skillfully written, at times even stirring, the "Great American Symphonies" of Hanson, Harris, Piston and others were not visions of experience, but escape routes from it.
Lacking the intensity and drama of Faulkner or even Steinbeck, they depict America as a Wild West Eden (plenty of cowboys, no Indians) or a prepubescent Playland.
Howard Hanson's Second Symphony, a work of consummate, terrifying professionalism, is a rhapsody in cotton candy, emotionally gaga, and seductively so.
Roy Harris's Third Symphony endows prairie tunes with spiritual authority through Baroque devices of chorale and fugue, Beethovenian fate motifs and Brahmsian pedal points.
This is as good as it gets; your heart pounds at times, but it's still B-movie territory.


BEST SELLERS: July 28, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
2
2
20
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A lawyer's firm is engaged in secret activities.
3
3
10
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
4
5
5
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The disappearance of a couple off Bermuda raises a question: is a creature from the deep responsible?
5
4
12
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
6
6
5
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love.
7
1
PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) The private eye Spenser learns much about his own past while helping a young man track down his mother, who has disappeared.
8 *
7
12
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
9
9
4
THE PIRANHAS, by Harold Robbins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) A young man discovers the ways of Hollywood, Wall Street and organized crime.
10
8
70
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
11
12
2
DARKNESS, by John Saul. (Bantam, $17.50.) A family moves back to a Florida town, where something evil awaits.
12
10
6
THE RUSTLERS OF WEST FORK, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $18.) A frontier novel featuring Hopalong Cassidy, first published in 1951. (LP)
13
13
13
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) On the trail of an insurance scam.
14
1
SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Fine/Putnam, $21.95.) The United States Air Force comes to the aid of the Philippines in a war with China in 1994.
15
8
HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT, by Whitney Otto. (Villard, $18.) The reminiscences of eight women, members of a quilting circle.
16 *
14
6
A SOLDIER OF THE GREAT WAR, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $24.95.) An elderly Italian professor recalls his life.
17 *
1
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America, past, present and future.
2
3
6
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
3
2
36
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
4
6
11
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
5
8
4
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
6
5
3
BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) Two former F.B.I. agents report on the downfall of Paul Castellano, head of the Gambino crime family.
7
4
11
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How the President and his high military commanders made their decisions during the first two years of the Bush Administration.
8
7
4
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
9
1
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
10
12
8
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events and machinations that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
11
13
8
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
12
9
5
PAUL HARVEY'S FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH, edited by Paul Harvey Jr. (Bantam, $15.) Anecdotes told by the radio broadcaster.
13 *
16
10
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated on campus.
14
11
5
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
15
14
3
UNDER THE INFLUENCE, by Peter Hernon and Terry Ganey. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized account of the Anheuser-Busch beer dynasty.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
38
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) An illustrated book in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
2
5
5
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
3
3
81
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
4
1
25
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
5
4
118
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's advice about how to make a personal fortune.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
LONE STAR RISING: Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908-1960, by Robert Dallek. (Oxford University, $30.) Mr.
Dallek, a history professor, attributes to L.B.J. a "sense of unrelenting deprivation" that made him do anything to win the prizes; once in office, he performed magnificently.
The book ends with his election to the Vice Presidency in 1960; a second volume is planned.
TYPICAL, by Padgett Powell. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) Short stories, some very short, well using all the tricks of distillation, timing, bull's-eye observation and Southern colloquial speech.
ALONE, by David Small. (Norton, $19.95.) Mr.
Small's third novel concerns a damaged family yearning for love that's not to be had; its big themes are parenthood, solitude, the loss of the beloved.
WILD PEOPLE: Travels With Borneo's Head-Hunters, by Andro Linklater. (Morgan Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A wacky account, by a British journalist, of a sojourn in Sarawak looking for the primitive but discovering Day-Glo T-shirts, plastic chairs and chain saws suspended among the traditional skull collections.
THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS, by Anne Roiphe. (Summit, $22.95.) A whopping five-generation tale of immigrant Jews from 1878 till just now, tackling nothing less than the nature of human fulfillment as seen through the eyes of a persecuted people.
CHINA BOY, by Gus Lee. (Dutton, $19.95.) This hilarious and poignant coming-of-age novel, set in a California Chinese community in the 1950's, filters the customs and mores of the American present through those of the Chinese past.
BRIEF LIVES, by Anita Brookner. (Random House, $20.) A meditative, quiet novel that reveals the depth beneath the calm of a woman's constricted life, by a sovereign creator of such novels.


'With Fire and Sword'
To the Editor:
In his review of the new translation of Henryk Sienkiewicz's "With Fire and Sword" (June 30), Norman Davies erred in stating that the only previous English-language edition was the 1890 Jeremiah Curtin version, which, he said, "was well designed to repel all readers."


Bush's Stance on Job Standards Is Said to Contradict Court Rulings
A leading civil rights organization made public a study of 18 years of job discrimination cases today, saying it showed that the Bush Administration's approach to this year's civil rights bill "is a radical departure from established legal precedent."
The study was prepared by the New York City law firm Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson for the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.
Contradicting Administration arguments about the bill, it found that the Federal courts had ruled almost without exception that employers could not impose employment standards that discriminated against minority members unless the standards related to job performance.


To Seal Driveways And Patch Big Holes
ASPHALT driveways need prompt repair and periodic sealing, just like roads.
Summer is a good time for driveway maintenance, because most repair and sealing products work best when applied at temperatures from 50 to 85 degrees.
As soon as temperatures allow, repair damage like cracks and potholes, which usually occur in winter and early spring.
To repair cracks that are less than a half-inch wide, brush loose particles with a whisk broom and fill the cracks with liquid filler.


Bondholders Take Their Revenge
The bondholders are getting restless, and battles for control of bankrupt America are intensifying.
The stakes in that fight are greater than ever before, simply because so many good companies are now going broke.
With manageable debt, the companies can prosper.
The question is who will own them.


Castro More Defiant and Isolated as Soviets Shed Marxist Ideology


W. C. Cotter Weds Eileen O'Connell
Eileen Marie O'Connell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. O'Connell of Bloomfield, N.J., was married yesterday at St.
Thomas the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in Bloomfield to William Christopher Cotter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William D. Cotter of Point Pleasant, N.J.
The Rev.
John Gabriel performed the ceremony.
The bride and bridegroom are 28 years old.
The bride, a graduate of Fairfield University, is the director of special projects for the Metro Newark Chamber of Commerce in Newark.
Her father is a Federal administrative law judge in Newark.


The Nation; When an Original Idea Sounds Really Familiar
PLAGIARISM has a long and honorable tradition.
Laurence Sterne drew liberally on Robert Burton's "Anatomy of Melancholy" when he was writing "Tristram Shandy." Immense stretches of Coleridge's "Biographia Literaria" were cribbed from the German philosopher Friedrich Schlegel.
Indeed, the history of literature, according to the Yale critic Harold Bloom, is a history of "misreading" -- his term for the kind of unconscious borrowings that enable a writer to discover his own voice.
"Weaker talents idealize," writes Mr.
Bloom in "The Anxiety of Influence," while "figures of capable imagination appropriate for themselves." Or, as T. S. Eliot more bluntly put it in his essay on the Jacobean dramatist Philip Massinger: "Immature poets imitate; mature poets steal."


Italian Country Style in New Preston
WHEN Doc's opened in 1989 in New Preston, it was delightful.
But because the proprietor, Adam Riess, was so young (24 at the time), we suspected he would soon tire of the venture and move on to something else.
Fortunately for residents of the Litchfield area and others willing to make the drive, that hasn't happened.
Doc's is still going strong in the same simple locale, a small house across the road from Lake Waramaug.
The house is part of the charm, even though the decibel level in the 40-seat dining room escalates rapidly as the place fills up.
Near the entrance, a garden of lettuce, basil, sage, thyme and other herbs hugs the side of the house.
Inside, on each butcher-paper-covered table is a bottle of golden olive oil, waiting to be dribbled on the fresh-baked bread from the kitchen.
There are no bread plates, no butter, and pizzas are served from the covers of large Brie boxes doubling as trays.
A computer-printout menu tells the evening's choices.
As before, you may bring your own wine or beer, and payment is with cash or personal check.


Those Helpful Spiders
Don't kill the spiders in your garden.
Researchers from the University of Tennessee have found that insect damage on cabbage, brussels sprouts and potatoes was significantly less when lots of spiders were on patrol.
"What attracted them was the use of a grass-type mulch, i.e., grass clippings, straw, or salt hay between the rows," says Richard Weir, a Cornell Cooperative Extension agent, in his newsletter, Garden Guides.
When spiders were removed from the mulched plots, insect damage was the same as on those crops growing in unmulched rows of bare ground.


Last Of the Old-Time Summits
President Bush's trip to Moscow this week marks the end of the superpower era, not just for the Soviet Union but for the bilateral Soviet-American focus of world affairs.
The end of the cold war did not produce the giant condominium that many feared.
But neither is there a renewal of what Henry Luce called "the American century," a lonely U.S. superpower minding and ministering to dependents.
The main event of the Moscow summit meeting will be the signing of the Start treaty, reducing strategic missile arsenals on both sides.
The U.S. and Soviet Union will still have enough nuclear power to destroy the world many times over, but the meaning of that power has changed.
They won't run the world.


Tour Company Drops Ship Order
After a series of disagreements with the Finnish shipbuilder Rauma Yards, Society Expeditions has canceled plans to add a third cruise ship to its fleet.
The ship was due to be delivered July 8 to Society, a 16-year-old tour operator known for its tours to remote destinations.
The new vessel, the Society Adventurer, was to have begun her maiden voyage immediately from England to Greenland and Iceland.
Society had also booked passengers on trips it had planned for the ship to the Hudson Bay, Amazon and Antarctic over the next nine months.


'Radio Days'
To the Editor:
"Too Many Stations, Too Few Buyers and Depressed Prices," (June 30) was informative, but several points need to be clarified.
The characterization of radio revenue as being "virtually unchanged" from 1989 to 1990 is less than accurate.
Radio revenue grew 4.8 percent in 1990, faster than the overall advertising growth rate of 3.8 percent for the year and a respectable showing when compared with the decrease in newspaper revenue.


'EXCUSE ME,' HE SAID
Albany


As Hilton Head Grows, What of the Environment?
When Lois Richardson moved to this sea island 35 years ago, one road and one combination gas station/grocery served the needs of about 600 people.
The five or six white families who lived on the island had retired from corporate careers elsewhere and most of the residents were the descendants of slaves, who, after the Civil War, earned the rights to the rice plantations on which they had worked.


'Most People Are Honest'
To the Editor:
As a misguided guardian of culture, Richard B. Woodward  [ "True Confessions of a Nielsen Family," July 14 ]  boasts about filling out his Nielsen diary with "outrageous, wholesale, novelistic fictions" and muses that if enough pople like himself were willing to go to such lengths, it would wreck the television ratings system.
Probably so.


Miss Smith Wed to Christopher Ennis
Kathleen Mary Smith, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Smith of Wyckoff, N.J., was married there yesterday at St.
Elizabeth's Roman Catholic Church to Christopher William Ennis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Beavan Ennis of Armonk, N.Y.
The Rev.
Eugene M. Lynch, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Ennis, 26 years old, graduated from the College of the Holy Cross and received a master's degree in education from Fordham University.
She was until recently a teacher at St.
Joseph's of Yorkville School in Manhattan.
Her father is the vice president of direct marketing at Dun's Marketing Services in Parsippany, N.J.
Her mother, Kathleen Smith, is a services marketing representative for I.B.M. in Franklin Lakes, N.J.


What's Behind U.S. Advisories
Between June 1989 and February 1991, according to a State Department report, 139 Americans were the victims of violence in Mexico.
There were 39 murders or attempted murders, 29 rapes or attempted rapes, 3 kidnappings and 68 assaults and armed robberies, the report said.
Yet Mexico does not rate a strong travel advisory informing Americans visiting the country about the risk of violent crime, only a mild "notice" advising Americans about driving restrictions in Mexico City because of air pollution.
By contrast, just a few days after a 50-year-old American tourist from Connecticut was shot to death by two bandits during a wildlife tour in Kenya in 1989, the State Department issued a travel advisory describing "a few instances of attacks on tourists," and recommending that Americans travel in groups with reputable guides when visiting game parks.


A Shot of Cultural Adrenaline at Lincoln Center
Maybe it wasn't all that surprising that the management of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, after watching real-estate developers get rich for two decades by filling its neighborhood with high-rise apartments, would decide to get in on the act itself.
After all, why shouldn't the institution whose real estate has made profits for so many others get a little something for its own balance sheet?
Thus was born 3 Lincoln Center, 60 stories of black glass recently completed at the corner of 65th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, intended as the most upscale of the many upscale condominiums in the Lincoln Center neighborhood -- and the only one with the right to call itself an actual part of the performing arts complex.
Three Lincoln Center, which has been marketed as "the first opportunity to live at Lincoln Center," is, like Museum Tower, which rose in 1983 over the Museum of Modern Art, a case of commerce being put to the service of art.


Review/Concert; Mozart's 'Requiem,' Choreographed
For any other festival and similar circumstances, this would be merely a time of transition.
For the Salzburg Festival, which opened this evening in spectacular fashion, 1991 promises to be one of the biggest years ever.
When Herbert von Karajan died two years ago, he left plans for the festival, through this season.
Shortly after Karajan's death, Gerard Mortier was made artistic director, a post Karajan had held in fact though not in name, but Mr.
Mortier must wait until next year to realize the bold departures he has announced.


And 6 More Ideas
To the Sports Editor:


Mallets, Musicians and Shadow Puppets
Widiyanto S. Putro, an 11th-generation Indonesian puppet master, sits cross-legged in his traditional court dress facing a white cloth screen.
His fingers move deftly as he manipulates the puppets, whose shadows are thrown onto the screen by an overhead lamp, and with his feet he manipulates a mallet, clappers and chimes that simulate the noise of battle and help to guide the 13-piece gamelan orchestra sitting cross-legged behind him.
Mr.
Widiyanto is performing a thousand-year-old shadow puppet drama known as "wayan kulit," twice daily, except Mondays and Tuesdays, at the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery on the Mall here.
The show is part of an exhibition called "Court Arts of Indonesia."


The Network Takeovers: Why ABC Survived Best
DAVID W. BURKE WAS A formal man.
A vice president of ABC News, he was renowned for his starched white shirts with gold cuff links, round tortoise-shell glasses and fastidiously trimmed sandy hair.
High-minded and exacting, the son of a Brookline, Mass., policeman, he was known around ABC News as "the headmaster." But here he was at the Arizona Biltmore in Phoenix, on his feet, clapping like an Amway salesman.
He looked down at his hands, and willed them to stop.
"Christ, what the hell am I doing?" he remembers thinking.
He glanced around and saw 160 fellow executives, more than half of them from ABC, hollering like cheerleaders at this, the first management retreat since Capital Cities Communications officially swallowed the network on Jan. 3, 1986.


Cool Watchbands May Even Feel Cool
When the temperature and humidity run high, a wristwatch can feel like a shackle.
Traditional bands of heavy metal links or leather tanned in somber hues can look and feel hot and constrictive.
A wide assortment of breathable, washable summer watchbands for men and women can be found at Paul Stuart (45th Street and Madison Avenue).
Oxford-cloth bands in pastel pink, blue or yellow are $6.50.
Solid grosgrain ribbon bands in forest green, burgundy, navy or yellow are $4.50.
Two- and three-color striped grosgrain ribbon styles come in many color combinations, wide and narrow stripes in several shades of red and blue, white, emerald green, black and bright yellow, also $4.50.
Some Leather Offerings
For those who prefer leather, a temporary switch to a lighter shade may appeal.
Melon- or honey-colored straps of English saddle leather are $25 at Paul Stuart.
Lizard skin bands in pale gray or oatmeal are $34.50.


Reporter's Notebook; At Happy Land Mass-Murder Trial, Days of Tears, Humor and Boredom
The long-awaited trial of one of the worst mass-murder cases in the nation unfolded slowly and almost uneventfully in a quiet, half-empty, wood-paneled room in the Bronx County Court House last week.
Six days into the trial of Julio Gonzalez, the 37-year-old Cuban refugee who has admitted he set fire to the Happy Land Social Club, the prosecution had only just completed establishing what everyone already knew -- that each of the 87 victims who died in the fire on March 25, 1990 had died of smoke inhalation.
Judge Burton B. Roberts turned to a weary jury and apologetically explained, "This is not the stuff from which television dramas are made."


With Fresh Corn at Hand, the Simplest Recipes Are the Best
THE season for fresh corn on the cob is now in full swing.
Because of the extremely warm weather in May and June, corn matured quite early in some parts of the tristate region, notably southern New Jersey and eastern Long Island.
The best place to buy corn is from a farm or a farm stand that carries it, freshly picked, every day.
Corn should be purchased in the morning, before it has had a chance to sit out in the heat.
And it should be refrigerated as soon as possible.
Corn treated this way will taste sweeter than the corn purchased closer to dinner time.


Resist Searches
To the Editor:
Tom Wicker, in "For Whom The Bell Tolls" (column, July 7), advises us not to resist police searches on a bus, possibly in a remote place, despite a Supreme Court opinion to the contrary.
Reasonable law-abiding citizens will and should resist such searches unless police officers can present a valid search warrant.
Those who take civil rights seriously have no choice, unless we are reconciled to letting totalitarianism make additional inroads into our political system.
KENNETH R. BURLEY Maryville, Tenn., July 8, 1991


Man Kills Wife With a Hammer and Slits His Wrists, Police Say
A 59-year-old Manhattan man bludgeoned his wife to death yesterday morning with a hammer, then slit his wrists before calling the police several hours later, the police said.
And in Brooklyn, a woman stabbed her boyfriend to death after he struck her on the head with a bottle, the police said.


Fall Wedding Plans For Michele Sorgen
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard P. Sorgen of Dix Hills, L.I., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Michele Sorgen and Lance Lutz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wesley Lutz of Jackson, Mich.
Miss Sorgen and her fiance are 26 years old and graduates of the University of Michigan.
She is a senior consultant at Andersen Consulting in Chicago.
Her father is a senior vice president and the technology chief at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


STRIKEOUTS AND PSYCH-OUTS
Are you working for the Pittsburgh Pirates, or what?
The Mets' team spirit has never been stronger, now that they have learned to play as a team, instead of depending on one or two players as in former years.
The anecdotes in your article about Dr.
Lans only revive memories of old feuds, failures and grievances.
WENDY FROMER
Brooklyn


Film; Oliver Stone, Under Fire Over the Killing of J.F.K.
Camelot Productions' research department is on the second floor of a shabby former bus depot on Annunciation Street, a few minutes' drive from where Oliver Stone is filming his controversial interpretation of the assassination of John F. Kennedy.
The full 26 volumes of the Warren Commission hearings occupy a metal shelf alongside several books that see the President's assassination, on Nov. 22, 1963, as part of a conspiracy and the Warren report as a Government cover-up.
There is a videotape library; there are copies of Congressional investigations, C.I.A. reports, Xeroxed magazine articles from 20 years ago.
Mr.
Stone, the writer-director of "Platoon," "Born on the Fourth of July" and, most recently, "The Doors," has suggested a visit to the research department.
His purpose is clear.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
WHEN Happy Fine moved to Jersey City five years ago, he took to the old waterfront city right off.
Jersey City reminded him of his own hometown, Boston, a place of street-corner bars where people love to talk sports as much as they love to talk politics.
It didn't take long for Mr.
Fine, a 44-year-old sportswriter and a cable television consultant for high school basketball games, to dip into the rich lore of Jersey City history and hear famous names like Flip Wilson, Ozzie Nelson or Kool and the Gang, all people with Jersey City roots.
Nor did it take long for Mr.
Fine, whose real first name is Laurence, to come up with the idea that such a colorful past ought to have a formal showcase.


Alicia A. Galanter To Marry Next Year
Prof. and Mrs.
Eugene Galanter of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alicia Anderson Galanter, to Roland Dominic Walton, the son of John Walton of Radlett, Hertfordshire, England, and Countess Annette D'Exea Walton of Cambridge, England.
A July 1992 wedding is planned.
Miss Galanter, 24 years old, is a painter living in London.
She graduated with honors from Cambridge University.
Her father is a professor of experimental psychology and the director of the Psychophysics Laboratory at Columbia University.
Mrs.
Galanter is the chief executive of Adams-Bannister-Cox, a textbook publishing firm in New York.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Valenzuela Is Promoted
FERNANDO VALENZUELA, trying to return to the major leagues with the California Angels, moved up to Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League on Friday.
After a four-game rehabilitation stint with Class AA Midland in the Texas League, Valenzuela joined the Class AAA Trappers and is expected to start tomorrow against Tacoma.
"I'm trying to go back to the big leagues," the 30-year-old pitcher said as Trapper Manager MAX OLIVERAS and an Angels scout looked on.


Teaching the 'Realies' To Fight for Themselves
When Nicol Williamson departed from the script to whack Evan Handler instead of patting him with the broadside of a sword in the play "I Hate Hamlet" in May, he did more than get Mr.
Handler's attention.
He also focused audience attention on a rapidly growing specialty: choreographing fights for plays, television and movies.
Fight direction has become a "profession unto itself," and teaching stage combat has even blossomed at universities, according to J. Allen Suddeth, president of the Society of American Fight Directors, a professional organization for the breed, with more than 150 members.


Political Talk
Talk About Insiders
While Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins elbow each other from a distance over budgets and state aid to New York City, the Governor's son, Andrew, and another longtime Cuomo adviser, Peter J. Johnson Jr., are quietly playing roles in the Dinkins administration -- to the consternation of some Dinkins aides, who see them as potential Trojan horses.


Does Military Adventurism Proclaim Our National Decline?
To the Editor:
Don't we have any national leaders who will tell the country that we are falling into the trap that the historian Paul Kennedy described as typical for nations in decline?
Mr.
Kennedy noted that as a nation senses it is weakening politically and economically, there is an impulse to resort to military adventures to demonstrate power, even though this activity ultimately accelerates decline.


Review/Opera; An Up Side and a Down To the Updating of Verdi
In one of the profounder contradictions of current musical politics, Roger Norrington and his London Classical Players spent Saturday night trying to materialize the past while just across the plaza at Lincoln Center, the New York City Opera's new production of "La Traviata" was trying to forget it.
The search for the cutting edge these days goes in opposite directions, it would seem.
In a weekend titled a "Mozart Experience," Mr.
Norrington's period instruments and practices constituted a kind of seance, summoning dead loved ones.
"La Traviata" in Nicholas Muni's new configuration told us, on the other hand, that Violetta, Alfredo and Germont are not of mid-19th-century Paris but instead live right down the street in a trans-Atlantic world of upscale pads, downtown nightclubs and the AIDS ward.


Stocks Firmer in Tokyo
Stock prices in Tokyo were up at midday today in light trading.
By the end of the morning session, the 225-issue Nikkei average had advanced 89.82 points, or nearly four-tenths of 1 percent, to 23,608.89.


Boy, 12, Held in Shooting of Man
A 12-year-old Brooklyn boy was in custody yesterday after shooting and wounding a 65-year-old man in an attempted robbery on a street near the man's house in Queens late Saturday, the police said.
The name of the youth, who is from the East New York section, was not released because of his age.
He was arrested as a juvenile delinquent and was in Spofford Youth Center pending an appearance in Family Court.


CHRONICLE
When Carnegie Hall begins its second century this fall, concertgoers will be treated to an all-Japanese orchestra composed of musicians who trained at the same conservatory but perform with many different orchestras.
The group, the Saito Kinen Orchestra -- led by SEIJI OZAWA, a product of the school, the Toho Gakuen School of Music -- will make its American debut as an ensemble in a performance on Sept. 24.
This is the players' third time together; they played twice in Europe to ecstatic reviews.


U.S. RENEGOTIATES SOME S.&amp;L. DEALS TO REDUCE COSTS
With an angry Congress complaining, Federal regulators have begun renegotiating some of the biggest sales of failed savings and loans to private investors and have started to withdraw many financial breaks granted to other investors.
The Government says it is trying to save taxpayers billions of dollars.
Exercising some of its options has already produced savings of more than $1 billion, the regulators say, and the renegotiations could produce as much $2 billion more in savings.


Gooden Nails Up His Old Stopper Sign
Dwight Gooden's funky new curveball helped restore some stability to the Mets' rotation Saturday night.
Gooden, who has experimented with a novel curveball for weeks, used it almost exclusively against the Padres in crafting a 4-0 victory for the Mets, ending their slide of losses at four straight and bringing a halt to the torrent of runs starting pitchers had given up lately.


In Hartford, No Budget, Just Anxiety
As Connecticut enters its fifth week without a budget, government goes on much like a family addicted to credit cards: with the need to pay up comfortingly distant in some dim tomorrow, costs are measured mainly in anxiety today.
The General Assembly and Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. paid another installment on both counts on Friday when they agreed on a third temporary budget, only a week long, half the length of the previous ones.


GROUPS PRESSURE BUSH TO INCREASE MEDICAID ACCESS
The Bush Administration has come under growing pressure from its own advisers and from four of the most powerful health-care organizations to propose ambitious, potentially expensive changes in the nation's health-care system to protect uninsured people.
A report drafted for an advisory panel appointed by the Administration recommends expanding Medicaid to cover doctors' services and hospital care for 10 million people below the poverty level with no health insurance.


The U.N. Today
General Assemby There are no scheduled meetings.


Big Madison Sq. Garden Facelift: 'Tasteful' With Teal
Will Madison Square Garden be a less raucous place when "Blue Heaven" -- its uppermost and famously rowdy tier -- is redone in violet or teal?
The New York City landmark that is home to the Knicks basketball team, the Rangers hockey team, horse shows, rock concerts and the circus, is nearing the end of a $200 million renovation.


Coors Selects Agencies For 2 New Products
The Coors Brewing Company, Golden, Colo., has assigned advertising accounts for two new products.
Tatham/RSCG, Chicago, has been awarded Coors Cutter, a non-alcoholic brew to be introduced nationally on Sept. 30 with the slogan "Nothing cuts it like a Cutter." This is the first Coors product assigned to Tatham, although the agency has worked on projects for the brewer.
Billings were not disclosed.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Home Section on July 18 misidentified the garden where a Hibiscus moscheutos bloomed early.
It was the Conservatory Garden in Central Park, not the Central Park Conservatory.


First Anniversary of Kuwaiti Invasion Commemorated Aboard Museum


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 29


Question Box
Lazzeri in N.Y. Crowd
Q.
Tony Lazzeri, who was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame last weekend, played most of his major league career with the New York Yankees, but he also played for New York's other two teams, the Giants and the Brooklyn Dodgers.
How many other Hall of Fame members accomplished this?


Bone May Tie Mass Killer to Victim in Ohio
As the police department here continued to investigate its handling of complaints about a man accused of mass murder, investigators in Ohio said today that they believed they had found part of a hip bone belonging to a 19-year-old who in 1978 may have been the first victim in the string of slayings.
The Milwaukee police declined to comment about the status of the departmental investigation, in which three officers were suspended Friday by Chief of Police Philip Arreola.


Coach Suspended Over Slurs
A high school coach accused of using racial slurs and physically abusing students has been suspended for five years.
The school board voted Friday night to suspend the coach, Edward Frank Murin, after lawyers for the State Department of Education had suggested that the district would be denied state funds after its earlier refusal to suspend Mr.
Murin and prohibit him from coaching.


Bone May Tie Mass Killer to Victim in Ohio
As the police department here continued to investigate its handling of complaints about a man accused of mass murder, investigators in Ohio said today that they believed they had found part of a hip bone belonging to a 19-year-old who in 1978 may have been the first victim in the string of slayings.
The Milwaukee police declined to comment about the status of the departmental investigation, in which three officers were suspended Friday by Chief of Police Philip Arreola.


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT BUSH will nominate WILLIAM E. RYERSON as Ambassador to Albania, State Department officials say.
Mr.
Ryerson is now the sole American diplomat in Tirana, the Albanian capital.
The United States resumed diplomatic relations with Albania in March after 52 years.
Mr.
Ryerson began learning Albanian last year while he was a consular officer in Yugoslavia.
His sole assistant in Tirana is an Albanian interpreter, KESTRINA BUDINA.


Is New York Inefficient? Try Parking Illegally
It has long been illegal in New York City to park more than 12 inches from the curb.
It has also been against the law to pump coin after coin into a parking meter, turning a one-hour spot into an all-day refuge, or to double-park during alternate-side-of-the-street hours.
Until now, almost every motorist who did these things got away with them.
No more.


Barbara Kider Wed To Richard J. Zakin
Barbara Sue Kider, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Kider of Bellerose, Queens, was married yesterday at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden to Richard Joseph Zakin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Zakin of Worthington, Ohio.
Rabbi Stephen Pearce performed the ceremony.


Slave Owner's 1791 Act of Emancipation Endures
In a pasture next to an old slaves' cemetery, more than 500 people gathered tonight to pay homage to a forgotten Virginia aristocrat and an enduring ideal -- freedom.
The setting was apt.
The Northern Neck of Virginia, wedged between the Potomac and Rappahannock Rivers, is the birthplace of a number of Americans identified with the concept of liberty.
George Washington was born a few miles from here, as were James Madison and James Monroe.


Corrections
An obituary on July 3 about the actress Lee Remick omitted one of her survivors.
He is her brother Bruce Waldo Remick of Springfield, Va.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Smooth Transition at Top For Educational Foundation
THE Advertising Educational Foundation, for the first time since its formation in 1983, has made a change in its top leadership, with one longtime industry executive succeeding another.
Eugene H. Kummel has become chairman and chief executive of the foundation, which sponsors programs to extend ties between the academic and advertising worlds.
He has replaced Alfred J. Seaman, who assumes the new titles of founder chairman and chairman of the executive committee.


Astros End Skid and Beat Pirates With Casey (Candaele) at the Bat
Casey Candaele homered and scored four runs today and Ryan Bowen earned his first major league victory as the Houston Astros snapped a losing streak at seven games with a 9-7 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates.
The Astros scored five runs in the third off Zane Smith and held on for Bowen, who went five innings, allowing four runs on six hits.
Jim Clancy, the fourth Houston pitcher, got the final three outs for his fifth save.


Football; Teammate's Troubles Cloud Steeler Camp
A disturbing silence engulfed the St.
Vincent College campus, site of the Pittsburgh Steelers' training camp, here on Saturday.
It came a day after published reports that a veteran offensive lineman, Terry Long, twice attempted suicide at his suburban Pittsburgh home Wednesday afternoon after learning the day before that he had failed a test for steroid use.
Players expressed shock, disappointment and sadness over the reports, but refused to confirm their accuracy.
They said team officials, including the coaching staff, had not met with players to tell them what happened.
It seems no one knew anything about whether Long had used steroids.


World Economies


Arens Mutes Hard Line on a Conference
Defense Minister Moshe Arens today reaffirmed Israeli statements that his country and the United States agreed in principle on the matter of Palestinian representation at a Middle East peace conference.
But senior Bush Administration officials said there was still no agreement on the composition of the Palestinian delegation.


Kenyans Do Some Soul-Searching After the Rape of 71 Schoolgirls
Outwardly, St.
Kizito's co-ed boarding school, set in the coffee-growing country of central Kenya, was much like any other in this African nation: overcrowded, poorly managed, staffed with underpaid teachers yet apparently calm.
But one night this month 71 teen-age schoolgirls were raped by male students and 19 others died in a night of dormitory violence that reportedly began with a protest over fees and then ran on unchecked by the local police or teachers.


Magazines Feel Pinch As Advertising Drops
In magazines as in people, looking good is often half the battle.
So when advertising pages plunge as drastically as they have this year, the impact on the size, the look and the feel of a magazine can be almost as devastating as the damage to the bottom line.
In other words, looking like a loser is the surest way of becoming one.
This presents a dilemma.
Many magazines observe strict ratios between their advertising pages and their editorial pages -- typically, 60 percent advertising, 40 percent editorial.
But when advertising pages plummet, should editorial pages be reduced proportionately?


Networks Get the Saturday Night Blues
For the networks, Saturday night is, without challenge, the loneliest night of the week.
Many people just do not watch television on Saturday.
They go out instead.
Others watch movies.
Cable channels frequently put their best movies on Saturday and movies on videocassettes are rented most often on Saturday.
Since the late 1980's, only NBC has been able to make money on its Saturday programs.


From There to Intolerance
America has many contradictions, but none greater than the fact that it was founded by puritans and yet invented tolerance.
The tension between the busybodies of 1620 and the free spirits of 1776 has often marked American history: the puritan had the upper hand in Prohibition, the permissive had it in Woodstock.
Like all things American, the contrast knob is turned up highest in California.
San Franciscans treat homosexuals almost without prejudice, but 60 percent of Californians tell pollsters they want contraceptives forcibly implanted into drug-taking single mothers (thus simultaneously sanctioning fornication and eugenics).
Los Angeles allows people of every color and creed complete freedom to sink or swim, yet employs a police force notorious for its racism and violence.


Hooligans and the Neighbors' Cow
A chill leaps out from the news that in Mlawa, an agricultural town in Poland, a mob of 150 young drunks recently stormed through the well-furnished homes of nine affluent gypsy families, smashing, looting and beating.
But beyond the reminder of savage scapegoating there is also an economic lesson here, a lesson in envy.
Communism is rapidly disappearing as a formal system, but eradicating its emotional power will take much longer.
Families in the West aspire to keep up with the Joneses; the resentful impulse in Communist societies is to stymie them.


Delta Offer To Pan Am Increased
Delta Air Lines yesterday raised its offer for Pan American World Airways' shuttle and European routes to $310 million, an increase of $50 million.
The new bid was not a surprise.
Last week, Trans World Airlines and American Airlines joined in a $310 million offer for various assets of Pan Am, which has been operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection since January.


Frenchwoman, No. 146, Upsets McNeil for Title
Even given the weak field, Isabelle Demongeot of France did not figure to go far in the first Westchester Ladies Cup tennis tournament at Manhattanville College.
But the 24-year-old from St.
Tropez, ranked 146th in the world, upset top-seeded Laura Gildemeister of Peru, 6-1, 6-1, in the semifinals Saturday.
And today, she beat second-seeded Lori McNeil of Houston, 6-4, 6-4, to win her first tournament on the women's circuit.


McDonnell Delays New Jet
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation has enough potential orders to begin building a proposed jumbo jetliner, but it will not do so until it lines up investment partners, a company official said on Friday.
The St.
Louis-based aerospace company and military contractor has delayed the $4 billion MD-12X to reduce its financial risk, Herbert J. Lanese, the chief financial officer, said in an interview.


Baseball; Yankees Stripped Of Victory
Just when he could least afford it, Scott Kamieniecki was kissed by an exotic dancer in front of 30,000 witnesses.
Nursing a one-run lead yesterday in the second inning at Yankee Stadium, holding runners at first and second bases with one out, the rookie right-hander was embraced and bussed by Laurie Stathopoulos -- alias Toppsy Curvey, now appearing nightly in somewhat unconventional garb at the Fantasy Island club in Nyack, N.Y.


Treasury Will Sell Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings for this week have been limited tentatively to $20.8 billion in three- and six-month bills at the usual weekly auction today, with maturity dates of Oct. 31 and Jan. 1.
This lull comes after a busy week, when the Treasury auctioned one-, two- and five-year securities amounting to $34.25 billion, plus the $20.8 billion raised through the usual Monday auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday the three-month bill was bid at 5.56 percent and the six-month bill at 5.67 percent.
The following new fixed-income issues are scheduled this week: TAXABLE ONE DAY DURING THE WEEK
Carco Auto Loan Master Trust, 1991-2/1991-3, $1 billion of asset-backed certificates, Aaa/AAA/AAA.
Salomon Brothers.
Freeport-McMoran Inc., $750 million face amount zero-coupon convertible subordinated debentures, due in 2006, Ba3/BB-/NR.
Kidder, Peabody.
FMC Corp., $625 million face amount zero-coupon convertible senior subordinated debentures, due in 2011.
Ba3/BB-/NR.
Morgan Stanley. (Source: MCM Corporation; Ratings: Moody's/Standard &amp; Poor's/Duff &amp; Phelps.) TAX-EXEMPT MONDAY
Houston public improvement refunding bonds, 1991-A, general obligation, $112.7 million, on a negotiated basis with Goldman, Sachs.
Mesa, Ariz., utility system, $91.3 million general obligation bonds.
Merrill Lynch.
TUESDAY
Georgia Environmental Authority, $50 million general-obligation revenue bonds.
Merrill Lynch.
WEDNESDAY
New York City, $1 billion in tax anticipation notes. Merrill Lynch.
New York State, $191.3 million, general obligation. J. P. Morgan.  THURSDAY
Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District, $120 million in revenue bonds negotiated with Merrill Lynch.


Michael Rebuts Comment By Prospect's Mother
Gene Michael, the Yankees' general manager, said yesterday that the attorney advising Brien Taylor, whom the team made the first pick in June's free-agent draft, was misleading Taylor's family about the Yankees' intentions.
In return, the attorney, Scott Boras, said the Yankee general manager was making matters worse by suggesting that the Taylors were "incapable of conscious thought."
Michael held an informal news conference in his office to say that charges levied against him by Bettie Taylor, Brien's mother, were unfair.
Mrs.
Taylor said Saturday at her home in North Carolina that Michael had been disrepectful, and she wondered, "Is it because we're back here, we're poor and we're black?"


Reclaiming Track Is Runners' Goal
Two of New York City's enduring problems were symbolized recently by the sight of high-school runners at the 168th Street Armory sprinting on the perimeter of the floor -- while in the middle homeless men and women slept or watched.
About five years ago, the armory on Broadway, became a full-time shelter for the homeless and the runners were forced out.


Washington Talk; Freshman, No Novice, Does Battle For a Base
When Robert E. Andrews walks the streets of this city, he can easily be mistaken for a lanky, clean-shaven Capitol Hill aide.
But his anonymity vanishes when he returns to Bellmawr, N.J., each weekend.
At home, he is the local Congressman who cannot even go to the store without being asked how he plans to save the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard and Naval Station.


A Hemisphere's Worth of Competitors Will Gather This Week in Havana
ARCHERY: The United States is sending its best team to Cuba and is favored to win the competition.
Jay Barrs, who won the men's event in 1987, and Denise Parker, the defending women's champion, are favored.


CHRONICLE
HARRIET S. RABB, a specialist in equal rights who has won landmark sex-discrimination lawsuits, has been named the GEORGE M. JAFFIN Professor of Law and Social Responsibility at Columbia Law School.
The director of clinical education at Columbia Law School, Professor Rabb, 49, is the first to hold the professorship.
In the 1970's, she was director of the school's employment rights project.
She represented women at Newsweek, Reader's Digest, The New York Times, the New York Telephone Company and some major law firms in sex-bias lawsuits that led to cash settlements and affirmative-action programs.


New York Gives Up Its Hunt For Top Parking Scofflaws
The New York City Parking Violations Bureau is giving up on collecting more than $2.15 million in unpaid parking tickets from 28 of the city's top 44 scofflaws.
Agency officials say it is just not worth the trouble.
For one thing, some of them apparently do not exist -- like the city's No. 1 scofflaw, who owes $182,212 for 2,807 parking tickets on 36 cars registered under a fake identity at a false address.


NEWS SUMMARY
InternationalA2-7
The changes in U.S.-Soviet relations are noticeable on more than the political front.
Soviets have become more familiar with America, a land that seems less threatening but still the one to reckon with.Page A1


Bone May Tie Mass Killer to Victim in Ohio
As the police department here continued to investigate its handling of complaints about a man accused of mass murder, investigators in Ohio said today that they believed they had found part of a hip bone belonging to a 19-year-old who in 1978 may have been the first victim in the string of slayings.
The Milwaukee police declined to comment about the status of the departmental investigation, in which three officers were suspended Friday by Chief of Police Philip Arreola.


As Hearings on Thomas Approach, Attention Focuses on Foes' Strategy
The next few weeks may be crucial for President Bush's nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court as it becomes clearer whether liberal groups, whose opposition would be central to defeating the nomination, will be able to form a coalition strong enough to mount a serious challenge.
Most of the important groups have not yet decided whether to oppose the Thomas nomination.
Mr.
Bush's selection of a black candidate with conservative views appears to have caused consternation among several potential opponents, and that will affect the depth and breadth of any coalition.


C&amp;S/Sovran's Account Goes to Austin Agency
The advertising implications of the merger of the NCNB Corporation and the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation have taken another intriguing turn.
Last week, when the two corporations announced their merger, speculation began as to which agency might be awarded the account for the merged bank, which will be known as Nationsbank.
The likely contenders for that account, which could have total billings of $50 million to $60 million, seemed to be NCNB's agency and C&amp;S/Sovran's agency.
NCNB's estimated $35 million account is handled by the Dallas office of Bozell Inc.
C&amp;S/Sovran had been conducting a review of its $20 million account since September, when C&amp;S merged with Sovran.


Quotation of the Day
"One Soviet woman went to an American doctor and tried to strike up a conversation about Toulouse-Lautrec. She was shocked that he had no idea who he was. Our doctor typically would've known all about Toulouse-Lautrec, though he'd have only a vague idea where her liver is." -- Tatyana Tolstaya, a writer who spends much of her time in the United States.  [ A6:1. ]


Wildlife Is Threatened By Oil Leak From Ship
Oil from a Japanese ship that sank off the Washington coast on Monday is expected to wash up on shore in the next day and could endanger thousands of birds and sea mammals in a national park, officials said today.
More than a dozen birds covered with oil, some of them dead and some alive, have already been found on beaches, said a spokesman for the State Department of Wildlife, Doug Zimmer.


U.S. Approves Women's Heart Study
Overruling an advisory group, Federal health officials are planning to pay for a study of whether low doses of aspirin protect women against heart attacks.
If the study meets the scientific standards of the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute, it will be combined with a study of 45,000 nurses age 50 and older who have been through menopause.
The aspirin portion of the study, which will be conducted by researchers at Harvard University, is scheduled to begin in September.


Doctor With AIDS Virus Evokes Anger and Pathos
In town, people were talking about the letter from the hospital.
"Mine came yesterday," was the greeting often heard.
"Did you get one?" One woman at the county fair said to another: "I'm not really scared, but I'm not sure what it means. I know I don't have AIDS, but can you be really sure?"
And a man placed a call to the hospital, shouting, "You took away my right to choose! You took away my rights!"


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing; Hold the Drinks and Shrimp: Book Parties Are Waning
IT is generally agreed that publishing is less fun than it used to be.
Financial pressures are greater, lunches shorter and more sober, dismissals frequent.
Books, once venerated for some intrinsic but intangible value, are now frequently viewed as mere units of commerce.
Publishers fret about a grim future in an America of television and Nintendo addicts.
But like revelers on a sinking ship, or rulers of a declining empire, publishers have always demonstrated a heartening ability to set aside their cares and give a party.
No pretext was too flimsy, no expense too outlandish for the opportunity to throw off the pretense of being businesslike and become loquaciously dissolute among like-minded colleagues.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Tom Bolton, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Daryl Irvine, pitcher, from Pawtucket of the International League.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Mike Marshall, first baseman, and assigned him to Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Recalled Jeff Carter, pitcher, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Greg Hibbard, pitcher, to Vancouver.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Designated Vance Law, third baseman, for assignment.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Recalled Jeff Parrett, pitcher, from Richmond of the International League.
Optioned Mike Bell, infielder, to Richmond.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Called up Andujar Cedeno, infielder; Jose Tolentio, first baseman, and Dean Wilkins, pitcher, from Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Eric Anthony, outfielder, and Eric Yelding, infielder, to Tucson.
Released Ken Oberkfell, infielder.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Placed Bob Walk, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Jeff Banister, catcher, to Buffalo of the American Association.
Called up Carlos Garcia, infielder, and Tom Prince, catcher, from Buffalo.
Football  National Football League  CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Keith Van Horne, tackle, and Brad Muster, running back, to two-year contracts.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Randy Kirk, linebacker.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Waived Terence Barber, wide receiver.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Signed Bob Golic, defensive lineman.
LOS ANGELAS RAMS -- Signed Robert Cox, tackle.


Walter Hetfield 3d, 85, Ex-Judge in New Jersey
Walter L. Hetfield 3d, a retired Union County judge who is believed to have been the youngest person to become a judge in New Jersey, died on Friday at his home in Scotch Plains, N.J.
He was 85 years old.
He died of arteriosclerotic heart disease, a spokesman for the family said.


Manhattan Man Held in Abuse of Girl, 13
A 51-year-old Manhattan man was arrested yesterday and accused of sexually abusing a 13-year-old girl, the police said.
The man was identified as Rogelio Otero, but to protect the identity of the victim, who lived in the same household with him, the police did not release his exact address.


Horse Racing; Fly So Free Outduels Strike the Gold
Fly So Free shook down the memories of his juvenile championship today when he outran Strike the Gold and six other colts to win the Jim Dandy Stakes and absolutely scramble the year's pursuit of honors by America's prize 3-year-old thoroughbreds.
It was a smashing comeback for a horse who won the Eclipse Award as a 2-year-old but then lost some luster when he ran fifth while Strike the Gold was winning the Kentucky Derby.


Motherwell Estate Is Estimated to Be $25 Million
The artist Robert Motherwell, who died on July 16 in Provincetown, Mass., at the age of 76, left an estate estimated at more than $25 million and more than 1,000 works of art, not including prints, his lawyer said yesterday.
The bulk of the estate, aside from family and personal bequests, was left to the Dedalus Foundation, a not-for-profit entity set up by Mr.
Motherwell.
The foundation eventually plans to create a study center and museum devoted to the artist at his home and studio in Greenwich, Conn., and to give his works to museums around the world.


Oil Shipment From Kuwait
Kuwait shipped two million barrels of crude oil today, its first oil shipment since the Iraqi invasion last August.
A supertanker left this oil terminal south of Kuwait City at midday for Western Europe.
The Oil Minister of Kuwait, Hamoud Abdulla al-Raqba, said other tankers would pick up crude at a rate of one every 7 to 10 days.
The loss of oil exports had cost Kuwait its main source of hard currency, forcing it to seek billions of dollars in foreign loans to finance postwar reconstruction.
Mr.
Raqba said 249 of the 600 wells set on fire or left gushing by retreating Iraqi troops had been capped as of Friday.
Kuwait is producing 115,000 barrels of oil a day, excluding the estimated daily output of 200,000 barrels from the neutral zone it shares with Saudi Arabia.
Kuwait was pumping about two million barrels of crude oil a day before the Iraqi invasion.


Trading Cards Won't Go Away
Will trading cards never cease?
For those fans who aren't satisfied with rookie cards, coming soon, courtesy of Line Drive's collection of minor leaguers, will be pre-rookie baseball cards.
As a guide through the confusing lineup of baseball cards, here is a strictly unofficial rating, by comment and batting average, of recent issues:


TV Networks, in a Crisis, Talk of Sweeping Changes
Searching for solutions to the worst economic crisis they have ever faced, the three big television networks are sailing in uncharted water -- and often in opposite directions.
The networks would still rather have the business adapt to their changed circumstances than be forced to adapt themselves.
But they have mapped out somewhat different strategies, some of which would radically alter the television landscape.


Victoria Hoberman Weds
Victoria Brooke Hoberman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Owen O. Hoberman of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married yesterday in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Howard Ira Trepp, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Trepp of Englewood, N.J.
Rabbi Shmuel Goldin performed the ceremony at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill.
The bride, 23 years old, is a junior designer at Kaiser Gutlon Associates, interior designers in New York.
She graduated from Union College.
The bridegroom, 23, graduated from Cornell University and is a law student at Rutgers University.


Aetna's Net Down 22%
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company said Friday that its profits fell 22 percent in the second quarter, primarily because of losses related to its real estate investments.
For the period that ended on June 30, Aetna's after-tax profits totaled $160 million, or $1.44 a share, on revenues of $4.7 billion.
That compared with earnings of $204 million, or $1.82 a share, on revenues of $4.8 billion in the period a year earlier.


A Miami Attorney Takes on the Grafs
ELLIS RUBIN , a Miami-based lawyer with a penchant for high-profile cases, recently went after MERV GRIFFIN in a palimony suit on behalf of BRENT PLOTT .
Now Rubin is up against the entire family of STEFFI GRAF .
He hopes that a Palm Beach, Fla., judge will grant a restraining order today against "any member of Steffi Graf's family from attacking JIM LEVEE ," Rubin's client.


Baseball; Perrrfect! Expos' Martinez Befuddles L.A.
Dennis Martinez pitched the 15th perfect game in major league history as the Montreal Expos beat the Los Angeles Dodgers, 2-0, this afternoon.
The last perfect game was by Cincinnati's Tom Browning, also against Los Angeles, on Sept. 16, 1988, at Riverfront Stadium.
The game today was the second perfect game at Dodger Stadium; Sandy Koufax beat Chicago, 1-0, on Sept. 9, 1965.


Summertimes To Remember
Last week a woman took a lipstick from her purse, removed the cap and attempted to paint her lips a radiant rosy plum.
Instead she painted a good part of her chin because the stick, weakened by heat, broke in midstroke.
How much longer can it last, this summer that seems to have started sometime last April?
Eight weeks?
Ten weeks?
Till eternity?
How much longer can we last, we habitues of that tortuous annex of Hades that is the subway system, of streets that smell like defrosting refrigerators, of rooms where air-conditioners spit and cough and sometimes die?


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Bush Administration is under growing pressure to propose ambitious, potentially expensive improvements in the nation's health-care system to protect people who are uninsured.
A report drafted for an advisory panel appointed by the Administration recommends expanding Medicaid to cover doctors' services and hospital care for 10 million poor people, at an annual cost to the Federal Government of at least $4 billion a year.  [ Page A1. ]
Federal regulators have begun renegotiating some of the biggest sales of failed savings and loans to private investors and have started to withdraw many financial breaks granted to other investors.
Exercising some options has already produced savings of more than $1 billion, the regulators say, and the renegotiations could produce as much $2 billion more in savings.  [ A1. ]
Orders for American-made machine tools jumped 13 percent in June from May, helped by a surge in foreign demand.
But they still remained far below the levels of June 1990.  [ D1. ] The Banking Scandal Inquiry
The Justice Department has been assailed in Congress and elsewhere by people who say it possessed evidence of possible crimes at the Bank of Credit and Commerce International for years.  [ A10. ]
Senator John F. Kerry of Massachusetts has spent the last three years investigating what has become the largest bank scandal in history, despite the hostility of some Federal law-enforcement officials.  [ A10. ]
What the savings and loan crisis failed to do in the United States, a disgraced, Luxembourg-based bank may now accomplish: fundamental changes in the way accountants do their jobs.  [ D1. ] Companies
Delta Air Lines raised its offer for Pan Am's East Coast shuttle and European routes to $310 million, an increase of $50 million.
Last week T.W.A. and American Airlines joined in a $310 million offer for various Pan Am assets.
A committee of Pan Am's unsecured creditors is scheduled to meet today to review the competing bids.  [ D1. ]
Retailing's executive recruiters are having to work a lot harder these days to find a good fit.  [ D2. ] International
The Canadian economy is stirring again after a recession that was far longer and deeper than the one in the United States.  [ D1. ] Media Business
The three big television networks are in uncharted water -- and sailing in opposite directions -- as they seach for solutions to the worst economic crisis they have ever faced.  [ D1. ]  For the networks, Saturday night is the loneliest night of the week.  [ D6. ]
Declining advertising is forcing magazine editors to decide whether to cut back articles they run.  [ D6. ]
Colombia is emerging as one of the world's leading exporters of books and is attracting the interest of U.S. publishers.  [ D6. ]
Publishers are skimping on the drinks and shrimp as tough economic times force them to cut back on an industry institution: book parties.
Roger Cohen: Publishing.  [ D6. ]
The Advertising Educational Foundation has changed its top leadership, with one longtime industry executive succeeding another.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D7. ] Today's Columns
It's a rare person who is not in love with Tiffany &amp; Company, whose wares are status symbols and whose stock has soared 47 percent since Jan. 7.
Except, of course, the company's management.
Market Place.  [ D1. ]
A flurry of economic reports will test the growing sense in the credit markets that the mild recovery most economists have been forecasting is stalling.
Kenneth N. Gilpin: Credit Markets.  [ D5. ]


Review/Dance; Henry Yu Returns With a Style Of His Own
Henry Yu studied with Martha Graham and danced with her company in the mid-1970's, later returning to his native Taiwan, where he established the Henry Yu Dance Company in 1983.
On the evidence of that troupe's United States debut on Saturday night at the Pace Downtown Theater, Mr.
Yu must have gone off into some private corner of the world, done a little splicing of American dance styles, sprinkled in some bold, Soviet-style heroism, and come up with a memorably individualistic style of his own.
All combine to form a choreographic style that is at times nuttily peculiar but always great fun and exciting for the way it glories in gutsy physicality, and for its colorful music and vivid bits of dramatic detail.
Although the program did not include the kind of ardent piece about the founding of Taiwan that is usually a feature of Taiwanese modern-dance performances in New York City, Mr.
Yu did take on the similarly solemn theme of modern life and its trials and tribulations, as program notes put it, in "To Seek and You Will Find." Blessedly, however, this was a spirited jazz-dance piece, set to rock and jazz music, that made modern life look eminently enjoyable.


Lower Long-Term Rates Unlikely
A flurry of economic reports expected this week will test the growing sense in the credit markets that the mild recovery most economists have been forecasting is stalling.
Thus far, however, the signs of renewed weakness have not been sufficient to dispel the notion among analysts that a rebound is under way and that it will gather some strength in the third quarter.


Give 'Motor Voter' Another Chance
Partly out of disgust with politics, partly out of apathy -- and largely because of difficulty, only about half the electorate votes in Federal elections.
Last year the House passed a sound bill to facilitate voter registration.
But Republicans recently blocked action on the Senate version.
The reform deserves another chance this session; to block it is to block democracy.
Only 60 percent of eligible voters are currently registered.
The "motor voter" bill, sponsored by Senator Wendell Ford, Democrat of Kentucky, would increase the figure to more than 90 percent by requiring states to allow registration when a voter applies for or renews a driver's license.
States would also have to permit registration by mail and at other public agencies.


Toward the Summit; Soviets to Embrace Bush, But Not All He Stands For
Gone are the days when Soviet citizens looked on an American President as the lord of a hostile empire or a white knight come to rescue Russia from its misery.
But if President Bush arrives in Moscow this week as the representative of a far more familiar land -- less exotic, less threatening, less all-promising -- it is still the one to reckon with.
The propaganda about a land of scheming imperialists, or the whispered legends of a land of untold prosperity, have long given way to "Dallas," CNN, Arnold Schwarzenegger, McDonald's, Estee Lauder and the accounts of thousands of Soviet travelers and emigres in forming images of America.


A Hemisphere's Worth of Competitors Will Gather This Week in Havana
ARCHERY: The United States is sending its best team to Cuba and is favored to win the competition.
Jay Barrs, who won the men's event in 1987, and Denise Parker, the defending women's champion, are favored.
ATHELTICS: With the track and field world championships scheduled for late August in Tokyo, many of the United States' premier performers are skipping the Pan Am Games.
Hollis Conway, the 1991 outdoor high jump champion and Andre Cason, the 1991 100-meters indoor champion, will attend.
Schowonda Williams, one of the United States' best hurdlers, is favored to win the event in Cuba.


Retailers Hunt but Few Heads Fit
Retailing's top executive recruiters, long accustomed to easily placing round pegs into round holes, are having to work a lot harder these days to find a good fit.
Computerized name banks are giving way to on-the-road field searches.
The failure of so many retail organizations has made competition keen to land the executives who still know how to turn a profit.
And economic uncertainty has forced recruiters to become part-counselor, part-psychologist as they talk to clients and job candidates.


Yugoslav Premier Fears All-Out War
Prime Minister Ante Markovic says Yugoslavia is on the brink of a conflagration that could claim millions of victims, and has threatened to resign if his program for restoring "minimum" Government functions is not accepted.
In a interview this weekend with several reporters, the federal Prime Minister acknowledged that parts of Yugoslavia were now outside the control of Government authority.
He appealed for the European Community to help stave off all-out war.


Jill Levison and Daniel Chenok Wed
Jill Ann Levison, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Levison of San Francisco, was married yesterday , to Daniel Joshua Chenok, a son of Ann Chernow of Westport, Conn., and Philip Chenok of Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Robert Kirschner and Cantor Roslyn Barak performed the ceremony at Hacienda de Las Flores, a historic estate in Moraga, Calif.
The bride, 26 years old, is a policy analyst and Presidential management intern with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in Washington.
She graduated from Columbia University, from which she also received a master's degree in international affairs.
Her father and her mother, Ruth Levison, founded and operate the Curtis Swann greeting card company in San Francisco.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Spain Defeats U.S.
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario won her singles match and then teamed with Conchita Martinez, who had lost, to capture the decisive doubles confrontation yesterday as Spain won its first Federation Cup title with a 2-1 victory over the United States in Nottingham, England.
As the crowd chanted "Ole! Ole!" Sanchez Vicario and Martinez rallied to defeat Gigi Fernandez and Zina Garrison, 3-6, 6-1, 6-1.
The teams had split the singles matches, with Jennifer Capriati defeating Martinez, 4-6, 7-6, 6-1, and Sanchez Vicario winning, 6-3, 6-4, over Mary Joe Fernandez.
The Americans became so frustrated in the final match that Gigi Fernandez, ranked No. 1 in the world in doubles, smashed a ball out of the stadium -- earning a warning from the umpire -- after missing two volleys in the last game.
Martinez finished off the victory with a volley winner between the American players, then Sanchez Vicario and Martinez threw their racquets in the air and rushed to hug each other.
Spain, which lost in the 1989 Federation Cup final to the United States, prevented the Americans from winning their third consecutive title.
The United States still has a record 14 Federation Cup titles.
Sanchez Vicario put on a heroic performance for Spain, overpowering Mary Joe Fernandez in the singles and then taking control in the doubles.
Sanchez Vicario was all over the court in the doubles match, smashing winners and exhorting Martnez, an inexperienced doubles player. (AP) Chesnokov the Champion: Andrei Chesnokov of the Soviet Union, who upset Ivan Lendl to reach the final, continued his superb play with a victory over Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia in the Canadian Open final in Montreal.
Korda's loss was his second in a row in an Association of Tennis Professionals Tour final.
He was beaten a week ago by Andre Agassi in Washington.
Chesnokov, who beat Korda, 6-3, 4-6, 6-3, became the first Soviet player to win the tournament. (AP)


Review/Television; Sarah Vaughan Story, Mostly in Song
Sarah Vaughan (1924-90) is the subject of tonight's "American Masters" documentary, and the producers, Toby Byron and Richard Saylor, have wisely let her singing do most of the talking.
"Sarah Vaughan: The Divine One" can be seen at 9 on Channel 13.
Born in Newark, Miss Vaughan began her musical education in church.
Her mother, Ada Vaughan, said that Sarah "always wanted to sit next to the organist, and she told me the child knew more than she did." Early in her teens, Miss Vaughan began singing in local nightclubs.
Then, entering a talent contest at the Apollo Theater in Harlem, she caught the attention of the singer Billy Eckstine.
Recalling Sassy, as she was nicknamed, he says she "was just something you hadn't heard before."


Connecticut Paying For Spending of 80's
To the Editor:
Your July 3 news analysis of the Connecticut state budget crisis attributes it to "falling tax revenues due to the recession." Our study on the fiscal condition of the states found that in the 1980's Connecticut tax collections rose 161 percent.
Connecticut ranks third of all the states in per capita tax collections.
This is hardly a state starved for revenues.


Corrections
The De Gustibus column in The Living Section on Wednesday, about restaurateurs' embarrassing moments, misidentified the owner of Montrachet in TriBeCa.
He is Drew Nieporent.


Bridge
In two decades of trying, players from the New York metropolitan area have never won the Grand National Team Championship, and that jinx was maintained here on Saturday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
The foursome of Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I., Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., Steve Weinstein of Upper Montclair, N.J., and Fred Stewart of Accord, N.Y., lost by 29 to a squad from the Chicago area: Larry Robbins, Peter Nagy, Jerry Goldfein, Howard Weinstein, Jack Oest and Steve Garner.
The winners are now qualified for playoffs that will eventually determine the American representation in the 1993 World Team Championships.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Zale Corp.'s $950 million in debt has been placed on credit watch by Standard &amp; Poor's because of larger than expected losses of $54 million in the last year.
*
Pepsico Inc. plans to sell 100 million Swiss francs ($66 million) of three-year 7.125 percent bonds, due on Aug. 26, 1994, at a price of 101.1, to yield 6.708 percent.
Ratings  *
Western States Life Insurance Co. has received an AAA rating from S.&amp; P., based on the support of its parent, Mutual Life Assurance Co. of Canada.


Massachusetts Nuclear Plant To Postpone Relicensing Bid
The owners of the Yankee Rowe nuclear plant have decided to delay their efforts to relicense the plant for at least a year to concentrate on answering safety questions about the plant's pressure vessel, a company spokesman says.
In Washington last week, the satff of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission recommended that Yankee Rowe stay open at least through April.
The staff said the plant posed "no undue" risk.


Baseball; Mets' Trip Becomes Fall
The crumbling has been so complete for the Mets that it has become difficult to sift through the debris of the defeats for significance or symbolism.
One could do worse, however, than to preserve the sixth inning of their 2-0 loss to the Padres today as an artifact.
The inning's significance was immense, because it ultimately sent the Mets to another defeat and prevented them from gaining ground on the Pirates, whose 9-7 loss in Houston had just been posted on the scoreboard.
And it was loaded with symbolism, as disastrous defense undermined a desperately needed quality pitching performance.


Books of The Times; Just What Went On Under That Big Hat?
Lone Star Rising Lyndon Johnson and His Times 1908-1960 By Robert Dallek Illustrated. 721 pages.
Oxford University Press. $30.
Lyndon Baines Johnson's reputation has been sullied unjustly, argues Robert Dallek in "Lone Star Rising," which traces the career of the 36th President of the United States from his birth in 1908 to his election as Vice President in 1960.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.


Market Place; Stock Sales by Insiders Raise Doubts on Tiffany
It's a rare person these days who is not in love with Tiffany &amp; Company and its high-flying stock, which has soared 47 percent since Jan. 7.
Except, of course, the company's management.
Since April 30, when the company finished the second of two down quarters, 15 Tiffany insiders have sold 113,850 shares, or 14 percent of management's stake in the company.
And that selloff is raising doubts about the stock's chances of remaining at its luxurious heights.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of July 29:


Abroad at Home; Crime Against Justice
One of the most shameful pages in the history of American justice was the 1915 case of Leo Frank.
A Jewish businessman in Georgia, he was accused of murdering a young Christian woman he employed.
He was tried, convicted and sentenced to death in a courtroom dominated by an anti-Semitic mob.
The Georgia courts rejected his appeal.
Mr.
Frank asked the Federal courts to free him on a writ of habeas corpus.
But the Supreme Court held that Federal judges could not even hear his case, because it had had "a full review" in the Georgia courts.
Georgia's governor then commuted his sentence, but a mob dragged him from jail and lynched him.


Essay; A Cat Named Gourmand
A talented and beautiful artist is murdered on the towpath along the canal in Georgetown.
She is the former wife of a C.I.A. station chief and the illicit love of the President of the United States.
Partly to investigate what he suspected may have been Soviet complicity in the murder (unsolved to this day) but primarily to protect the President's reputation, the chief of counterespionage for the agency -- an angular warrior who reads poetry and raises orchids -- rushes to her home ahead of the police.
He searches for, and at last finds, the woman's diary.
He slips it into his pocket, later to read its private revelations and then to consign it to a fire.
He starts to leave, but then is startled by the sound of crying.


Colombia Emerges as a Large Exporter of Books
For years, Colombia has been renowned for its coffee.
Soon, it may win equal renown for its coffee-table books.
Starting from scratch in 1980, the year that book paper was first manufactured here, Colombia's printing and publishing industry has grown to make this country Latin America's largest exporter of books.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:


Toward the Summit; Reformer Resigns From Gorbachev Staff
On the eve of the Soviet-American summit gathering, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's closest confidant in drawing up the perestroika reform program, Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, has abruptly resigned, apparently because of a deepening rift over the need to force change upon the Communist Party.
The timing of Mr.
Yakovlev's move, made as summit diplomacy attracted worldwide attention to the Kremlin, was being widely seen as his protest against Mr.
Gorbachev's handling of a growing conflict over the party's clinging to patronage and privilege in Soviet life.


Toward the Summit; Soviet Bid to Join I.M.F. Still a Puzzle
The Soviet Union's applications to join the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank last week are something of a financial mystery.
Administration officials and academic experts here are asking why President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union did not warn other leaders two weeks ago at the meeting of seven industrialized nations that his Government had already prepared an application for full membership in the I.M.F. and possibly the World Bank.
The seven leaders endorsed only a "special association" for the Soviet Union with both multilateral lending agencies.


Robyn Einbinder Weds
Robyn Elissa Einbinder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Einbinder of Jericho, L.I., and Jeffrey Alan Koeppel, a son of Alida Koeppel of Roslyn, L.I., and Dr.
Edward Koeppel of Jericho, were married yesterday at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbi Michael Katz and Cantor Kalman Fliegelman officiated.
The bride, 25 years old, is the production manager at Barneys New York Advertising.
She is a graduate of Hofstra University.
Mr.
Koeppel, 28, a graduate of the State University of New York at Albany, is the assistant controller of Ticketmaster in New York.


Indurain Is a Safe And Sound Winner
Early this month, Miguel Indurain made a proud boast to a mechanic with his Banesto bicycle-racing team.
"I'll win this Tour de France," Indurain said.
"If I can't beat Greg LeMond this year, I'll quit racing forever."


New York Needs Merit Selection of Its Judges
To the Editor:
Again there is evidence that judicial "elections" are nothing but appointments by party bosses, not decisions by the voters.


Harrison Burns, 51, An Artist and Teacher
Harrison Burns, a painter and teacher, died on July 14 at his summer home in Almunecar, Spain.
He was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Burns died of a heart attack, said a friend, Michael Walls.


In Romania, Anti-Semitism Stirs Passions
To the Editor:
"Romania's Dirty Secrets" (editorial, July 5) and news articles July 1 and 2 indicate an attempt to depict the Romanian people as anti-Semites, guilty of indiscriminate mass killing of Jews, and to take out of context the tragic events that occurred during World War II in Romania.


Peru Takes Bigger Role In Production of Cocaine
For years, Peru seemed to be a secondary front in the South American drug war.
Though the country produced 60 percent of the world's coca leaf, the Government lacked the will to risk alienating the peasants who scraped out an existence growing the raw material for cocaine.
There was little violence and no cartels, and the crop was quickly transported north to Colombia, where powerful drug organizations processed pure cocaine for shipment.


Deborah Faith Bloom Weds Andrew Berman
Deborah Faith Bloom, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Bloom of East Brunswick, N.J., was married last evening to Andrew Philip Berman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Meyer Berman of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Harold Saperstein performed the ceremony at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I.


Football; Taylor Has Slight Edge in Jets' Quarterback Scramble
All four Jets quarterbacks had equal playing time in Saturday's scrimmage against the Washington Redskins in Bethlehem, Pa.
So as the team yesterday took its first day off since two-a-day drills began on July 18, it was time to assess.
Since it is midsummer, maybe it would be best to describe the Jets' quarterback battle in seasonal terms: "Advantage, Troy Taylor."


A Test for Dinkins
On a plane bound from Washington to New York City last week, two passengers spotted Mayor David N. Dinkins seated in the front row, returning from a trip to lobby for more Federal aid to cities.
"Mayor Dinkins is on this flight -- that's a bad omen," one of them said.


Guns Won't Save Battered Women
To the Editor:
"A Victim of Gun Control," Peter Alan Kaiser's self-serving, anecdotal Op-Ed article (July 13), reflects a lack of understanding of the character traits of men who batter women.
He implies that if a battered woman had a gun, and if the man who beats her knows she has a gun, he will avoid contact with her.
Those who work with men in battering cases know too well that the presence of a gun will have little or no effect in keeping her attacker from assaulting her as he has done so often before.


Policy on AIDS Reviewed
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday that state health officials were reviewing New York's policies on health-care workers infected with the AIDS virus, and that he expected a report next week.
New York has been at the forefront of the growing national debate on such policies, opposing calls for the mandatory testing of health workers and the automatic restriction of those with the virus from performing invasive procedures like surgery.


Three Men Drown While Clamming Off Brooklyn
Three men drowned yesterday in waters off Brooklyn when one man who was clamming lost his footing and the other two jumped from a pier to try to rescue him, the police said.
One of the victims, Miguel Rodriguez, 57 years old, of 1782 Broadway in Brooklyn, was standing on a sandbar in water about 25 feet off the Canarsie Pier at 5898 Shore Parkway, feeling for clams with his bare feet, when he slipped under water, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen.


Werner Henke, 75; Invented a Process To Limit Pollution
Werner Henke, a petroleum engineer who invented a process for controlling industrial air pollution, died Saturday at his home in Lafayette, La., at the age of 75.
The cause of death was cancer, said his wife, Gertrude Henke.


A Hemisphere's Worth of Competitors Will Gather This Week in Havana
ARCHERY: The United States is sending its best team to Cuba and is favored to win the competition.
Jay Barrs, who won the men's event in 1987, and Denise Parker, the defending women's champion, are favored.


New York City Expanding Monitoring of Toxic Wastes
In a major step toward cleaning up New York Harbor, the city has agreed to expand its program to reduce industrial discharges of toxic pollutants to include companies that had not faced limits before.
Under the agreement with New York State and several private environmental groups, the city must identify smaller polluters and then apply limits on what they could discharge into the sewer system.
Environmentalists said that could include small businesses, like laundries, photofinishers, gasoline stations and bakeries, who would for the first time face limits on the amount of toxic waste they discharge.


Environmental Office Chided On Cleaning of Waterways
The Environmental Protection Agency has ordered accelerated cleanups of just 529 of the nation's 18,770 severely polluted waterways, Congressional investigators say, even though all could have been singled out for cleanup under the 1987 Clean Water Act.
The General Accounting Office, a Congressional investigating agency, said last week in a report obtained by The Associated Press that the E.P.A. could have ordered the states to set stiffer pollution-discharge standards "for all impaired waters" under the 1987 law.


Amy Winkelman Wed in Michigan
Amy Sharon Winkelman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Myron Winkelman of West Bloomfield, Mich., was married yesterday to Gary Wayne Blackman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Blackman of Paramus, N.J.
Rabbis Efry Spectre and Elliot Pachter performed the ceremony at Adat Shalom Synagogue in Farmington Hills, Mich.
The bride, 29 years old, is an associate in the law firm of Clapp &amp; Eisenberg in Newark.
A graduate of the University of Michigan and a member of Phi Beta Kappa, she received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Value Rx, a managed-health-care company in Southfield, Mich.


Beijing Journal; Even Gloomy T-Shirts Fall Under Censorship
A popular T-shirt in Beijing these days carries this message splashed across the chest in angry Chinese characters: "I'm fed up! Leave me alone!"
The authorities are refusing to heed the message.
Instead of leaving the grumpy alone, the Government has banned the manufacture and sale of T-shirts that are spiritually "unhealthy."


Miscellany
*
Hachette Magazines Inc., New York, has consolidated the publishing responsibilities for its two automotive titles, Car and Driver and Road &amp; Track, under one executive.
Taking the new position of senior vice president and group publisher is Donald M. Hufford, 58 years old.
He was previously vice president and publisher of Car and Driver.
Richard Bartkus, the previous publisher of Road &amp; Track, retired in May.


People
*
John R. Blaney has been appointed to the newly created position of executive director of worldwide clients at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, New York.
He had previously been the worldwide management supervisor on the Unilever account. *
John Stevenson has been named senior vice president and executive creative director at FCB/Ronalds-Reynolds Ltd., Toronto.
He had previously been an associate creative director at Leo Burnett Company, Chicago. *
Daniel O'Shea has been named chief operating officer at Bill Communications Inc., New York, a business magazine publisher.
He had previously been managing director at the Jordan Group, New York, a consulting firm.
He succeeds Irwin Levine, who left the company. *
Anastasia (Stacy) Rubis has been named vice president and director of public relations at BBDO, New York.
She had previously held a similar position at TBWA Advertising, New York. *
Mary Jane Kolar has been appointed executive director, the chief staff position at the Business/Professional Advertising Association, Edison, N.J.
She had previously been executive director at the Association of Government Accountants.


Neighbors Assess Tensions That Led to Firebombings
The police searched unsuccessfully yesterday for a suspect in the firebombings of a real-estate company that sold homes to black families in Canarsie.
But both black and white residents of the Brooklyn neighborhood said that behind the crimes lay tensions stemming from an influx of newcomers into a traditionally white area.
The number of minority residents in the area rose 40 percent during the 1980's, city figures indicated.


Robert R. Preato; Art Historian, 49
Robert R. Preato, an art historian, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 49 years old.
He died of heart failure, his brother, Dennis, said.


Paper Names Companies In Japanese Stock Paybacks
An economic newspaper today published a list of corporations, including some of the biggest names in Japanese industry, that it said had received paybacks from the country's top brokerage firms as compensation for stock market losses.


After a Week to Forget, It Was a Day to Remember


Review/Performance Art; Worry About Freedom and the Artist
Behind the visuals and the rock music textures that have made her name synonymous with multi-media performance art, Laurie Anderson has always been first and foremost a storyteller.
Without her cool, witty speaking voice reflecting on the technological wonders and horrors of modern life, the images projected in pieces like her epic "United States I-IV" would have been a chaotic jumble.
Just how central Ms.
Anderson's storytelling voice is to her art became clearer than ever in her disturbing, politically pointed solo work, "Voices From the Beyond," which she performed at Alice Tully Hall on Friday and Saturday evenings as part of Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival.
Instead of presenting an elaborate slide show with songs and narration, Ms.
Anderson stood in front of a screen that held a single, fixed image of an empty highway receding into the distance.
Her musical accoutrements were reduced to a single keyboard and an electronic voice filter that she occasionally used to deepen her voice into the chilling Big Brother drawl that has always been one of her most striking sound effects.


Isaac Bashevis Singer's Funeral Tempers Grief With Remembrance
His goblins, devils and witches may have been lurking somewhere around the funeral, but since their opinions of him could not be distinguished with any certainty, Isaac Bashevis Singer was remembered by relatives and companions yesterday for an impish wit and penetrating insight into human nature that enriched both his stories and those who knew him.
Still, when the rabbi's eulogy was repeatedly interrupted by growling noises from the amplifier system, more than a few mourners may have wondered whether the spirits he sometimes depicted with such zest and terror were having their revenge.


A Pitcher Achieves Perfection


Early Wagering On Hambletonian
It has taken most of this century, but that grand old harness race, the Hambletonian, once rural America's great sporting event, has finally made it up there with the Kentucky Derby -- in Las Vegas, that is.
For the first time, there is a "future book" on the Hambo.
That is, you can bet on it in advance, legally, if you can't wait until next Saturday at the Meadowlands.
"We've already got half the advance that was bet on the Derby," said MIKE FERBER , race supervisor of the Stardust Hotel.
He made the odds.


The American Games; For Games in Cuba, the Athletes Come to Compete and Politics Come Into Play
They will begin to trickle in this evening.
By Friday, more than 17,000 athletes, journalists and tourists representing 39 nations will have converged on Cuba for the largest international event ever on the island nation.
The 11th Pan American Games will begin in Havana with opening ceremonies on Friday followed by 16 days of competition among member nations of the Pan American Sports Organization.


Hussein Risks 'Enormous Mistake' By Veiling A-Arms, Bush Warns
President Bush said today that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq would be making "an enormous mistake" if Baghdad failed to reveal all of its nuclear weapons programs and Mr.
Bush said he was confident that the allies would use military force if necessary.
"I don't really have a deadline in mind," Mr.
Bush told reporters at Andrews Air Force Base shortly before playing golf there.


Betsy Salamon Weds Michael Sufott
Elizabeth Frank Salamon, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Itamar Salamon of Hartsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday in New York to Michael Mordechai Sufott, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Zev Sufott of Jerusalem.
Rabbi Peter Rubinstein performed the ceremony at the Sign of the Dove .
The bride, 27 years old and known as Betsy, is studying for master's degree in social work at New York University.
She is a graduate of the University of Vermont.
Her father is an associate clinical professor of psychiatry at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and the director of the Soundview-Throgs Neck Community Mental Health Center in the Bronx.
Her mother, Linda Salamon, is the director of counseling at All Women's Health Services in White Plains.


A Month to Remember For Friendly New Star
In the month since she has taken over women's golf, Meg Mallon has made plenty of big putts.
But none of them have been bigger than the one she made four weeks ago, at a point when it looked as if she didn't want the job at the top.
When the 28-year-old Mallon came to the 71st hole of the Ladies Professional Golf Association Championship with a one-shot lead over her veteran playing partners, Pat Bradley and Ayako Okamoto, it was as a one-time winner who had never finished better than 27th on the tour's money list.


Laura Alcott Wed To Peter Gaffney
Laura Gwen Alcott, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Alcott of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Peter Jonathan Gaffney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Gaffney of Old Tappan, N.J.
Rabbi David Fass and Cantor Ronald Brodin performed the ceremony at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye, N.Y.
The bride, 26 years old, is a law student at Yeshiva University.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison in New York.
Her mother is a cantorial student at the Academy for Jewish Religion in New York and is the cantor at the Hawthorne (N.Y.) School.


Sports of the Times; The Guard Who Took Rat Poison
THE game is basically about intimidation.
Forget about the whippets catching passes out in the open.
They're only out there because some very large men are knocking down some other very large men at the line of scrimmage.
"Son, we'd like you to come in a little heavier next season." Football players start hearing this during junior high school.
That mythic figure known as Coach would like them to have just a bit more bulk on their frames, in order to win the nasty little wars that make up a football game.


Premier of Madagascar Resigns
Prime Minister Victor Ramahatra announced his resignation and the dissolution of his Cabinet today.
He acted hours after President Didier Ratsiraka made his first concession to seven weeks of huge pro-democracy demonstrations and offered to open talks with opponents seeking his ouster.


Molly C. McCormick Weds Ronald Brindle
Molly Catherine McCormick, daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay McCormick of Grosse Pointe, Mich., was married yesterday in Burnt Hills, N.Y., to Ronald Eric Brindle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl Brindle of Greenville, R.I.
The Rev.
Richard Barrett performed the ceremony at the Calvary Episcopal Church.


The Squirrel That Loved a Traffic Signal
To the Editor:
Apropos "Listen to the Backhoe Bird," your July 5 editorial about the mockingbird that mimicked a machine and other feats performed by these ornithological parodists and sweet songsters:


The Squirrel That Loved a Traffic Signal; Martins Nearer Home
To the Editor:
"Making Purple Martins Feel at Home" (July 15) tells us of a BBC crew's filming of these extraordinary birds in Edinboro, Pa.
New Yorkers need not travel as far as western Pennsylvania to see purple martins, our largest swallow.
They are in "hotels" on the C.Y.O. campgrounds at Lemon Creek and Princess Bay on Staten Island.
HENRY HOPE REED New York, July 17, 1991


In Romania, Anti-Semitism Stirs Passions; Geography as Destiny
To the Editor:
"Romania's Dirty Secrets" (editorial, July 5), on the resurgence of anti-Semitism in Romania, states, "even now, as the truth struggles to the surface, those who speak it are vilified." Unfortunately, your inaccuracies do not help the truth much.


Beijing Issues Crime Warning
China's Supreme Court has ordered severe punishment for crimes in flood-stricken areas, the People's Daily newspaper reported today.
A Supreme Court notice ordered lower courts to "deal a severe blow to all criminal activity that seriously damages flood-relief work, production in flood-hit areas or living order."


Mr. Nunn's Rash Rush to ABM's
The Senate Armed Services Committee has rashly voted to spend billions to deploy antiballistic missiles.
These are supposed to protect against an accidental launch of Soviet ballistic missiles or a limited attack by some other country that develops nuclear arms.
But those are remote contingencies and, initially, the proposed deployment would do little to defend against them.
Even worse, the scheme could shake the 40-year nuclear standoff.
It could even revive the arms race.


Tool Orders Rose by 13% Last Month
Helped by a surge in foreign demand, orders for American-made machine tools jumped 13 percent in June from May, according to an industry trade group's monthly report, but they still remained far below the levels of June 1990.
Indeed, domestic orders were down sharply from May and from a year earlier.
Analysts interpreted this as a sign that manufacturers had not yet seen much recovery from the recession.


In Canada, the Tempo Picks Up
The Canadian economy is stirring again after a recession, far longer and deeper than the one in the United States, cut output by billions of dollars and sent unemployment to the highest levels since the early 1980's.
Like the United States, Canada has benefited from cuts in interest rates, which appear to be helping the housing and auto markets.
Canada's economy is only a tenth the size of the United States' and Americans buy three-quarters of everything Canada exports, so it remains highly dependent on what happens south of the border.


Oil-Rig Count Rises
The number of working oil and gas rigs in the nation rose by 17 in the most recent week, Baker Hughes Inc. says.
The maker of oilfield equipment reported Friday that 845 rigs were operating nationally, 177 less than the 1,022 a year earlier.
The previous week's count was 828.
Of the rigs working, 329 were handling gas, 470 oil and 46 others were listed as miscellaneous.
The count represents the number of rigs actively exploring for petroleum and natural gas, not those producing oil and gas.
At the height of the oil boom in December 1981, the count reached a peak of 4,500.
It plunged to a low of 663 after oil prices collapsed in the summer of 1986.


The Budget Follies Have to Stop
The conventional wisdom holds that the 1990 budget agreement will last until shortly after the 1992 election, when campaign promises can be safely forgotten and we must face deficits that have deepened beyond expectations.
Until then, we are supposed to be on automatic pilot.
Yet the Congressional Budget Office confirmed last week that we can't achieve the planned $480 billion deficit reduction over five years without further paring.
We must begin that paring far in advance of fiscal 1993.


Critic's Notebook; 3 Queens Of Talk Who Rule The Day
If Paris, that judgmental Trojan, were around today, he would no doubt take on the assignment of choosing which of the three daytime talk show graces -- Sally Jessy Raphael, Joan Rivers and Oprah Winfrey -- gets the platinum apple.
All have established themselves in a field once dominated by men.
In New York, Ms.
Winfrey reigns in the afternoon; Ms.
Raphael is queen of the morning, and although Ms.
Rivers is not up there with the ratings royalty, she keeps rolling along.
What are their appeals?
The love-besotted Paris would be gratified to note that all offer romance of a sort.
Among Ms.
Raphael's contributions in July were "Married Men Who Act Like They're Single," "Cheating Wives" and "Gay Men in Search of Rich Lovers." On one show, Ms.
Raphael (who can be seen at 10 A.M. on Channel 7, where she enjoys the spillover from the popular "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee" program), brought on young men who, in their search for foreign wives (they say they don't like American women) resorted to catalogues from abroad describing available foreign women.


Court Backs Caterpillar
Caterpillar Inc. said Friday that it had won a court ruling upholding its policy against unauthorized resale of its parts and equipment for export.
The heavy-equipment manufacturer said a circuit court judge in Cook County, Ill., had issued a summary judgment against Intercontinental Parts Inc., which had charged Caterpillar with violating antitrust laws.
Caterpillar had previously prohibited Patten Industries from selling parts to Intercontinental and other resellers for export.


Rethinking Obligations Of Auditors
What the savings and loan crisis failed to accomplish in the United States, a disgraced, Luxembourg-based bank may now accomplish: fundamental changes in the way accountants do their jobs.
Ever since the extent of the savings and loan mess became apparent, government officials have been debating the proper role of independent auditors in the fight against bank fraud.
Until recently, the accounting industry and business groups have thwarted one proposal after another that would have required some companies' private auditors to work more closely with the Government.


Justice Dept. Denies Charges It Moved Sluggishly in Bank Case
On Sept. 9, 1988, in a surreptitiously recorded conversation at the Grand Bay Hotel in Miami's the Coconut Grove section of Miami, Amjad Awan, an executive of the
Nearly three years later, Mr.
Awan's admission of the financial relationship -- one long concealed from banking regulators -- is emerging as a fragment of evidence that critics of the Justice Department say should have resulted in criminal prosecutions long ago.


How Prices Are Threat to Art Collections
In a show that opened today, Renoir's sun-dappled "Confidences," a portrait of two lovers seated together in a leafy bower, hangs on the wall of the Portland Museum of Art, evoking a world of repose and tranquillity.
The idyll could not be more different from the epic legal battles, family strife and now institutional conflict that have swirled around this picture and the celebrated family collection of which it is a part.
"Confidences," painted in 1875, is among 10 notable works lent to the museum from the collection of the late Joan Whitney Payson, the owner of race horses and the first owner of the New York Mets.
Her collection's most famous painting was van Gogh's "Irises," which sold at Sotheby's for an auction-house record of $53.9 million four years ago.
But even without it, the collection remains one of the finest of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings still in private hands.


South African Leader Determined To Ride Out Slush-Fund Scandal
President F. W. de Klerk's Government has apparently decided that it can ride out the scandal over its secret funding of a Zulu-based political movement without suffering much more damage to its credibility or losing control over South Africa's shift to a post-apartheid era.
President de Klerk has postponed his response to the country's worst political scandal in a dozen years until a news conference on Tuesday.
The Citizen newspaper, which is close to the Government, reported on Saturday that President de Klerk would announce an immediate end to secret funding of all political groups and to other payments that would compromise his administration's credibility.


INSIDE
Questions on Bank Inquiry
The Justice Department is being assailed as moving sluggishly to investigate the Bank of Commerce and Credit International, and one persistent critic has been Senator John F. Kerry of Massachusetts.
Page A10.


Nicklaus, After Beating Trevino, Goes to Playoff With Rodriguez
After beating out one old rival in a head-to-head duel with Lee Trevino, Jack Nicklaus found himself tied with another at the end of the fourth round of the United Sates Senior Open today and will have to go another 18 holes Monday with Chi Chi Rodriguez to decide the championship.
"I'm going to be thrilled playing with the greatest golfer of all time," Rodriguez said about his matchup at Oakland Hills Country Club with Nicklaus, who described his sentiments about playing with Rodriguez this way: "It'll be a lighter time tomorrow. Lee and I got a little too serious."


Review/Music; Tradition Meets the Future In Eros Ramazzotti's Pop
Eros Ramazzotti has become a leading pop superstar in Europe by forging a seamless fusion between two worlds, one traditional, the other contemporary.
The 27-year-old Italian singer and songwriter, who appeared at Radio City Music Hall on Friday evening, creates music that underlines a time-honored Mediterranean melodicism with rock beats and synthesized textures.
In his best songs, the styles of Julio Iglesias and George Michael coincide comfortably.
One minute the instrumentation might suggest the sound of a concertina, the next the latest space-age pop sound effects.
Mr.
Ramazzotti has the additional advantage of good looks, which, like his music, combine a continental ideal of class with the funkier aura of English-speaking rock stars like Mr.
Michael.
Mr.
Ramazzotti, who was shown in closeup on two large video screens throughout the concert, wore his hair slicked back into a bushy ponytail.
His slightly arrogant poses suggested the demeanor of an international tennis star.
The athletic aura was accentuated by a cast on his left foot, which he explained was a result of a recent motorcycle accident.


West Side Journal; It's the 15th Day of Av. Are These the Miracles?
There is an old Jewish saying that making a shiddach -- a match between a man and a woman -- is as difficult as parting the Red Sea.
Both take a miracle.
Listening closely to single people today, the saying still seems to have some resonance, especially on the West Side of Manhattan, an area popular with the unattached.


Fraud in East Germany
The German privatization agency said it sold an eastern German engineering company to a man who emptied its coffers.
The newspaper Berliner Zeitung said a man previously convicted in eastern Germany for fraud took over the company, Cottbuser, and emptied its bank account of 250,000 marks, or about $143,000.


Spanish Artist Paints Olympics
Over an Olympian four years, CRISTOBAL GABARRON studied athletes in photographs and in slow-motion films, and even engaged them in philosophical discussions.
Then two years ago, the artist, one of the most acclaimed in Spain, was ready to get to work on a mural of the history of the Olympics.
It would require 100 tons of clay, which would be baked after painting, and span more than 300 feet.
He had to work at several studios to assemble the panels of the 16-foot-high combination of clay, oils and pigments.


Dr. H. F. Wood, 72, Strep-Infection Expert
Dr.
Harrison F. Wood, a physician who did research into rheumatic fever and streptococcal infection, died on Friday at the Hebrew Home and Hospital in West Hartford, Conn.
He was 72 years old and lived in West Hartford.
He died of emphysema, family members said.


Accounts
*
Partners &amp; Simons, Boston, has been awarded a business-to-business campaign for personal computer products from Microcom Inc., Norwood, Mass., and a publicity program for the Heublein wines division, Farmington, Conn.
Total billings are between $2.5 million and $3 million. *
Sandoz Consumer Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, N.J., has reassigned a possible introduction of two products, Tavist 1 and Tavist D, to Bloom FCA, from Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, both New York.
Billings have not been determined pending review of the products by the Food and Drug Administration.


Matchmaker, Matchmaker, Make Me a Shiddach


Milwaukee Grasping for Answers As Horror Mounts Over Killings
The full emotional toll of everything that happened in Apartment 213 on North 25th Street, where Jeffrey L. Dahmer lived and the young men he brought home died, is beginning to be taken.
And the municipal currency in which that toll is being counted is mistrust and anger.
Milwaukee, which used to promote itself as being safer, cleaner and prouder than other cities in the Middle West, suddenly finds itself seething over mass murders that many believe the authorities had a chance to prevent.
Blacks and homosexuals are accusing the police of brushing aside neighbors' complaints about Mr.
Dahmer.
Some say the police chief and even the Mayor should resign.


J .A. Fuld Weds Miss Derbyshire
Margaret Jane Derbyshire, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
John Edward Derbyshire of Buffalo, and Jeffrey Arthur Fuld, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth A. Fuld of New York, were married yesterday at the Sherwood Inn in Skaneateles, N.Y.
Rabbi Alvin Roth and Canon Tom Barrington, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
Mrs.
Fuld, 27 years old, is an English teacher at the Eagle Hill Middle School in Manlius, N.Y.
She graduated from the State University of New York College at Buffalo and received a master's degree in teaching from Colgate University.
Her father, an Episcopal deacon, is the public affairs officer for the Army Corps of Engineers at Buffalo.
Her mother, Cynthia Harrison Derbyshire, a designer of children's clothing and quilts, owns and operates the Quilted Wall in Buffalo.


11 Muslim Militants Killed And 47 Arrested in Kashmir
Indian security forces in the Kashmir region killed 11 Muslim separatists in skirmishes today and arrested 47 people, the police said.
Rebels ambushed a patrol of federal troops on the outskirts of Srinagar, the summer capital of Jammu-Kashmir state, which has a Muslim majority and is the center of a secessionist movement from largely Hindu India.
The troops killed two militants in a two-hour skirmish, a police official said.


Queens Man Seized in 3 Slayings And 2 Rapes in Last 7 Months
A 28-year-old Queens man was arrested and charged yesterday in three murders and two rapes in the last seven months, including the shooting death of a pregnant woman near her home in St.
Albans last week, the police said.
The arrest of the suspect, Lester Ford of 209-29 111th Road in St.
Albans, brought a sigh of relief from friends and neighbors of the murder victims and shocked his family, who said Mr.
Ford had vowed not to return to jail when he was released in 1989 on parole after serving three years on a drug charge.


Washington at Work; Senator Who Hunted Bank Scandal Is Watching Doubters Take His Path
Alone among the 535 members of Congress, and despite the hostility of Federal law-enforcement officials, Senator John Forbes Kerry has spent the last three years investigating what has become the largest bank scandal in history.
"Law-enforcement authorities looked the other way," the Massachusetts Democrat said in an interview last week about his investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
"The Justice Department put roadblocks in our path."


Lauren Bufferd Weds Cal Fuller
Lauren Amy Bufferd, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Bufferd of Newton, Mass., was married yesterday in Oak Park, Ill., to Dr.
Roy Calhoun Fuller 3d, the son of Mrs.
James R. Burdeshaw of Chattanooga, Tenn., and the late Mr.
Fuller Jr.
The Rev.
Samuel Portaro, an Episcopal minister, and Rabbi Mordecai Rosen performed the ceremony at the Elizabeth F. Cheney mansion.
The bride, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, is the theater archivist at the Chicago Public Library.
She graduated from Bard College and received a master's degree in library science from Rosary College in River Forest, Ill.


Metro Matters; Words of Advice From Dinkins To Dinkins
By now, David N. Dinkins must believe that being Mayor means always having to say you're sorry.
But does he have any words left in his repertory to reassure New Yorkers?
Mr.
Dinkins plans to deliver a report tomorrow night on New York City's efforts to shrink the size and cost of government while improving the delivery of vital services.
This will be his sixth major address in 19 months as Mayor.


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Monday about a proposed United States contribution to the International Monetary Fund referred incorrectly to the effect of exchange-rate fluctuations on past contributions and also to a forecast of the effect this year.
Since 1986, the fluctuations have on average produced a surplus, not a loss.
The Government has not determined the effect of the fluctuations in 1991.


Art Museum in Detroit Tries to Cope With Cuts
At any given time, on the abbreviated days when you can visit the Detroit Institute of Arts, half the galleries are sealed and darkened, their stairways roped off and their medieval sculpture and Chinese hand scrolls guarded by forbidding black signs warning, "Galleries Closed."
For months now, loyal patrons have watched the proud, embattled museum trim pieces of itself in response to deep cuts imposed by a state Government that is also embattled.
It is the most desperate example of the hard times facing museums around the country as deficit-ridden states and cities cut their arts budgets to pay for schools and roads, and as philanthropic dollars grow scarce because of the recession.


CHRONICLE
PEE-WEE HERMAN, the popular actor and children's television star with trademark bow tie and high-pitched giggles, is accused of masturbating in an adult movie theater in Sarasota, Fla., the police said yesterday.
The actor, 38 years old, whose real name is Paul Reubens, was arrested by undercover Sarasota County sheriff's deputies Friday night and charged with exposing a sexual organ.


Districting Foe, In New Tactic, Backs Elections
A coalition of labor leaders and allies of Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday that it would drop its challenge to New York City's redistricting plan temporarily so City Council elections could be held this year.
But the coalition's members said they would challenge the plan in 1993 to try to eliminate what they said were ethnic discrimination flaws in the present Council maps.


AIDS Drug Tests Planned
IAF Biochem International Inc., a small, Quebec- based drug maker, said today that it would begin testing its treatment for AIDS next month on people in North America.
IAF Biochem, which is 10 percent owned by Glaxo Holdings P.L.C. of Britain, said Glaxo was filing an application for the drug, 3TC compound, with the United States Food and Drug Administration.


Review/Music; Listening to the Late Mozart, Absolutely All of Him
Roger Norrington's Experience weekends are total immersion programs, part marathon concert and part musicological seminar.
They usually focus on single works, Haydn's "Creation" or Beethoven's Ninth Symphony for example, with lectures, debates, rehearsals, demonstrations, concerts of contemporaneous works and auxiliary exhibitions prefacing a performance of the work being Experienced.
The program Mr.
Norrington and Nicholas Kenyon, the British music critic, assembled to commemorate the bicentennial of Mozart's death, and over which Mr.
Norrington presided at Lincoln Center on Saturday and Sunday, painted on a broader canvas.
Instead of a single work, it explored all the music Mozart composed in 1791, his final year.


Longstanding Adviser To Fill Seagram Post
The Seagram Company, maker of Chivas Regal and Tropicana orange juice and one of the world's largest marketers of distilled spirits and wines, said yesterday that it had named a longtime legal adviser to a new post as one of its most senior officers.
Stephen E. Banner, 53 years old and a partner at Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, Seagram's longtime law firm, was named Seagram's senior executive vice president, with responsibilities for finance, strategic planning and legal matters.


Athletics Blast Away At Troubled Yankees
Jose Canseco's hard ground ball zipped past Yankee third baseman Pat Kelly, who should have caught it, and was grabbed neatly by the ballboy, who should have let it go.
Because of this jumbled combo in the eighth inning last night, Canseco was awarded a ground-rule double, Yankee Manager Stump Merrill was ejected from the game, and the Oakland Athletics would go on to win, 10-8.


Careers; Big Demand For Experts On Quality
TWO management recruiters, Carole R. Schwartz and Janet Jones-Parker, have noticed a new trend: More and more client companies want managers or vice presidents of "corporate quality."
"The titles might vary but they are real jobs that apparently did not exist before," Mrs.
Schwartz said last week.
Both she and Mrs.
Jones-Parker are vice presidents of the management recruiting unit of A. T. Kearney Inc., a management consulting firm in Chicago.


By Design; Sheer (But Durable) Delights
T-shirts, tank tops and bodysuits as sheer as the filmiest stockings are suddenly popular.
Woven with Lycra or nylon yarns, they cling, stretch and even give some support.
And, unlike hose, they seem impressively impervious to runs.
Daring women are wearing these transparent coverings over nothing (usually shielded by a jacket), while those who are more modest put theirs over bras pretty enough to show off.
Either way, the look is unquestionably sexy, fitting right in with the current mode of lingerie dressing.


With Mets Feeling the Heat, Manager Hopes for the Best
With tensions rising in the clubhouse and the chances of the Mets catching the Pirates eroding steadily, Manager Bud Harrelson said before today's game that he did not feel any sort of team meeting was required to address the team's state of affairs.
"Every time I come to the ball park, I feel differently about calling one, thinking we are going to come out of it that day," said Harrelson, whose team was 1-5 on its trip through California going into tonight's game with the Dodgers.
"We're a professional team. I'll give them the benefit of the doubt. I don't have a whole lot to say, anyway."


An Indicator of a Volcano's Ferocity


Nicklaus Captures Playoff in Remarkable Fashion
The eyes of the golfing world were focused on the over-50 set today, and Jack Nicklaus took advantage of the attention by winning the 12th United States Senior Open in grand fashion in a playoff against Chi Chi Rodriguez.
Nicklaus reinforced his reputation as perhaps the game's greatest player of all time this afternoon, not only by defeating Rodriguez by four stokes in the 18-hole playoff, but also by playing magnificently on one of the nation's toughest courses.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday with the Style Makers column reversed the identities of two brothers who are sculptors.
Ivan Schwartz was at the left, Elliot at the right.


Grand Jury Is Likely To Get Tyson Case
The prosecutor for Marion County (Ind.) announced yesterday that he was asking that a special grand jury be convened within two weeks to look into allegations that Mike Tyson raped a woman at an Indianapolis hotel 11 days ago.
The prosecutor, Jeffrey Modisett, said that Tyson, the former heavyweight boxing champion, would be asked to testify but wouldn't be obligated to appear before the grand jury.


Shamir Remains Firm on Palestinian Role in Talks
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir today reiterated Israel's refusal to attend a regional peace conference if the Palestinian delegation included representatives from East Jerusalem or members of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Palestinian leaders here said that no representatives to a conference had been chosen.
Statements by both sides made evident that a gap remains to be bridged before a conference can be arranged.


South Africa Leader Demotes 2 Ministers In Charge of Security
President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa today demoted the two ministers in charge of the country's security forces.
The Cabinet shake-up seemed aimed at helping Mr. de Klerk recover from the damage caused by the disclosure of the Government's secret aid to the black political organization Inkatha.
Mr. de Klerk shunted the Defense Minister, Gen.
Magnus Malan, and the Law and Order Minister, Adriaan J. Vlok, from their critical Cabinet posts, assigning them lesser civilian portfolios.


Georgia-Pacific Chief Postpones Retirement
Still working to digest its $4.5 billion acquisition of Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation last year, Georgia-Pacific Corporation said yesterday that T. Marshall Hahn would remain chairman and chief executive of the company through December 1993.
Mr.
Hahn, 64, had been expected to retire next year.
The vice chairman of the company, Harold L. Airington, 63, will retire in December, and Ronald P. Hogan, 50, now president and chief operating officer, becomes vice chairman.


Two Setbacks for Pan Am In Efforts to Sell Off Assets
The orderly liquidation of Pan American World Airways ran into unforeseen problems yesterday when some of its biggest creditors balked at management's plan to sell some prized assets to Delta Air Lines for $310 million.
United Airlines also withdrew a $235 million offer that competed slightly with the Delta deal.
Because Pan Am is operating in Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code, any deal would need the approval of the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan, which is scheduled to review the Delta bid and others on Aug. 12.
But any deal that had the creditors' backing would have a much better chance of winning the court's endorsement.


Lawsuit on Todd Is Set for Hearing
A lawsuit filed against the Todd Shipyards Corporation by Burton Borman, who heads a group of dissident shareholders, is set for a hearing on Friday in Delaware Chancery Court.
The suit will be heard by Judge William B. Chandler in Dover.


Sister Elizabeth Cavanagh, Educator, 77
Sister Elizabeth Cavanagh, a former vice president and dean of students at Manhattanvlle College in Purchase, N.Y., died on Sunday at Kenwood Convent of the Sacred Heart in Albany.
She was 77 years old.
She died of bone cancer, Sister Mary Lyman said.


An Advocate of Plants To Clean Air Indoors Welcomes a New Test
W .C. WOLVERTON says he has a solution to indoor air pollution: houseplants.
To prove it, he built an addition to his house in Picayune, Miss., in which he pumps sewage from the bathroom and fumes from the kitchen through planters of ferns, ficuses and philodendrons in the living room.
"It's like a little earth," he says.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 30


An Industrial Policy, Piece by Piece
Despite the Bush Administration's opposition to a large-scale Federal effort, the nation is adopting an industrial policy piece by piece as a result of Congressional and state initiatives.
Dozens of Federal and state programs are helping manufacturers improve their efficiency and technology to compete with foreign companies.
Advocates of these programs say they are essential to keeping the nation from losing more jobs and industries, like consumer electronics, to foreign competitors.
They note that other nations, particularly Japan, provide extensive support for technological advances.


Politically Correct and Free Speech
To the Editor:
Joel Conarroe, in criticizing those concerned about free speech on campus ("How I'm P.C.," Op-Ed, July 12), owes it to readers to be clearer on the First Amendment issue.
He charges "educated individuals" with finding "apparently beyond reproach" the expression of racist, sexist and homophobic sentiments.
This is not so.
Those to whom he alludes, who raise free-speech questions, do not, by doing so, approve bigoted talk, any more than educated Jews who defended the right of neo-Nazis to march endorsed their sick thinking.


Swissair Profits Rise
Swissair, the Swiss national carrier, reported a slight rise in first-half profits today despite the recession and a decline in passenger traffic because of the Persian Gulf war.
Swissair said that its six-month gross profits rose to 86 million Swiss francs, or about $56.2 million, from 70 million francs, or about $45.8 million in the period last year.
The result followed a disappointing 1990, when it paid no dividend after its profits plunged to 4.3 million francs, or $2.8 million, from a record 94.7 million, or $61.9 million, in 1989.


Early Land Animal: A Fish Out of Water?
IN a discovery providing new insight into the transition of life from the sea to land, British biologists have found evidence that one of the first four-legged animals known to walk on land was almost literally a fish out of water.
The creatures retained gills and seemed to live more like fish than land-dwellers.
Fish-like gills were identified in fossils of a 360-million-year-old salamander-like creature found in Greenland.
The species, Acanthostega gunnari, was one of the earliest known four-limbed creatures.
Though the species walked on land and probably had lungs as well, the findings indicate that these transitional animals remained primarily aquatic.


From Iran, More Satanic Decrees
Circumstantial evidence, like finding feathers in the cat's milk, can be highly persuasive.
Such evidence links Iran to the July 12 murder in Tokyo of the Japanese translator of Salman Rushdie's "Satanic Verses" and to the earlier stabbing in Milan of the Italian translator of Mr.
Rushdie's allegedly blasphemous novel.
Iran's rulers deny responsibility.
Believing them is no easier than ignoring telltale feathers.
Mr.
Rushdie, a British subject, has been in hiding since February 1989, when Ayatollah Khomeini castigated the book and demanded the death of the author and his publishers.
A few months later, the old Ayatollah died and optimists hoped his threat would be quietly withdrawn.
When Britain resumed relations with Teheran last September, Iran's ruling mullahs promised to abide by world law.
In December a subdued Mr.
Rushdie openly embraced Islam and canceled plans for a British paperback of his book.


Sports Daily Bid Reported
More than a month after folding the newspaper, the owners of The National Sports Daily are talking with a potential buyer who could restart it in some fashion, its editor and publisher, Frank Deford, said yesterday.
Mr.
Deford said he expected a decision on a sale could be made within at least a week.
He declined to identify the potential buyer.


Tsongas Assails Bush On Use of Race Issue
In one of his sharpest attacks on President Bush since declaring his candidacy for the Democratic Presidential nomination three months ago, Paul Tsongas accused Mr.
Bush on Sunday of using race to divide the nation and further his political agenda.
Mr.
Bush "doesn't give a damn about race relations," Mr.
Tsongas said in a speech to Democrats at a picnic.
Mr.
Tsongas appeared with Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, who is considering a Presidential bid and said he would decide around Labor Day.


DERAILMENT CLOSES A CALIFORNIA ROAD
A freight train carrying a corrosive chemical derailed on Sunday, forcing the closing of a 10-mile stretch of one of California's main north-south highways and stopping Amtrak service between Los Angeles and Santa Barbara.
Roughly 440 gallons of the jet fuel component aqueous hydrazine splashed across train tracks Sunday afternoon after a 39-car Southern Pacific freight train snapped in half and crashed into a Highway 101 overpass near Seacliff, about 75 miles north of Los Angeles.
A cloud of toxic, ammonia-like fumes and smoke continued to float across the freeway 24 hours after the crash.


Only a Start Against Global Fraud
With each passing day, the Bank of Credit and Commerce International appears, like a Midas of crime, to have spread its poisonous fraud ever further.
That became even clearer yesterday when, almost simultaneously, District Attorney Robert Morgenthau of Manhattan and the Federal Reserve Board each brought heavy new charges against the bank.
The enforcement actions are as welcome as they are strong, but neither answers the reverberating question: What took so long?
How did B.C.C.I. get away with its scheming until now?
Inevitably, multinational crime has followed the rapid spread of multinational finance; but there are not yet global cops to match the global robbers.


Boeing Net Advances 17%
Stronger commercial jet sales and lower losses from space and military segments helped the Boeing Company increase its second-quarter profits 17 percent over the corresponding period last year, the company said today.
For the quarter that ended on June 30, Boeing earned $454 million, or $1.32 a share, compared with $387 million, or $1.12 a share, for the corresponding period last year.
Its revenues rose 12.1 percent, to $7.81 billion from $6.97 billion.


Goodyear Plans Sale Of Factory in Alabama
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said today that Akzo N.V., the Dutch chemicals company, had agreed to pay about $105 million for a Goodyear plant in Alabama.
The deal is expected to be completed in the fourth quarter, pending a definitive contract and governmental approval.


COMPROMISE URGED ON A JOBLESS BILL
The Bush Administration urged Congress today to wait until after Labor Day before trying to extend unemployment benefits for people who have been out of work at least half a year.
But some Senate Republicans, anxious to avoid voting against a politically attractive measure, are seeking to find room for compromise.
The bill that Democratic leaders want to pass before going on vacation this weekend will cost $5.8 billion.


Corrections
An article on July 20 about a Food and Drug Administration committee's recommendation of approval for a new AIDS drug referred incorrectly to David Barr.
He is the assistant director for policy at the Gay Men's Health Crisis.


Witness Tells of Visit by Happy Land Fire Suspect
A woman testified yesterday that Julio Gonzales came to her apartment early one morning, threw himself on the floor, cried and screamed and admitted setting fire to the Happy Land Social Club.
The scene described by the woman, Carmen Melendez, took place at 4:45 A.M. on March 25, 1990, about an hour after the blaze at the South Bronx club killed 87 people.


Gasoline Prices Are Up
A slight increase in taxes and in wholesale prices in the last two weeks ended a summerlong decline in gasoline prices, a survey has found.
Weighted average retail prices rose five-tenths of a cent a gallon, to $1.22, last week, according to the Lundberg Survey of 13,000 stations nationwide.
Prices for regular unleaded gasoline, including taxes, were $1.09 a gallon at self-service stations; premium unleaded was $1.25, and regular leaded $1.01.
At full-service stations, regular unleaded gas was $1.37 a gallon, premium unleaded was $1.52 and regular leaded $1.36.


N.F.L. to Take 2d Look at Long's Steroid Test
The National Football League will conduct a second analysis of the July 11 urine sample of Terry Long, a Pittsburgh Steeler offensive lineman who reportedly attempted suicide twice last week after telling teammates he had tested positive for steroid use, a league official familiar with the situation said yesterday.
The league has refused to confirm that Long's urine sample, given in a scheduled procedure at the Steelers' training camp in Latrobe, Pa., July 11, was positive for steroids, but the official, who asked not to be named, pointed out that a second analysis is always conducted in the case of a first positive test.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-9
President Bush arrived in Moscow for a summit meeting with President Gorbachev that will explore Soviet-American relations in the post-cold-war era but may also focus on the politics of the Middle East.
Page A1
Reporter's notebook: Muscovites have only humble hopes for the summit meeting.
One woman's message, as she stood by a department store, was: Pots and pans, and never mind the plowshares.
A1


Corrections
The chart at the top of the Business Digest on Saturday and yesterday, noting the performance of various markets, misstated the closing price for the September crude oil contract on the New York Mercantile Exchange on Friday.
It was $21.48 a barrel, up 2 cents from the previous day and down 68 cents for the week.


For 'L.A. Law,' a New Skipper and a New Course
Patricia Green, who began supervising her first episode as the executive producer of "L.A. Law" this week, admitted she was daunted about stepping into the "most incredibly huge shoes in television."
David E. Kelley, who is well over six feet tall, wore those shoes until last May.
In two years as executive producer of NBC's Thursday-night-at-10 hit series, Mr.
Kelley won Emmy Awards as the best producer and writer of drama on television.
He took the series into new territory, reworked its cast, wrote every episode his first season as executive producer, and managed last season to pump so much new heat into the show's multiple plot lines that, even in its fifth year, it was one of the most talked-about shows on television.


Nicaraguans Celebrate After Perfect Game
Nicaraguans rejoiced yesterday over the perfect game pitched on Sunday by countryman DENNIS MARTINEZ of the Montreal Expos.
"This is a feat that fills all Nicaraguans with pride," President VIOLETA CHAMORRO said in a letter she sent to Martinez.


Harold Trapido, 74, Expert on Illnesses In the Tropics, Dies
Dr.
Harold Trapido, an expert on tropical medicine and viruses who worked in South America, India and Louisiana, died Thursday at Touro Infirmary in New Orleans.
He was 74 years old.
Dr.
Trapido died of colon cancer, said Ed Bordes, administrator of the New Orleans Mosquito Control Board, which Dr.
Trapido served as chairman.


Maradona to Work Out
DIEGO MARADONA, banned from soccer until July of next year for failing a drug test and currently undergoing drug rehabilitation, will start training with his former local club, Boca Juniors, this week in Buenos Aires.
But Maradona, who faces drug charges here and in Italy, said he still had not made up his mind on whether he would return to professional soccer.


CHRONICLE
MARY McFADDEN broke two ribs playing in a celebrity tennis tournament in Forest Hills, Queens, on Sunday when she was accidentally struck by her partner, IAN ZIERING, an actor in "Beverly Hills 90210." They were playing against ROBIN LEACH and JUDSON MILLS, an actor in "As the World Turns." But she made the final serve and won the set, 6-3.


Critics Assert the Federal Reserve Was Asleep at the Switch
Senior Federal Reserve officials say they were repeatedly lied to for more than a decade and thus were late to grasp the full extent of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International's illicit dealings in the United States.
Some lawmakers and other critics, however, say the bank regulators at the Federal Reserve were asleep at the switch.
In a letter last week to Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve Board chairman, Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, the Texas Democrat who heads the Banking Committee, wrote, "There is strong suspicion that the Federal Reserve failed miserably to meet its responsibility to monitor and regulate B.C.C.I.'s activities in the U.S."


Stanford Chief Quits Amid Furor on Use Of Federal Money
Donald Kennedy, the president of Stanford University, announced today that he would resign at the end of the coming academic year to give a university plagued by scandal and uncertainty a chance "to banish ambiguity and look to the future as we resolve the problems of the past."
"At present we are talking too much about our problems and too little about our opportunities," Mr.
Kennedy said in his letter of resignation to the university's Board of Trustees, which met today on the Palo Alto campus of one of the country's premier institutions of higher education.
"And to be quite frank about it, there is entirely too much speculation about my future at Stanford. It is very difficult, I have concluded, for a person identified with a problem to be the spokesman for its solution."


Politically Correct and Free Speech; Perils of Humor
To the Editor:
How nice that Joel Connaroe (Op-Ed, July 12) has found self-satisfaction in his political correctness.
He ought now to take the next, more difficult step and attempt to practice intellectual scrupulosity.
In his final paragraph, Mr.
Connaroe notes that it is "especially startling" to see me amusing myself "by likening feminists to pit bulls and making little jokes about 'Dykes on Bikes' " in an essay about academic literary studies that I published in The Hudson Review.


300 Arrests Reported in Iran In a Clash Over Dress Code
Hundreds of demonstrators in the city of Isfahan who were trying to prevent the arrest of women charged with wearing improper dress clashed with the Islamic security force known as the Komiteh on Friday, the newspaper Salaam reported today.
The hard-line daily, which called for "an unfailing combat against social decadence," said 300 people had been arrested.


Busy as a Bee? Then Who's Doing the Work?
IN these languid midsummer days, humans who feel the urge to take it easy but remain burdened by a recalcitrant work ethic might do well to consider that laziness is perfectly natural, perfectly sensible and shared by nearly every other species on the planet.
Contrary to the old fables about the unflagging industriousness of ants, bees, beavers and the like, field biologists engaged in a new specialty known as time budget analysis are discovering that the great majority of creatures spend most of their time doing nothing much at all.


Tungsten-Halogen Bulbs May Pose a Hazard
AUSTRALIAN and British scientists have found that tungsten-halogen lamps emit higher amounts of ultraviolet radiation than conventional lightbulbs and, in certain circumstances, could increase the risk of skin cancer, sunburn and cataracts.
Tungsten-halogen bulbs have become increasingly popular in many countries, including the United States, because they produce more light more efficiently than conventional incandescent bulbs.
But the findings, by scientists working for the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council, prompted the council to warn in June that people using the bulbs in desk lamps are increasing their exposure to harmful ultraviolet radiation.


Alar's Gone, Little Thanks to the Government; Rush to Judgment
To the Editor:
As a former Federal regulator, I felt a special appreciation for your July 9 front-page article on Alar.
You clearly show the folly of Government's basing public health policy on weak or incomplete science and media hype.
Unfortunately, Alar is not an isolated case.


Beef Council Takes Aim At Frequent Beef Eaters
"Real people" don't eat enough beef.
At least, that is the conclusion the Beef Industry Council reached in deciding to change marketing strategies and end its "Real food for real people" advertising campaign.
And that means a review on the council's $25 million to $30 million account, now at Ketchum Advertising, San Francisco.
Monica Eorgoff, the council's advertising director, said yesterday that the change would involve shifting from ads intended for people who are light to moderate consumers of beef to a strategy aimed at moderate to heavy consumers.
The review should take from 60 to 90 days, Ms.
Eorgoff said, and Ketchum has been invited to participate.


Albany Begins Measures to Cut Auto Emissions
New York State will take the first step in adopting the California standards on vehicle emissions today, with the new rules to take effect in time for the 1995 model year.
The rules will add $70 to $390 to the cost of a new gasoline-powered car or light truck, the Department of Environmental Conservation said yesterday, and will eventually require that 10 percent of cars sold be electric.


Judges' Panel, Seeing Court Crisis, Combines 26,000 Asbestos Cases
In an attempt to reduce the delays and exploding costs of asbestos litigation, a panel of Federal judges issued a ruling today that consolidates more than 26,000 cases and transfers them to a single court.
The ruling, which shifts most Federal asbestos cases from around the nation to the Federal District Court in Philadelphia, reverses five previous rulings by the panel over 14 years.


Chase Names New Unit Head
The Chase Manhattan Corporation said yesterday that it had named Vivian L. Eversole head of its global securities services.
Chase's Global Securities Services, which has more than 2,400 employees, holds and processes $500 billion in securities assets for pension funds, insurance companies, mutual funds and investment companies.


Market Place; Big Board Won't Add To Hours
The New York Stock Exchange, stunned by the resistance of many brokers to working longer hours, is backing away from some of the key steps it proposed to try to make itself more competitive internationally.
Exchange officials said yesterday that they had put aside plans for night sessions, which had been tentatively scheduled for later this year.
Those plans had called for brief sessions at 8 P.M., midnight and 5 A.M.


Group President Named For Simon &amp; Schuster
Jack Romanos, a publisher known for his highly effective marketing of paperback books, was named president of Simon &amp; Schuster's consumer group, a job that gives him responsibility for all general-interest publishing, or about 25 percent of the house's $1.4 billion business.
The appointment of Mr.
Romanos, who led Simon &amp; Schuster's paperback division for six years, comes less than a week after the departure of Charles E. Hayward, president of the company's adult hardback division, to Little, Brown.
If he had stayed at Simon &amp; Schuster, Mr.
Hayward would have reported to Mr.
Romanos.


Yanks in Quandary Over Top Prospect
The Yankees have become trapped in their pursuit of Brien Taylor, the overpowering 19-year-old pitcher.
Limited in its pursuit of Taylor by college eligibility regulations, the club has been further set back by perceived slights by his family.
Less than a month before the pitcher's possible enrollment in Louisburg College, a junior college in North Carolina, the Yankees have time to reverse a firm public posture.
They could repair the damage done by a contract offer of barely half the family's demand by showing a willingness to pay more than the $1.2 million agreement the Oakland Athletics reached with Todd Van Poppel last summer.


Drexel Set To Pay I.R.S. $290 Million
Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $290 million to the Internal Revenue Service to settle tax claims against the bankrupt firm.
The agreement, for a small fraction of the $5.28 billion the Government had sought, cleared the way for Drexel to file a plan of reorganization in bankruptcy court, possibly as soon as today.


A Frightful Night: Red Sox Lose 9th Straight at Fenway
The Red Sox lost their ninth consecutive game at Fenway Park -- their longest home losing streak in 64 years -- as the Texas Rangers beat Boston, 7-2, tonight behind a pair of two-run homers by Juan Gonzalez.
Boston has lost 10 of its last 11 games, 15 of 19 and 22 of 32.
The home losing streak is the longest for the Red Sox since June 21-July 4, 1927.
Their record losing streak in Fenway Park is 14, set in 1926.


INSIDE
Jordanian Appeal to P.L.O.
King Hussein of Jordan appealed to the P.L.O. not to raise unnecessary problems over Palestinian represen tation that might delay the proposed Middle East peace talks.
Page A8.
AIDS and the Dentist


Injury to Barfield Leaves Yanks With Empty Feeling
Jesse Barfield walked into the manager's office at Yankee Stadium yesterday afternoon without a limp, and emerged on crutches.
It was what the doctor ordered.
Inside, behind the closed door, Barfield had just been told by Manager Stump Merrill and General Manager Gene Michael that his left foot injury had been diagnosed as a small stress fracture of the navicular bone.
Now, facing a minimum of four weeks' rehabilitation and quite probably more, Barfield felt vindicated in some strange way.


Corrections
A brief television review in Weekend on Friday about a special edition of "Later With Bob Costas" misstated the broadcast days of the shows from which it was compiled.
They are this week's, not last week's -- being broadcast on NBC at 1:30 A.M. through Thursday.


Cone Keeps His Poise And Goes the Distance
David Cone wasn't perfect.
Among the things he was, though, were these: sharp, sensational, confounding, efficient, relentless.
And so in the end, Cone was not surprisingly triumphant.
Cone, who had been rocked early and mercilessly in his last two starts, allowed one hit through seven innings and three over all in earning his second complete game with a 5-1 victory over the Dodgers tonight.
The triumph came as a great emotional lift for the Mets and helped complete an encouraging vault toward the Pirates in the National League East.
Wicked Stretch
Cone, who struck out seven and walked one, yielded a bunt base hit to Brett Butler to start the game and then demolished or fooled 20 of the next 21 Dodgers before Mike Scioscia singled in the eighth.
He lost his shutout when Chris Gwynn homered to begin the ninth, but he didn't let go of his composure, and he recovered to close out the Dodgers.


Apple Computer In Soviet Market
Apple Computer Inc. is selling its Macintosh machine with Russian-language software in the Soviet Union.
Greg Borovsky, Apple's director in the Soviet Union, said the company signed a one-year contract this month to set up dealerships with Intermicro, a Soviet-Austrian venture based in Moscow.


Quotation of the Day
"It is very difficult, I have concluded, for a person identified with a problem to be the spokesman for its solution." -- Donald Kennedy, announcing his resignation as president of Stanford University.  [ A1:1. ]


India in Talks With I.M.F.
India, which last week introduced wideranging measures to open its economy to foreign investors, is negotiating with the International Monetary Fund as Indian officials disclosed further plans to soften decades of red tape and allow 100 percent ownership by multinational corporations.
According to reports here, Finance Ministry officials are talking with a team from the International Monetary Fund about an immediate loan of about $300 million.
The Indian Express, one of the nation's largest English-speaking newspapers, reported that talks on a loan of $3.5 billion to $5 billion were also likely.


Videotapes Preserve Martha Graham's Genius
A historic collection of videotapes and a film documenting the ballets and techniques of the modern dance pioneer Martha Graham were presented today to the Library of Congress by the National Endowment for the Arts.
"Although these videotapes will never duplicate the unique experience of a Martha Graham work in live performance, we will be able to secure at least an approximation of her artistry for future generations," said James H. Billington, the Librarian of Congress, after accepting the materials at a small ceremony at the library.


June Gains of 0.5% Posted For Income and Spending
Personal income and consumer spending both rose five-tenths of 1 percent in June, the Government said today in a report that analysts saw as a sign that the economy would continue to grow in the third quarter.
"It gives consumer spending quite a bit of momentum going into the third quarter," said Laurence H. Meyer, head of a St.
Louis economic forecasting firm.
"It's another piece of data that the third quarter is locked in as fairly solid." He added that he thought the recovery would be weaker than normal.


CHRONICLE
The British press said it was the most expensive non-royal wedding ever when KERRY PACKERspent $1.5 million to give away his daughter, GRETEL PACKER, at a village church in West Sussex on Saturday and to entertain 1,000 friends at a reception at his nearby estate, Fyning Hall.
Miss Packer, 25 years old, wed NICHOLAS BARHAM, 31, a financier.


BRIEFS
A.
B.
Astra, Stockholm, a unit of ABB Asea Brown Boveri, said its high-blood-pressure drug Plendil had been approved for use in the United States. *
AST Research Inc., Irvine, Calif., a maker of personal computer products, will test and evaluate I.B.M.'s OS/2 extended services products.


Washington at Work; Quintessential Spy Undone by His Own Loyalty
In the supercharged Central Intelligence Agency of the mid-1980's, when the war on Communism was a holy war and spies were its crusaders, Alan Fiers embodied the upwardly mobile clandestine agent.
A minister's son from the Indiana flatlands, a Big Ten football letterman and decorated Marine hero, Mr.
Fiers had assembled a reputation for ferocious patriotism and zealous dedication to his craft in 15 years of undercover work, associates say.


Review/Music; 4 Programs Of Mozart At Festival In Austria
The Salzburg Festival, which opened on Friday evening with, among other events, a stunning setting of Mozart's Requiem by John Neumeier and the Hamburg Ballet, continued its celebration of the city's favorite son throughout the weekend.
Mozart, who died 200 years ago in Vienna, was born here in 1756, in a house on the Getreidegasse that is now conspicuously marked and thronged with tourists.
The festival, which began musical productions in 1921, the year after its founding, has lavished special attention on Mozart ever since.
This year, with the whole world celebrating the Mozart bicentennial, the festival is presenting seven of the composer's operas and many other programs of his music.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT BORK gave some advice to CLARENCE THOMAS on Saturday in a speech in Long Beach, Calif., The Associated Press reported.
PRESIDENT BUSH nominated Mr.
Bork to the Supreme Court four years ago.


Morgenthau Latest in a Line Of High-Profile Prosecutors
With yesterday's indictments in what many predict will be the largest international banking scandal ever, the Manhattan District Attorney has continued a tradition of acting like something larger than a standard-issue local prosecutor's office and characteristically created controversy in the process.
Since the racket-busting days of Thomas E. Dewey in the 1930's, the office has been dominated by single-minded prosecutors who, while processing tens of thousands of petty drug, assault and domestic cases a year, have set their sights on such larger targets as the state Legislature, systemic political corruption, and far-ranging organized-crime conspiracies.


Dr. Campbell to Head Tisch School of Arts
Dr.
Mary Schmidt Campbell, the Commissioner of Cultural Affairs for New York City since 1987, has been named dean of the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University.
Dr.
Campbell, who will assume the post on Oct. 1, succeeds David J. Oppenheim, who has announced his resignation.
No successor has been named for Dr.
Campbell.


A Weekend Fallout Pulls 3 Colts Together
After a weekend of upsets in the chase for 3-year-old honors, Fly So Free had a jammed ankle today, Strike the Gold had a new jockey and Hansel had a date to join both of them in the morning at Saratoga Race Course.
The three star colts will race for $1 mllion in the Travers Stakes on Aug. 17.
But today they were paying the price for a tumultuous weekend that saw Hansel and Strike the Gold run third in major races while Fly So Free was winning the Jim Dandy Stakes and creating something of a three-way tie at the head of the class.


Grand Jury Is Likely To Get Tyson Case
The prosecutor for Marion County (Ind.) announced yesterday that he was asking that a special grand jury be convened within two weeks to look into allegations that Mike Tyson raped a woman at an Indianapolis hotel 11 days ago.
The prosecutor, Jeffrey Modisett, said that Tyson, the former heavyweight boxing champion, would be asked to testify but wouldn't be obligated to appear before the grand jury.


Man Freed From Prison As Conviction Is Upset
After serving more than two and a half years for killing a man who burst into his apartment seeking to buy drugs, Michael Nickerson walked out of a state correctional center in Harlem yesterday and into the arms of his wife and family.
Last week, a state appeals court ruled that Mr.
Nickerson should never have been charged in the case, much less convicted.


Business Scene; The Soaring Cost Of Cigarettes
WHEN the Labor Department releases its monthly reports on inflation, they often include this sort of sentence: "Tobacco products (mainly cigarettes) were among the items that rose most sharply in price." Fewer and fewer Americans smoke.
And the danger to health is a huge disincentive.
But in the last decade, no other single item in the Consumer Price Index has gone up as much as cigarettes.
Clearly the cigarette industry, despite the endless anti-smoking campaigns, is achieving price increases that many other industries can only dream of.
Even health care did not keep up with the 154.3 percent rise in cigarette prices between 1980 and 1990, although the cost of hospital rooms and prescription drugs ran a very close second and third, respectively.


Our Towns; Suspicion Haunts Village After Boy's Disappearance
Suspicion will not shake hands and introduce itself.
On Augusta Street it has made itself known by rattling the trees and blowing a wicked mist over the front porches.
It has made the mouths on the old people and the young go flat and made the centers of their eyes small.
They never knew what went on in the house at 362 1/2 Augusta Street, but now they swear they know.
"There was always something about that woman." That's what they're saying now, with their lips tight.
These are dangerous whispers going up and down the block and around South Amboy, for the truly knowable facts are spare.
Five-year-old Timothy Wiltsey was last seen by the neighbors playing in his yard between noon and 1 o'clock on Saturday, May 25.
At a quarter past seven that night, his mother turned from a refreshment stand at the local carnival and began screaming that her son was missing.
Little else is sure.
But what the neighbors most certainly know is that they do not like how his mother has behaved since, starting with an appearance on the nightly news.


Interest Rates Show Little Change
Interest rates were little changed yesterday, as securities dealers and investors digested recent data showing a sluggish economic recovery and prepared for a heavy supply of new Treasury issues next week.
At the regular weekly auction of new Treasury bills, rates averaged about 5.58 percent for three-month bills, down from 5.60 percent last week, and 5.69 percent for six-month bills, down from 5.72 percent.
Those rates are far enough below the yields of longer term issues that many investors are under growing pressure to buy the longer maturities.


Hearing in Kenyan Rape Case
Twenty-nine Kenyan high school students pleaded not guilty today to manslaughter charges resulting from a midnight raid on a school dormitory two weeks ago in which 19 schoolgirls died and 71 were raped.
Only two of the students, aged 14 to 18, were charged with rape.
All were held after a brief hearing before the magistrate at Meru, 110 miles north of Nairobi.
The police prosecutor told the magistrate that 10 more male students were in custody but had not been charged.


JWP to Press Deal For Businessland
JWP Inc., the company seeking to buy Businessland Inc., said it would proceed with the acquisition although Businessland's bondholders rejected its offer of 35 cents on the dollar.JWP, a technical services company based in Purchase, N.Y., said it was confident that it had cleared the last obstacle to the successful completion of its $48 million tender, which also includes an offer of $1 a share for Businessland's common stock.
The deadline for the offer has been extended to Friday.


Study Finds Link Between Chemical Plant Accidents and Contract Workers
A study on chemical plant safety for the Department of Labor says the employees most likely to be placed in the most dangerous situations are contract workers who are poorly educated, inadequately trained and unprepared to confront emergency situations.
The study by the John Gray Institute, a division of Lamar University in Texas, is the first to document the shortcomings in education, training, and experience of workers who work for engineering and construction companies hired under contract by chemical companies.


Topics of The Times; Life-or-Death Decisions
Four years ago Gov.
Mario Cuomo signed a law requiring New York hospitals and nursing homes to withhold emergency cardiopulmonary resuscitation from patients who had decided, in advance, to refuse it.
The law also granted immunity to health professionals who carried out a lawful "do-not-resuscitate," or D.N.R., order in good faith or who, unaware of such an order, resuscitated someone who didn't want to be.
The law was, and is, welcome but it didn't go far enough.
It didn't include the increasing number of people, most of whom have AIDS or cancer, who die at home or in hospices.
That means that emergency medical service providers have to attempt resuscitation in virtually all cases -- even if the patient is clearly dead.


Dinkins Speech On TV Today
Mayor David N. Dinkins's speech on New York City's fiscal problems will be shown live at 5:15 P.M. today on television Channels 2, 4, 7 and 31, and rebroadcast in full on Channel 31 at 10:30 P.M.
Parts may also be broadcast live on radio stations WINS-AM (1010), WCBS-AM (880) and WNYC-AM (820), and by delayed broadcast at 7:30 P.M. on WNYC-FM (93.9).


A Garden of Science and History
"Nature Illustrated," now on view at the New York Academy of Design in Manhattan, is about the beauty of botanical art.
But it is also about the byproducts of history and science.
For instance, there is a drawing of a Western cactus made 150 years ago that was made because the country needed a transcontinental railroad.
When Jefferson Davis, as Secretary of War, mounted expeditions in the 1850's to survey possible railroads, he sent naturalists along to catalogue the plants and animals.


With More Dry Weather, Corn and Soybeans Surge
Corn and soybean futures prices surged yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade in reaction to dry Midwestern weather and forecasts for more of the same.
Wheat futures also rose, reflecting new Soviet buying interest.


Man Held in Family Deaths
A 26-year-old man whose parents and two younger brothers were found slain here Friday was arrested on a murder warrant at his California home on Saturday, officials said.
The police in St.
Louis said the bodies of Emory Futo, 53, and Euna Futo, 50, were found in their ransacked home, their son Joseph, 23, was found in a car parked two blocks away, and son Nick, 24, on a nearby cemetery road.


COACH SUSPENDED OVER ETHNIC SLURS
A rural Northern California school district threatened with the loss of state financing has avoided that penalty by suspending for at least five years a coach accused of using derogatory racial terms with black and American Indian students.
The agreement between the Susanville School District and the State Department of Education also stipulates that the coach, Edward Frank Murin, undertake a "cultural awareness program," paid for by the district and approved by the state department.


Top Athletes Are Angry
South Africa's top track and field athletes threatened yesterday to mount their own bid to enter international competition in time for the world championships in Tokyo next month.
The athletes were angered by a decision of the South African Amateur Athletics Association, which voted Saturday not to go to Tokyo, a move which may endanger South African participation in next year's Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.


The Job Is Simms's to Lose
The Giants' quarterback situation is still unsettled, but Phil Simms seemed to score a point today.
For the first time since Ray Handley became the head coach in May, he called Simms the incumbent and said Jeff Hostetler would have to unseat him.
Last season, after Simms had led the Giants to a 10-0 record, he suffered a season-ending foot injury in the 14th game of the season.
Hostetler took over, and he led the Giants to victories in that game, the two remaining regular-season games and the three playoff games, including Super Bowl XXV.


Voice of America Plan For the Negev Delayed
The High Court of Justice ruled today that construction of a Voice of America radio relay station in the Negev region could not begin until a study of its environmental impact was completed.
The decision is expected to delay construction of the $300 million station for at least a year and a half.
It was due to begin broadcasting to Central Asia, the Soviet Union and parts of Africa in 1993.


Count Dropped In Slaying Case
Prosecutors today formally dropped a murder charge against a man who had been named as a suspect in a slaying believed to be the work of a serial killer.
The man, Kenneth Ponte, was indicted last year in the 1988 killing of Rochelle Clifford Dopierala, one of nine women whose bodies were found along highways around New Bedford from July 1988 to April 1989.
Mr.
Ponte, a lawyer, had remained free.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Houston's $101 million of public improvememt revenue bonds have been priced to yield 6.80 percent for a 2006 maturity by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. *
State of Washington plans to sell about $650 million in general obligation refunding bonds Aug. 5 or Aug. 6, with Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company and Lehman Brothers Inc. as lead underwriters to negotiate the sale.


Patrick Tossed An Air Ball
WE read in the papers that Madison Square Garden has finally gotten around to offering something other than the ubiquitous rubber hot dog to hungry patrons of the sweaty arts.
It is progress indeed that the new improved Garden will be selling hamburgers and french fries this fall, if you can swing a loan.
What else is the Garden vending?
Why not Patrick Ewing?
How about calling Ewing's bluff, and saying, "O.K., big fella, if you don't like it in New York, we'll try to work out some kind of equitable trade. But just see how many commercials you get in Salt Lake City."


Indictment Is Expected To Push Peru's Inquiry
A New York grand jury indictment, which said the Bank of Credit and Commerce International bribed two former officers of the Peruvian central bank, breathes new life into a sputtering 12-month investigation into the personal finances of Alan Garcia, the former Peruvian President, bankers and lawmakers said today.
The investigation by a special commission of members of Peru's House of Delegates had floundered recently, as charges that Mr.
Garcia looted the country of as much as $50 million were rebutted and the Peruvian Congress seemed close to ending the inquiry.


Luxury Tax Is Criticized
The excise tax on luxury items passed by Congress last year has hurt the middle class by depressing sales in the automobile, jewelry, boat and aircraft industries, business executives told Republican lawmakers today.
Automobile dealers told the House Republican Study Committee that the 10 percent luxury tax on cars costing more than $30,000 had kept customers away and forced the dealers to lay off sales people and other workers.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League
NL -- Suspended Andre Dawson, Chicago Cubs outfielder, for one game and fined him $1,000 for bumping umpire Joe West in a game against Cincinnati last Tuesday.


Errant Envelope Snares Suspect in Bank Thefts
Vincent Arthur Hall may have seemed like a harmless bureaucrat.
He worked as a disability analyst for the State Social Services Department in Jamaica, Queens.
But give Mr.
Hall a day off or even a sick day, the authorities say, and he was fully capable of walking into a bank, going up to a window, pushing across a note demanding all of the teller's large bills and threatening to blow the employee's head off.


NEW YORK LODGES CRIMINAL CHARGES AGAINST BIG BANK
A state grand jury in New York City indicted the Bank of Credit and Commerce International and two former executives yesterday on fraud, theft and money-laundering counts.
At the same time, the Federal Reserve Board announced it was seeking a $200 million penalty against the bank for violating United States banking laws.
Besides the proposed fine, which would be by far the largest in the Federal Reserve's history, the central bank wants to bar nine foreign businessmen permanently from American banking institutions.


Observer; Let the Sap Run Out
It would be useful if cultural historians could pinpoint the moment when Americans, more or less simultaneously, stopped saying "wise up." Until that moment, being "wised up" was the essence of Americanism and anybody who wasn't "wised up," or at least capable of "wising up," was probably "a hopeless sap" and deserved everything that hit him.
"Sap," incidentally, is another important word that has fallen out of use.
Plenty of synonyms have tried to replace it.
"Airhead" is in vogue right now.
But "sap" had a simple force, with a sound as businesslike as a pistol butt on the side of the skull.


Candidates Say New Districting Creates Disorder
As New York City officials prepared to ask a Federal court for election law changes needed to let City Council elections proceed on schedule, some furious candidates argued yesterday that revised district lines had unfairly thrown their campaigns into disarray.
A decision expected today from a three-judge panel in Federal District Court in Brooklyn is pivotal as the city rushes toward a Sept. 12 primary.
The Justice Department on Friday approved the city's remedy to three districts that the department said discriminated against Hispanic voters, in addition to changes in six others.
But unless the judges change the election schedule, the historic election will not take place on Nov. 5.


BUSINESS DIGEST
A Banking Indictment
B.C.C.I. was indicted, along with two of its former executives, for fraud, theft and money laundering.
The Fed also said it was seeking a $200 million penalty.  [ Page A1. ]


NAMES LIST LEADS TO ETHICS DEBATE
The message on Elliot Hessayon's answering machine appeared to be a simple solicitation for a candidate in last month's State Assembly election, but its implications have led him to file a complaint with the Medical Board of California.
"This is Alex Koleszar calling from Burke for Assembly campaign headquarters," the message said.
"I actually had gotten your telephone number from Dr. Jenkins."


Unocal Net Plunges 97% In Quarter
The Unocal Corporation reported yesterday that its second-quarter profit sank 97 percent, compared with results that included a one-time gain a year earlier, while the Pennzoil Company said earnings for the quarter more than doubled.


Topics of The Times; Voting Vengeance
New York City's Districting Commission was chided last week for a racial gerrymander that denied a white incumbent a chance to run in her current minority area.
It now has replaced the gerrymander with new lines that can only be designed to punish the incumbent, Council member Susan Alter, for having complained.
It's a small-minded, grudging action that detracts from the commission's larger achievements.
While approving most of the city's new Council districts last week, the Justice Department went out of its way to criticize the serpentine lines that put Ms.
Alter a couple of blocks outside her old district.
John Dunne, Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights, instructed the commission that the Voting Rights Act did not automatically forbid newly created minority districts that elect white candidates.


Administration to Fight House Panel's Subpoena
The Bush Administration has decided not to comply with a House subcommittee subpoena for a Justice Department legal document and is preparing to assert executive privilege in support of its stand, Government officials said today.
The document at issue is a 1989 legal opinion by the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel, which concluded that agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation may legally arrest fugitives overseas without the permission of the country involved.


Europe Widens Yugoslav Observer Force
The European Community decided today to enlarge its team of 50 observers in Yugoslavia to at least 100 and to send the unarmed force into the republic of Croatia if the warring parties agreed and the safety of the observers could be assured.
The advance party of the European negotiators, seeking a cease-fire, is to leave for Belgrade on Tuesday, followed later in the week by the foreign ministers of Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Portugal.


Fugitive In Mob Case Is Arrested
Vittorio Amuso, the reputed boss of the Lucchese crime family and a fugitive since his indictment more than a year ago on charges of rigging bids and making labor payoffs to control New York City's window-installation industry, has been arrested at a shopping mall near Scranton, Pa., Federal officials said yesterday.
The 47-year-old fugitive was dressed in shorts and a T-shirt when he was seized by F.B.I. agents.
He had just hung up a pay telephone at the Fairview Mall in Dickson City, a suburb of Scranton, when the agents moved in, said Linda Vizi, a spokeswoman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Q&amp;A
Red Clay  Q.
What makes red clay red?
A.
The famous soil found in Georgia, South Carolina and elsewhere in the southern Piedmont region is mainly a grayish-white clay called kaolin colored by a small amount of iron oxides, said Bill R. Smith, a soil scientist at Clemson University in Clemson, S.C.


New Takeover Bid Denied by NCNB
The NCNB Corporation denied reports that it was considering the acquisition of the Hibernia Corporation, Louisiana's largest bank holding company.
The Wall Street Journal and The American Banker reported on Monday that NCNB might inject cash into Hibernia, with possible long-term plans to take it over.
NCNB said in a statement that it was "concentrating its efforts on completing" its recently announced merger with the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation.
Hibernia, which has $7.27 billion in assets, said it "does not comment on rumors."


Underwater Volcanoes
Most of the world's volcanoes probably erupt under the oceans.
But because many never break the ocean surface, only a small percentage are recorded, two scientists say.
In a recent issue of the journal Science, they theorize that the volcanoes form plumes that mushroom beneath the water surface, often shedding a mixture of pumice and rocky debris onto the bottom.


U.S. Math Team Places 5th
AN American team of six high school students has scored fifth in a field of 55 national teams that competed in the International Mathematical Olympiad in Sigtuna, Sweden.
In this year's competition, which was held July 17-18, the Soviet Union scored first, followed by China, Romania, Germany, the United States, Hungary, Bulgaria, Iran, Vietnam and India.
One member of the American team, Joel E. Rosenberg of Hall High School, West Hartford, Conn., won a gold medal.
The other Americans, Kiran S. Kedlaya of Georgetown Day High School, Washington, D.C., Robert D. Kleinberg of Iroquois High School, Elma, N.Y., Lenhard L. Ng of Chapel Hill Senior High School, Chapel Hill, N.C., and Michail G. Sunitsky and Ruvim Y. Breydo, both of Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan, won silver or bronze medals.


Dingell Lends Support To a Banking Measure
Representative John D. Dingell, the powerful chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee and a key opponent of proposals to overhaul the banking system, today gave qualified support to a banking measure now working its way through the Senate.
M.
Dingell's tentative endorsement of the measure proposed by Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr., a fellow Democrat from Michigan and the chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, greatly increases the likelihood of major banking legislation this year, although the Congressional plan would be substantially different from what the Administration has proposed.


Interest Rates Show Little Change
Interest rates were little changed yesterday, as securities dealers and investors digested recent data showing a sluggish economic recovery and prepared for a heavy supply of new Treasury issues next week.
At the regular weekly auction of new Treasury bills, rates averaged about 5.58 percent for three-month bills, down from 5.60 percent last week, and 5.69 percent for six-month bills, down from 5.72 percent.
Those rates are far enough below the yields of longer term issues that many investors are under growing pressure to buy the longer maturities.


Former Ogilvy Executive Joins Foote, Cone &amp; Belding
A FORMER top executive of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, who supervised its important American Express and Philip Morris accounts, is being hired by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding to bolster that agency's East Coast operations with clients including Philip Morris's rival, RJR Nabisco.
Effective Aug. 12, J. Brendan Ryan will become president of FCB East, a new position that involves overseeing FCB/Leber Katz Partners, the Chicago-based agency's offices in New York, and FCB/Lewis, Gilman &amp; Kynett, its Philadelphia unit.
He will also take a hand in Foote, Cone's international operations, serving on the board of Publicis-FCB, a joint venture with Publicis, a French agency.


Tear Down Barriers To Export of Services
To the Editor:
Your July 15 editorial on the London economic summit starts on a strong, clear note about the critical importance of finishing the Uruguay Round trade negotiations, but loses its way on the trade in services.
Services are a particular United States concern.
Industries such as banking, accounting, securities, telecommunications and transport now account for 78 percent of United States employment, 67 percent of United States gross national product and 24 percent of United States exports.
If we don't tear down some barriers to service exports, one of our most efficient sectors will continue to face protectionist walls abroad.


Midway Airlines
Midway Airlines has begun cutting costs by reducing the amount of paint on the exteriors of its aircraft.
By painting only its logo onto the jets' silver-colored surfaces, the company will eventually save $1.4 million a year, or $20,000 a plane, said Thomas E. Schick, the president.
The new paint scheme appears on 17 aircraft that began arriving here on Friday.
Since March, Midway has been operating under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


Chess
Revenge is always sweet, but even more so when quite unexpected.
Three years ago, the Chileans brought the illustrious Viktor Korchnoi, a former challenger for the world championship, to Vina del Mar for a training match with their favorite son, the grandmaster Ivan Morovic.
Korchnoi won the six-game contest easily with a 4-2 score.
So far, quite normal.


Theory Links Early Puberty to Childhood Stress
ONE of the most troubling facts for social scientists and policy makers alike has been the high numbers of girls in their early teens who become mothers, especially in America's inner cities.
Now a novel theory proposes that these young mothers are responding to a pattern in human evolution that induces people growing up in extremely stressful circumstances to bear children early and often.
The theory has received considerable attention and criticism.


Pros Are Undecided
MICHAEL JORDAN and PATRICK EWING are undecided about whether they will accept invitations to be on the United States basketball team for next year's Olympics, their agent, DAVID FALK, said yesterday.
Falk denied a report in The Chicago Tribune that Jordan and Ewing turned down offers to play in the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
That is the first year when National Basketball Association players will be eligible.


Anti-Missile Plan Exploits Controversial Technology
"STAR WARS" is coming down to earth, at least if the Senate Armed Services Committee has its way.
The Pentagon's bid to forge anti-missile arms -- after more than seven years and $24 billion -- has produced vast sums of exotic research but nothing to zap warheads lofted from afar.
The Bush Administration wants a $40 billion partial shield deployed in the late 1990's, its main feature being swarms of tiny interceptors orbiting the earth.


Unraveling the Dealings of a Worldwide Institution
For years, long before it was seized by regulators in a global sweep this month, the Bank of Credit and Commerce International was guided by what the governor of the Bank of England last week called a "criminal culture." The moves yesterday against the shadowy private bank by the Federal Reserve and the Manhattan District Attorney's office are the latest steps in a worldwide investigation into that criminal culture.
Together, the steps underscore the accelerating pace of the American investigation into the banking scandal that is proceeding on several fronts.


Judge Orders U.S. Marshals to Prevent Closing of Abortion Clinics
After more than two weeks of demonstrations at Wichita's three abortion clinics that have led to more than 1,000 arrests, a Federal district judge ordered United States marshals today to keep protesters from blocking the entrance to the clinics.
The judge, Patrick F. Kelly, sent letters to Mayor Bob Knight, Chief Rick Stone of the city police department and the United States Marshals Service saying that despite the Mayor's assurances on Friday the clinic gates were blocked again this morning by protesters.


Despite Euphoria on Arms Control, Deterrence Remains a Potent Force
Despite the United States-Soviet agreement that will cut the long-range nuclear weapons of both countries for the first time, Washington and Moscow will still have vast arsenals of roughly the same size as when the talks began in 1982.
Moreover, the pact to be signed Wednesday allows and encourages the superpowers to continue improving the power and accuracy of their nuclear weapons.


Flood Said to Kill 66 Romanians
A dam burst after heavy rain in mountainous northeastern Romania, unleashing a wall of water that killed at least 66 people and forced 10,000 to flee their homes, officials said today.
At least 30 people were reported missing.
The collapse of the dam late Sunday sent a wall of water up to 12 feet high rushing down a nearby valley, in some cases sweeping away children and old people who could not swim. 'Animals Torn Apart'
Heavy rains and flooding damaged hundreds of homes and dozens of bridges and knocked out communications and transportation, radio reports said.
A Government spokesman here said at least 51 villages were affected.


Florio Attacked On Tax Rebates To Homeowners
Property-tax rebate checks, on which Gov.
Jim Florio has bet much of his political capital, are ready to be mailed this week, but Republicans hope to beat the Democratic Governor to the punch.
"He's not going to get a free ride with the rebate checks," said Assemblyman Robert Franks, the Republican state chairman.
Mr.
Franks hired the New York ad agency Severin/Aviles to create what its senior partner, Jay Severin, described as "a sophisticated, expensive, multidimensional" ad campaign.
It calls the rebate checks "another Florio ripoff."


Rejected! Ewing Is Loser in Bid for Free Agency
The Knicks won their arbitration battle with Patrick Ewing yesterday, but it was still unclear whether the All-Star center would be a Knick when the team opens its season next November.
Several hours after the arbitrator, Daniel Collins, ruled against Ewing in his bid to become a free agent, Dave Checketts, the club president, said he would be willing to trade Ewing if the player told him he wanted to leave New York.
"I would make every attempt to accommodate him," he said.


Dibble Says He'll Seek Counseling
Cincinnati Reds pitcher Rob Dibble, who has had a penchant this season for throwing baseballs wildly at batters, runners and into the stands, said today that he would seek counseling to control his emotions.
"After carefully analyzing my behavior of the past few months and talking with my family, it has become apparent to me that I need professional counsel in dealing with some of my emotions," Dibble said in a statement released by Hamilton Projects Inc., his Cincinnati management firm.
"I also realized that my behavior not only reflected unfavorably on me but on my family, teammates and friends, and that it must change. I am in the process of seeking professional counsel.


Dollar Ends Day Higher; Gold Down in New York
The dollar edged higher in slow trading yesterday as dealers awaited further word on the state of the United States economy and the direction of interest rates.
Gold prices fell after rising overseas.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery fell $2.80 an ounce, to $363.40.
The Republic National Bank quoted a late bid of $363.60, off $2.40 from Friday.


Queens Rape-Murder Suspect Described as a Jekyll-Hyde
A 28-year-old mail clerk charged in a murder and rape spree that terrorized southeast Queens between January and July met repeatedly before and after the crimes with his parole officer, who picked up no hint of the suspect's involvement, officials said yesterday.
"To all appearances he was making a satisfactory adjustment," Martin Horn, a spokesman for the State Division of Parole, said about the suspect, Lester Ford, who lived with his mother, his stepfather, two brothers and two sisters at 209-29 111th Road in St.
Albans.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.66
5.76
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.58
7.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.69
7.37
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.04
8.04
8.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.39
8.38
8.40
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.34
9.35
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.11
7.11
7.35
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


In Paris, Winds Of Change Stir
The haute couture has been one of this city's monuments for a century and a half, as immutable as the Eiffel Tower or the Arc de Triomphe.
During the showings of fall clothes in July and spring clothes in January, decisions are made that will affect the length and shape of Western clothes.
In the past, major changes rarely happened overnight.
True, hemlines tumbled when Christian Dior introduced his New Look in 1947, and belts were banished when Balenciaga showed the chemise 10 years later.
But typically, changes were gradual, influencing expensive clothes first, then trickling down to lower-priced lines a season or more later.


Artistic Changes at 92d Street Y Are Cause for Speculation
In a move that has provoked intense speculation in the music business, the 92d Street Y has hired Raymond Grant as director of its new Tisch Center for the Performing Arts and shifted Omus Hirshbein to the posts of artistic adviser and vice chairman of a new board of directors headed by Joan Tisch.
Mr.
Hirshbein has devised and managed the Y's music programs and raised money for them for the last 17 years.
The change is part of a major reorganization of the Y that also includes a $40 million fund-raising drive.
Mrs.
Tisch, who has been a Y board member for 17 years, is the wife of Preston Robert Tisch, the co-owner of the New York Giants.


Review/Television; Are Pit Bulls All Bad? And How About Romance Novelists?
Is the bite of a pit bull worse than the bark of a romance novelist?
The question is inspired by tonight's quirky double bill at 10:30 on Channel 13, the week's offering from "P.O.V." ("Point of View"), public broadcasting's outlet for independent producers.
The opening documentary, "A Little Vicious," tells the story of a five-year-old terrier named Bandit, a relative of the pit bull, a species that has earned or been invested with a bad name for aggressiveness.
Bandit first got into trouble when he chased and bit a neighbor, and then got into real trouble when he sank his teeth into the arm of his loving owner, a 75-year-old named Lamon Redd, who had made the mistake of beating him for a minor indiscretion.


Steinbrenner Is Assuming a Low-Key Approach With the Commissioner
Motivated by a desire to regain an active role in baseball one year after his banishment, George Steinbrenner has adopted a low-key approach to his adversarial relationship with the commissioner, laying the groundwork for a possible reconciliation.
Steinbrenner has started his new strategy at a time when the Yankees, the team he was forced to leave behind, have returned to respectability.
They have made the leap behind a band of young players, the type Steinbrenner eschewed in his 18-year reign as managing partner of the team.


Bill to Ease Sale of Bonds
The Bush Administration says it wants to make it easier for states and local governments to sell tax-exempt bonds.
In testimony today to a House Ways and Means Committee subcommittee, Kenneth Gideon, an assistant Treasury Secretary, supported legislation to eliminate some of the complicated rules that local authorities say cost them money and scare away some investors.


Patterns
Halston's Life and Art
Halston, a designer whose personal life attracted as much attention as his fashions, will be examined from both sides this fall.
"Simply Halston," a biography by Steven Gaines, is scheduled for publication in September.


Japan Brokers Disclose Improper Payments
Under intense political pressure, Japan's largest securities firms finally disclosed today that they had made improper payments covering stock market losses to nearly every big industrial group in the country.
Companies in the Mitsubishi, Sumitomo, Matsushita and Toyota groups; leading steel companies; media concerns; trading companies and banks, as well as public pension funds representing teachers and police, among others, received the improper payments, which totaled nearly $1 billion, the securities firms said.


Stocks Gain in Tokyo
Stock prices were up today in Tokyo.
By the end of the afternoon trading session, the 225-issue Nikkei average had advanced 429.05 points, or 1.83 percent, to 23,872.63.


An AIDS Puzzle: What Went Wrong In Dentist's Office?
After a year-long investigation showed that a Florida dentist and five of his patients had become infected with the same strain of the AIDS virus, Federal and state medical detectives are mounting a fresh probe because they are baffled by how the virus was transmitted in his office.
The cluster of cases has become one of the biggest mysteries in the annals of epidemiology.
To detect what went wrong in the practice of Dr.
David J. Acer of Stuart, the sleuths now are looking to the wider-ranging and more intensive investigation.


Spielvogel-Coke Meeting
The two top executives of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, New York, flew to the Atlanta headquarters of the Coca-Cola Company yesterday to make an unusual advertising presentation to the soft drink giant.
It was unusual because Backer is not a Coca-Cola advertising agency.
McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York, is the agency of record for the company's flagship Coca-Cola Classic brand, which brings McCann an estimated $300 million in annual billings in the United States and 70 other countries.


Corrections
Two entries in the Finance Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to the status of bond issues planned by New York State and New York City to be sold Wednesday.
Both issues are up for competitive bids, so no lead underwriter has been chosen.


Xerox's Net Declined 3% In Period
The Xerox Corporation reported today that second-quarter earnings fell 3 percent because of slow copier sales.
After-tax profit totaled $126 million, or $1.11 a share, in the quarter, compared with $130 million, or $1.16 a share, in the corresponding period last year.


Air Bags for All Cars
A chance to make public safe ty history public health, really -- comes to few people.
Now it has come to Jerry Curry in the form of the air bag, which a few years ago the auto industry scorned.
Mr.
Curry, Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, can ultimately prevent at least 7,000 deaths and 80,000 crippling injuries each year by ordering that front-seat air bags become available as standard equipment in all new passenger vehicles.
He is flinching, because the Administration wants to let the industry to decide who does and doesn't get safe cars.


Slayings Point Up Lapses By Milwaukee's Agencies
As the authorities continued today to investigate killings linked to Jeffrey L. Dahmer, community leaders and local officials pointed to repeated mistakes that were made even as complaints and suspicions about Mr.
Dahmer's behavior were mounting.
From the Milwaukee police to the state parole and probations system to the courts, Mr.
Dahmer, 31 years old, slipped through several layers, officials acknowledge, with sometimes only scant attention.


Why Single Out Small-Store Owners for Fines?
To the Editor:
I love New York.
This has been my attitude for more than 35 years.
Let me tell you, it ain't easy.
The streets of New York City are filthy.
Most store owners are not the problem.
The administration is trying to destroy small merchants.


Bush in Moscow to Chart a New Course
President Bush landed in the Soviet Union tonight for a summit meeting with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev that will explore the shape of Moscow's relations with Washington in the post-cold-war era but may also focus on the politics of the Middle East.
Mr.
Bush's plane arrived at Sheremetyevo Airport here a few minutes before 10 P.M., local time, after a nine-hour flight form Washington.
He received a low-keyed greeting from Vice President Gennadi I. Yanayev, reviewed a small honor guard, including a quartet of drummers with red stars emblazoned on their instruments, and then sped into the capital and retired for the night.


King Hussein Requests Flexibility From P.L.O.
King Hussein of Jordan appealed today to the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization to refrain from raising unnecessary problems over Palestinian representation that might delay the convening of the proposed Middle East peace conference.
The King's remarks, in an interview in his office at the Royal Palace here, were his first on the critical issue of Palestinian representation and were apparently meant as a signal to the P.L.O.'s executive committee to take a pragmatic approach at its meeting in Tunis.
The P.L.O. leaders must decide whether to accept Israel's demand that a Palestinian delegation for the proposed talks exclude P.L.O. members.


Virginia Student's Sentence on Drug Charge Is Cut
A Federal judge today cut in half the 13-month sentence of a University of Virginia student convicted on two charges of drug trafficking after a raid at three fraternities at the university.
The student, Ernest Prior Jr., 19 years old, was sentenced in June to serve the mandatory 13-month prison term without parole after he pleaded guilty to selling three-quarters of an ounce of marijuana and a bag of hallucinogenic mushrooms.


From Swords, Fountain Pens
Presidents Bush and Gorbachev will use pens made from scrapped nuclear missiles to sign the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty at the Kremlin.
The Interfax news agency said the pens for the ceremony were made of metal from medium-range nuclear missiles that were scrapped in the accord on intermediate-range nuclear arms that was signed in 1987.


More Pay Phones for Poor Neighborhoods Urged
New York City officials issued a proposal yesterday that would force New York Telephone and other companies that own pay telephones to install more of them in poor neighborhoods.
"We want to see that if they have a phone at 57th and Fifth, they have one at 157th and Fifth," said Joan Lebow, a spokeswoman for the city's Department of Telecommunications and Energy.


Ex-Shoo-In, Bill Bradley Fights Aloof Image
He is the same lanky, loose-limbed intellectual who even admirers said would spend three and a half hours on Kremlin politics, four hours on third-world debt and 30 seconds on flood control for Camden; the same politician who nearly lost an election by refusing to talk about anything anybody cared about.
But a chastened Bill Bradley is now trying hard to change all that.


For Giants, a Scarcity Arises on Defense
When a National Football League team plays a three-four defense, it generally uses three defensive linemen in running situations and four in passing situations.
It likes to carry six defensive linemen on the roster.
Last season, at the end of which the Giants won Super Bowl XXV, the team got by with five defensive linemen.
They were Leonard Marshall, Erik Howard, John Washington, Eric Dorsey and Mike Fox, then a rookie.


CREDIT MARKETS;
A $91.3 million issue of Mesa, Ariz., utility system revenue bonds, due 1992-2004, was awarded to the First Boston Corporation at a bid of 6.299 percent.
They have been priced at yields ranging from 4.75 percent for a 1992 maturity to 6.70 percent in 2004.


World Exclusive: Stars Bare All!
Some of the more intriguing -- and exclusive -- televised interviews with sports stars in various types of trouble have not appeared on sports programs.
They were seen only on network news and entertainment programs.
There was Martina Navratilova with Barbara Walters last Friday on ABC's "20/20" disputing the palimony suit filed against her by her former lover, Judy Nelson.


Lawyer Admits Bilking Foundation He Headed
The former head of a New York foundation pleaded guilty yesterday to looting the foundation of about $370,800 by charging it fake legal fees.
The defendant, James R. Halperin, who is 45 years old and lives in Kings Point, L.I., admitted guilt in State Supreme Court in Manhattan and is to be sentenced on Sept. 23.
He still faces a civil suit in which he is accused of giving himself more of the foundation's money than he gave to charities.


CHRONICLE
After several months of peddling the idea for it, EDWARD I. KOCH has sold his fifth book.
St.
Martin's Press is to publish "Citizen Koch" under the imprint of THOMAS DUNNE.
In the book Mr.
Koch, who was Mayor of New York from 1978 through 1989, will, as usual, air his views: "The tough issues of the day plus my honest comments," he said yesterday.
DANIEL PAISNER, who helped MAUREEN REAGAN write "First Father, First Daughter," will help Mr.
Koch write the book.


Mill Town Pensioners Pay for Wall Street Sins
For most of the century, few places have been as isolated from the economic mainstream as this venerable mill town where generations worked in the Cannon family mills, lived in the Cannon family rental cottages and shopped in Cannon family-owned buildings.
But when about 400 grim-faced retirees gathered at a high school auditorium today, the angry talk was of leveraged buyouts and California bankruptcy law and the way their pension payments, already meager, were slashed by 30 percent after a California financier bought and sold their company and reinvested their pension plan's holdings in an insurer dependent on junk bonds.


Jack Donahue, Author and Editor, 73
Jack Donahue, an author and a former managing editor of The Houston Post, died Saturday at the Memorial City Medical Center in Houston.
He was 73 years old and lived in Houston.
He died of complications from emphysema, his family said.


Bridge
An astonishing drive in the final session of the Life Master Pair Championship here on Sunday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals brought a victory to Eric Rodwell of West Lafayette, Ind., and Doug Simson of Columbus, Ohio.
A 46 percent game in the first of the two final sessions had left them languishing in 38th position, but they surged at night with a 70 percent game to snatch the title.
They had won in Toronto five years earlier, and are one of the very few double winners in the 62-year history of this prestigious event.
A single trick on the last deal decided the result.
Before that was played, John and Bill Roberts of Manhattan were leading by less than one match point, and had a chance to be the first brother combination to win.
But they failed by two tricks in a part-score while Simson and Rodwell failed by just one trick, settling the issue.


Books of The Times; A New Family Portrait Of Henry, William et al.
The Jameses A Family Narrative By R. W. B. Lewis Illustrated. 696 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $35.
It would be difficult to find a pair of brothers as formidable as Henry and William James, the first, arguably America's greatest writer, the latter, one of the pre-eminent philosophers of his generation.
Side by side, they produced large, influential bodies of work that reassessed the vicissitudes of human will and sensibility.
And together, they staked a young America's claim, in the waning years of the 19th century, as a worthy literary and intellectual rival to Europe with its centuries of tradition.


Jets Don't Replay It Again For Nagle
Browning Nagle will not leapfrog into the Jets' starting quarterback spot this season.
But still, you don't want to hurt the rookie's feelings after he messed up in his first exposure to National Football League competition.
So Joe Daniels, the quarterbacks' coach, showed mercy at this morning's film session, which reviewed last Saturday's scrimmage against the Redskins.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Allied Plywood Corp., Charlestown, Mass., a supplier of specialty woods and a unit of Ply Gem Industries, named Robert H. Nassau president and chief executive. *
Berol Corp., Brentwood, Tenn., a marketer of writing instruments and a subsidiary of Pen Holdings Inc., appointed Charles A. Lieppe president and chief executive.


New Campaigns
*
After disappearing from the fashion scene for much of the 1980's, the sportswear company Sasson has introduced its first ads aimed at men in 10 years.
The $6 million print and television campaign, which also includes ads for children's and women's apparel, continues to use the "Oo-la-la Sasson" slogan that was popular in the 1970's.
The ads were created by the company's in-house advertising department.


Postal Venture By TNT Express
TNT Express Worldwide, the international freight-courier company, said it had formed a venture with five national postal organizations.
The deal links its parent company, TNT Ltd., with the post offices of Germany, France, the Netherlands, Sweden and Canada.


CHRONICLE
Time Warner New York Cable Group, sponsor of the free PAUL SIMON concert in Central Park on Aug. 15, will pay the city about $150,000 to cover the cost of police, sanitation and emergency medical services, and will give another $400,000 to the City Parks Foundation.
Announcing the concert at City Hall yesterday, Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS managed to mention most of of Mr.
Simon's hit songs.


'Gypsy' Closes
"Gypsy," a revival of the 1959 musical with music by Jule Styne, lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and book by Arthur Laurents, closed after the matinee on Sunday at the Marquis Theater.
The musical, directed by Mr.
Laurents, was scheduled to run through Aug. 11.
It opened in November 1989, closed in January 1991 and reopened in April for a limited engagement.
Its total Broadway run was 35 previews and 582 regular performances.


Grand Jury Is Likely To Get Tyson Case
The prosecutor for Marion County (Ind.) announced yesterday that he was asking that a special grand jury be convened within two weeks to look into allegations that Mike Tyson raped a woman at an Indianapolis hotel 11 days ago.
The prosecutor, Jeffrey Modisett, said that Tyson, the former heavyweight boxing champion, would be asked to testify but wouldn't be obligated to appear before the grand jury.


Louis Langman, Physician, 87
Dr.
Louis Langman, an obstetrician and gynecologist who practiced in Manhattan and in White Plains, died on Sunday at his home in Sagaponack, L.I.
He was 87 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Officer Is Badly Hurt in Fall Chasing a Robbery Suspect
A Housing Authority police officer was in critial condition yesterday after falling 20 feet from the roof of a Brooklyn housing project, at 419 Blake Avenue in the Brownsville section, while chasing a robbery suspect, the authorities said.
The officer, John McMullen, 26 years old, was taken to Bellevue Hospital with a fractured pelvic bone and a broken left finger.


In Poland, Tourism With Apologies
Aspen and Monte Carlo too expensive?
Bronco-busting at an American dude ranch likely to bust the budget as well?
Why not ski the slopes above Zakopane, saddle up near Walbrzych or try breaking the bank at Wroclaw?
Such is the pitch from Poland's upstart travel entrepreneurs: Western pleasures at Eastern prices.
In a country where tourism was long dominated by Orbis, the state travel company notorious for gloomy hotels, gelatinous food and dormant showers, thousands of businesses have sprouted to house, feed and entertain a growing flock of foreign visitors.
About 18 million came last year, up from 8 million in 1989.
As Poland proudly proclaims that it is rejoining Europe and the rest of the capitalist world, it is earnestly trying to cater to foreign tastes.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Gildemeister Upset  Anne Minter of Australia won six straight games on the way to a 6-3, 6-4 victory over eighth-seeded Laura Gildemeister in the opening round of the $225,000 Mazda Classic yesterday in Carlsbad, Calif.
Sixth-seeded Nathalie Tauziat held off Kathy Rinaldi, 6-3, 4-6, 6-4, and seventh-seeded Barbara Paulus topped Christina Papadaki, 6-2, 6-3, in other matches.
In a late match, Pam Shriver was scheduled to play Jo Durie for a berth opposite top-ranked Monica Seles in the second round tonight.
Seles drew a first-round bye.
Minter, ranked 50th in the world, broke a 3-3 tie in the first set when she became the first player in the match to hold service.
She then clinched the set by taking 8 of the next 10 points, winning each on an error by Gildemeister.
Minter moved ahead, 2-0, in the second set, completing her string of six straight winning games, and then held steady for her first victory in five career matches against Gildemeister, the 22d-ranked native of Peru.
Rinaldi tied Tauziat, 4-4, in the third set with a service break and took the first two points in the next game with a pair of slams but couldn't maintain control.
Tauziat went back ahead by winning the next four points, clinching the game on a strong backhand shot down the line for a 5-4 advantage.
In the second set, Tauziat couldn't recover after Rinaldi won the first three games.
Rinaldi dropped only one point during that span as she began to approach the net with greater frequency.
Paulus, an Austrian who is ranked 16th, had little trouble beating Papadaki, a wild-card entry from Greece. (AP)


Some Signs of Hope Glint From New York's Clouds
In 1859, the diarist George Templeton Strong toured the muddy excavations of what was to be Central Park, and wondered whether New York City would succumb to the burdens of crime, filth, poverty and politics before the park's saplings would ever mature.
"Perhaps the city itself will perish before then," he mused, "by growing too big to live under faulty institutions, corruptly administered."


U.N. Helps Kuwait Recover Iraqi Loot
Early next month in the Saudi Arabian border town of Arar, representatives of Iraq, Kuwait and the United Nations, advised by experts from the Austrian Central Bank, will perform an unusual ceremony around a large pair of scales.
One by one, Iraqi officials will place on the scales 3,216 gold bars, weighing about 12.5 kilograms or 30 pounds each.
A United Nations representative will call out the exact weight of each bar calculated to several decimal places and record the figure on a computer.


Leafs Sign Bullard
Forward MIKE BULLARD has signed with the Toronto Maple Leafs, who acquired his rights from the Philadelphia Flyers.
In return, Philadelphia has the option of taking Toronto's fourth-round selection in the 1992 entry draft or its third-round pick in 1993.


Speaking in Tongues
A PERSONAL computer offers strong advantages for anyone learning or brushing up on a foreign language.
The machine is available outside of class time and it never grows impatient or bored with the numbing repetition of words and phrases.
Of course, you do have to inflict your accent on real people at some point.
HyperGlot of Knoxville, Tenn., puts out a series of so-called Survival Manuals for Macintosh computers.
These are available for Spanish, French, German, Russian and Chinese, and each holds about eight megabytes, mostly of the sound of a native speaker pronouncing more than 600 everyday words and phrases.
You see the words on the screen and hear them through the Mac's speaker.
If you have a Macintosh LC or Si, which include microphones, you can record your voice for comparison. (Owners of other models can use an accessory called the MacRecorder.)


Dow Stages A Recovery, Rising 12.74
With a slight gain late in the day yesterday, stock prices recovered some of last week's losses.
But analysts said the market remained stalled by concerns that the pace of the nation's economic recovery might be slow.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which fell more than 40 points last week, gained 12.74 for the day, closing at 2,985.24.
Advancing issues outnumbered declines by about 8 to 7 on the New York Stock Exchange, with 820 up, 708 down and 527 unchanged.


Homestake Gains In Galactic Deal
The Homestake Mining Company, a gold exploration concern, has been cleared by the Federal Trade Commission to acquire an interest in Galactic Resources Ltd., the Canadian natural resources developer.
Under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act, companies planning to acquire assets of $15 million or more, or a minimum of 15 percent in another company, must notify the commission.


Vote Set on Sabena
Shareholders of Sabena S.A., the ailing Belgian national airline, will vote on Tuesday to recapitalize the company with state money, Sabena and Government officials said.
The meeting follows the European Commission's approval last week of providing 35 billion francs, or about $972 million, of state aid to the airline.
But about nine billion francs, or $250 million, of the aid depends on Sabena's obtaining six billion francs, or about $166 million, from a partner.
The airline is negotiating with British Airways and Air France.


New Council Districts Only Encourage Strife
To the Editor:
The redistricting of the expanded New York City Council may be a throwback to ghettoization.
The gerrymandering of Council seats along ethnic majority lines, totally ignoring established relationships to adjoining neighborhoods, in effect established separatism.
But, instead of encouraging diverse ethnicity in neighborhoods, the integration of all groups into a melting pot, the new districts do just the reverse.
If anything, they set back racial, cultural and religious relationships at a time when every effort should be made at smoothing out the differences.
The one-person-one-vote recognition is lost when large groups of ethnic population live in majority-controlled districts -- such as Hispanics in an African-American district.
The minority in such districts loses its voice and vote.


Using Imagination In Paper for Printers
MANY people invest thousands of dollars and countless hours to become proficient at desktop publishing.
They use the best tools, including a personal computer, a laser or inkjet printer, a page layout program and, most important of all, their imaginations.
And then they print their creations on boring white paper.
Granted, remarkable things can be done with basic copier paper, and white laser printer stock is perfectly fine for most standard jobs.
There are times, however, when a special laser-quality paper can make a big difference in the way a document is received.
A parchment look can impart dignity, a marble finish elegance, a recycled-paper watermark political correctness and so on.
Businesses can establish a strong identity by printing their correspondence on a distinctive but tasteful paper.


Launching of Shuttle Is Scheduled for Thursday
After a weekend of repairs, NASA today cleared the space shuttle Atlantis for a possible launching on Thursday on a satellite delivery and research mission.
Liftoff is scheduled for 11:01 A.M.
Thursday, provided there are no surprises from tests of a shuttle main engine under way that was damaged last week, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said.


Dinkins Is Striving to Sell Mix of New and Old Ideas
Seated alone behind his desk, Mayor David N. Dinkins will take to the airwaves for the second time in two months tonight to explain his efforts to meet New York City's fiscal problems.
But, his advisers decided, he cannot compete with "Entertainment Tonight."
Mr.
Dinkins, striving to be seen as taking the lead in reshaping the city's government to match its resources, originally proposed broadcasting his speech at 7:30 P.M.
But local stations showed a tepid response to that time slot, which is home to lucrative shows like "Wheel of Fortune."


A City Brimming With Peace But Not Many Pots and Pans
Pots and pans, please, and never mind the plowshares, was the sum of Tatyana Pobirezhnaya's advice to the summit principals today as they gathered to sign a treaty to begin sheathing the world's long-range nuclear swords.
"I can only dream with envy of those pots and pans," the woman said, her back to the Kremlin as she stared longingly at a GUM department store window display of the latest nonstick saucepans and frying pans dangling like sugarplums well beyond her pocketbook.


London Journal; An Anniversary Dinner That's a Feast for Gossips
Ten years ago today, it was all pageantry and splendor, trumpet fanfares at St.
Paul's Cathedral, the romance and the wedding of the century.
Lady Diana Spencer and Charles, Prince of Wales and heir to the throne, enthralled Britain and the world with their royal romance.
But if the popular tabloids and the gossip columns are to be believed, they did not live happily ever after.


Alar's Gone, Little Thanks to the Government
To the Editor:
"Apple Growers Bruised and Bitter After Alar Scare" (front page, July 9), about the pesticide Alar, is severely flawed.
In 1989, a Natural Resources Defense Council report, first publicized on CBS's "60 Minutes," found that Alar in apple products created cancer risks at levels 240 times greater than those the Environmental Protection Agency said were safe.
Infants and young children were said to be especially at risk for their consumption of apple products at levels at least 10 times that of adults.


Live From New York
Chicago Bulls star MICHAEL JORDAN, the National Basketball Association's Most Valuable Player last season, will be the guest host of the 17th season premiere of the NBC program "Saturday Night Live" on Sept. 28.
The announcement was made yesterday in Los Angeles by LORNE MICHAELS, creator and executive producer of the show.


Berlin Journal; Reichstag: Great Hall Of Ghosts
With its two columned facades, the scarred hulk of the Reichstag casts its glance to the east and to the west.
Like some elderly liveried butler awaiting the family's return after a long absence, the old Parliament building has seen its assured place in a reunited Germany give way in recent times to gnawing questions about its future.


Bone Fragments, Many Human, Are Found at Suspect's Ohio Home
After hours of combing through woods and underbrush, local officials today found more than 50 bone fragments, some of which may be the remains of Jeffrey L. Dahmer's first murder victim.
At a news conference this afternoon beside Mr.
Dahmer's former home, where the fragments were recovered, the officials said they found pieces of skull, ribs and vertebrae that might belong to Steven M. Hicks, a 19-year-old Coventry Township man who disappeared on June 18, 1978.


BRIEFS
*
Castle &amp; Cooke Inc., Los Angeles, said shareholders had voted to retire the company's 140-year-old name in favor of Dole Food Co.. *
Dun &amp; Bradstreet Software, Atlanta, announced a partnership with Powersoft Corp., Burlington, Mass., to develop software for personal computers.


Patience Is a Virtue In New Yank Regime
Stump Merrill does not have the luxury of protecting his rookies, all eight of them, from the worst of times as they suffer their growing pains in the major leagues.
Davey Johnson, late of the Mets, had that luxury when the likes of Dwight Gooden, Sid Fernandez and Ron Darling were coming along back in the mid-1980's.


Books of The Times; Also in 1492, a Hunt for Spanish Jews
1492  The Life and Times of Juan Cabezon of Castile By Homero Aridjis  Translated by Betty Ferber. 285 pages.
Summit Books. $21.95.
With a resonating date for a title, this novel describes horrible events that occurred 500 years ago in Spain and is really history in disguise.
As such, it demands close attention to separate fact from fiction, requires constant unraveling of dozens of remote characters and, finally, leaves little redeeming catharsis.
But "1492," by Homero Aridjis, a Mexican poet and novelist, is rewarding because, like one of James A. Michener's informational novels, it is a palatable education about a time and place a reader might not otherwise pursue.


Corrections
Because of a computer processing error, a thumbnail biography yesterday with the Washington at Work column -- about Alan Dale Fiers Jr., who oversaw the Central Intelligence Agency's relationship with the Nicaraguan rebels -- listed his hobbies incorrectly.
They include pickup basketball and other amateur sports; flying and golf were the hobbies of a person who was the subject of an earlier column.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 26
July 19
July 27
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.2
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.1
3.1
Gasoline stocks
210.8
213.9
215.6
Distillate stocks
120.4
119.0
118.6
Crude imports, daily
5.8
6.9
7.3
Product imports, daily
1.7
2.0
2.3
Crude stocks
347.0
348.6
386.6
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
88.8
88.8
93.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


DINKINS OUTLINES PLANS TO REMEDY FISCAL PROBLEMS
Seeking to assure the public that he is in firm control of New York City's fiscal health, Mayor David N. Dinkins outlined a mix of immediate and long-term remedies last night, from eliminating chauffeurs for most city commissioners to increasing state financing for welfare and Medicaid.
In a televised address from City Hall, Mr.
Dinkins mapped out two basic approaches: an uphill battle to shift some of the city's fiscal burdens to the fiscally strapped state, and an array of sometimes politically difficult cost-cutting and revenue-raising proposals.


Decision to Pitch to Canseco Dooms the Yanks
Jose Canseco didn't even hit the baseball that hard.
He golfed a low, outside slider from Yankee starter Wade Taylor high to right.
If he had been any other batter, a standard-model power hitter, this ball might have become a soft fly to the opposite field.
But Canseco is still Canseco, a muscled celebrity of the first order.
So the baseball flew onward and upward, clearing the wall behind right fielder Mel Hall for a two-run homer in the seventh inning.
The man who battled Yankee Stadium fans for two long days had won the war, and Oakland would win last night's game, 6-5.


Jews for Jesus Suit Is Rejected
In 1987, Jews for Jesus decided to hold its annual convention at a kosher resort in the Catskills.
The resort rejected the convention, however, after mainstream Jewish organizations objected and threatened to take their business elsewhere.
So Jews for Jesus filed a lawsuit, arguing that the other Jewish organizations had violated the group's civil rights.


Martinez Too Big a Test for Met Rookie
The assignment, if not cruel, was challenging in the extreme.
Pete Schourek, a rookie who had not started a game in the major leagues, was given the baseball and this chore: face the Dodgers, take on Ramon Martinez pitch for pitch and keep the Mets in the hunt against the Pirates for another night.
"It'd be a big spot for anyone," said Bud Harrelson, the manager of the Mets, before Schourek took the mound tonight.
"Whatever he can give me I'll take."


English Puddings for All Seasons (and All Sweet Cravings)
"PUDDING wine? What do you mean, pudding wine?"
The customer's question was not asked discreetly, but boomed across the stately wood-paneled dining room of Middlethorpe Hall, a country house hotel on the outskirts of York.
"I've never heard of anything so ridiculous."


Osteopathy Plays Role in Primary Care
To the Editor:
I enjoyed your July 3 article on back manipulation.
However, let me provide some enlightenment.


Chief Marketer Leaves Coke
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that the senior vice president and marketing director for its United States subsidiary had resigned and that a senior officer from Coke's food subsidiary had been named to replace him.
Theodore Host, 45 years old, resigned from Coca-Cola U.S.A. to "pursue other interests," a Coke U.S.A. spokesman said.
Mr.
Host was not available for comment yesterday.


Vallone Drops Plan to Check Council Ethics
Two months after proposing the idea, the Speaker of the New York City Council, Peter F. Vallone, has abandoned his plan to conduct far-reaching background checks of the people nominated to lead Council committees.
He said he had done so in part because other Council members had protested that such scrutiny would invade their privacy.
Another reason, he said, was the opposition of several civic groups, which feared that the plan would give him too much power.


An Elaborate Route Around the Regulators
A former head of Saudi intelligence, the royalty of oil-rich Gulf emirates and offshore banks in the Cayman Islands were part of the intricate network of deceit that enabled the Bank of Credit and Commerce International to secretly gain control of three American banks over the last several years.
That clandestine network went undetected for years by America's banking regulators but it was sketched out in detail for the first time by the Federal Reserve Board in an order released on Monday that seeks to fine B.C.C.I. $200 million and permanently bar nine people from having any connection with banking in the United States.


For Thrills, Lovers and Others Leap
Once, those who wished to hurl themselves from high places, tumble a hundred feet or so and then bounce giddily at the end of a rubber cord had to pursue their passion on the sly and sneak onto bridges for illicit leaps.
But no more.
Bungee jumping, a mildly outlaw sport through most of the 1980's, is now a booming business.
Enterprises offering supervised jumps from construction cranes and hot-air balloons -- heights reach 320 feet, fees $99 a leap -- have sprouted in at least nine states, including Texas, California and New Jersey.
Though several people have died in leaps overseas, commercial bungee jumping in the United States has a pristine safety record.
But the industry's rapid growth is raising concern about a lack of government regulation and uniform training for those supervising the jumps.
Joe Bergman, of Jump Master Bungee in Livingston, N.J., said: "We need some guidelines to make sure people going into the business are trained. This is not as easy as it looks. There are a lot of technical calculations you have to make." Human Yo-Yo
For the thrill-seekers themselves, bungee jumping is unmatched for sheer simplicity.
It supplies an intoxicating tide of adrenaline for little expense and energy, compared with, say, skydiving, and no advance training is needed.
A jumper is provided a body harness that attaches to a set of three, four or five elastic bungee cords.
The bungees hook into nylon webbing that is bound around a crane, balloon basket or other structure.
As the jumper plunges earthward, the cords stretch to about twice their normal length and then contract, which by turns cushion the fall and bring on slingshot-like rebounds.
Though no one officially tracks the industry, interviews with bungee entrepreneurs around the country suggest that clients are plunging from platforms and baskets more than 1,000 times a week.
In four years of commercial jumping in the United States, no deaths or serious injuries have been reported.
But in 1989, three people died bungee jumping in France, where a single-cord system is used; two of the people died when their cords broke and one slammed into a tower.
Deaths have also occurred in Australia, Germany and New Zealand.
After the accidents, France and one state in Australia banned the sport, but bungee operators elsewhere in Australia and in New Zealand have developed safety standards and asked their governments to enforce them, said Geof Pearson, spokesman for World Bungee, an Australian operator.
A Regulatory Vacuum
In the United States, commercial bungee jumping appears to be a lawless province, other than local building codes, zoning ordinances and state liability insurance requirements for entertainment sites.
Debbie Edgecombe, a consumer analyst at the California Department of Consumer Protection, said she had received numerous calls about the sport in recent weeks.
"People want some kind of standards for this industry, and at this point there are none," she said.
Jane Vidler, a spokeswoman for Lloyd's of London, said companies that sell insurance for unusual risk activities "are not touching it at this time" because of uncertainty about the sport's potential legal status.
Manufacturers of construction cranes are worried about negligence lawsuits, said Robert E. Zeigler, senior safety consultant at the Crane Institute of America.
The United States Consumer Product Safety Commission, which has jurisdiction over mobile carnival rides, is investigating the use of cranes for commercial bungee jumping.
James De Marco, a compliance officer at the commission who is spearheading the investigation, said it "may be possible for the Federal Government to enforce industry-generated standards, with the Australian plan as a model."
"We are trying to learn as much as possible about the sport," Mr.
De Marco said, "and will eventually put in a jurisdictional opinion on it."
Even enthusiasts are concerned.
John Kockelman, the 32-year-old "grandfather" of American commercial bungee jumping who with his brother founded the first jump enterprise, in Mountain View, Calif., has written a detailed safety standards manual for a fledgling industry group called the United States Bungee Jumping Association.
"If people are going to get hurt, it will not be because a cord breaks," he said.
"It will be human error. This manual can show people how to avoid that."
The roots of bungee jumping are in a South Pacific rite of manhood and harvest blessing.
Each spring the "land divers" of Pentecost Island still twist liana vines into cords, lash them to their ankles and leap from trees or specially built towers.
Modern bungee jumping, using the wrist-thick bundles of rubber strands wrapped in woven nylon, was born on April Fool's Day, 1979, when members of the Oxford Dangerous Sports Club attached bungee cords to themselves and dived from the 245-foot Clifton Bridge in Bristol, England.
In New Braunfels, a resort town near San Antonio, a bungee tower has been erected on a limestone cliff, 120 feet above the Guadalupe River.
Half suspension bridge, half gangplank, the tower arches partway across the gorge and ends abruptly in a small platform.
Since the venture, called Bungy Over Texas, opened July 4, Mike Stine, a safety consultant on bungee jumping, has introduced hundreds of jumpers to the chills of free fall.
Mr.
Stine owns Vertigo Bungee of Lake Tahoe, Nev., which assists entrepreneurs in setting up companies. 'JUMP!'
"This will be the most terrifying moment of your life," Mr.
Stine calmly told a reporter who quivered on the platform, before shouting, "Five-four-three-two-one-JUMP!"
He was correct.
In the two or three long, long seconds after a jumper's feet leave the tower, breath disappears with startling completeness.
There is a ridiculous, fleeting urge to try to climb the air.
Just when the butterfly-stomach sensation, familiar to riders of roller coasters and fast elevators, seems it will expand beyond what the body can bear, the bungee cords tug at the harness and the first, deep bounce begins.
In that instant, exhilaration replaces terror.


The M.I.A. Racket
At first the blurred photo supposedly showing three American fliers given up for dead in the Vietnam War excited their families and intrigued the news media.
Then Government investigators raised persuasive doubts about the photo's authenticity.
This sequence was a vivid reminder of the roller-coaster emotions experienced by families of lost servicemen -- and of the cynical efforts to manipulate their grief.
Yesterday's decision by the Pentagon to increase the number of people investigating reports of missing Vietnam War servicemen is a reassuring step.
It could prove a welcome antidote to the hucksters who trade in tragedy.


Foodnotes
Help With the Bake-Off


Mitsubishi Owns Only a Tiny Interest in Rockefeller Center
To the Editor:
I was happy to see "Mitsubishi Lifts Rockefeller Stake" (news item, Business Day, July 13), which marked the first time anyone in the major news media got the story straight.
The Japanese have never bought more than a tiny minority interest in Rockefeller Center, and have been royally fleeced as they did.


USX Net Falls 88.2%; LTV Off 82.5%
The USX Corporation said today that its earnings plunged 88.2 percent in the second quarter with declines in both oil refining and steel making.
The Pittsburgh-based company, which is the nation's largest steelmaker and 12th largest energy company, said profits fell to $25 million in the 1991 quarter from $212 million in the corresponding year-earlier period.
Earnings per share were not reported because shareholders in May approved a plan to split USX stock into separate classes for energy and steel.


Moderate Quake Jars Alaska
A moderate earthquake shook the Seward area early today, but there were no immediate reports of damage or injury, officials said.
The magnitude of the temblor was 4.3 on the Richter scale, said Paul Whitmore of the Palmer-based Alaska Tsunami Warning Center.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the effects of the failure of the Executive Life Insurance Company on a group of pensioners in North Carolina referred to the precedent incorrectly in some copies.
The collapse of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, not of Executive Life, was the largest insurance failure in United States history.


CHRONICLE
BARRY CORBIN, an actor in "Northern Exposure," learned last month that he has a 26-year-old daughter, SHANNON ROSS, living in Texas.
Ms.
Ross was given up for adoption in Texas in 1965 by her mother, who had not told Mr.
Corbin she was pregnant.
Ms.
Ross got in touch with her biological mother, whose name she would not disclose, and thus found her father, who lives in Seattle.
She sought genetic information from her natural parents because of her own medical problems.
"She is having trouble with her pregnancy now," said Elizabeth Much, Mr.
Corbin's publicity agent, "and asking questions about the child she now has."


Abortion Protests Continue in Wichita


Millionaires' Tax Urged For Student-Loan Fund
Senator Bill Bradley has proposed taxing millionaires to pay for student loans to help thousands of middle-income students struggling to pay the rising cost of college tuition.
Worries about middle-income students have grown as tuition rates climb and Federal policy makers debate whether to provide more aid to poorer students, who may have few college options, or to help middle-income students attend the schools of their choice.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12


Narrow Field in Review By Lehman Brothers
Lehman Brothers, New York, a financial services unit of the American Express Company, has started a review of its $2 million advertising account.
The search has been narrowed to less than half a dozen agencies, said Steven Faigen, a company spokesman, who added that a decision was expected in September.


Manila Lifts Ban on Mrs. Marcos
The Philippine government lifted its five-year ban on the return of Imelda Marcos today and said the widow of the late President Ferdinand Marcos was free to come home from exile in the United States.
In announcing the decision, Franklin Drilon, the presidential executive secretary, said the ban on the body of the late president, who died in September 1989 in Hawaii, would remain in force.


New Campaigns
*
The latest gang of sharks in the subway has nothing to do with "West Side Story." Posters of the man-eating predators have been placed in subway trains as part of a campaign created by Geer, DuBois Inc.


Mayor Dinkins's Promising Promises
Mayor David Dinkins proved in his much-heralded speech last night that he recognizes the severity of New York City's problems and how much he has to do to lead the way out of them.
It offers relief to citizens who have grown anxious about seeming drift.
The trouble is, his agenda sounds like that of a brand-new mayor, not one in office for 18 months.
And this is not the first time he has promised reform.
The question remains: Does he have the perseverance to flesh out a substantive plan, and the stomach to make the harsh choices that can keep the city on course?


Personal Health
"GO in good health," my grandmother used to say to people leaving on a trip.
But this is not possible for millions of travelers who start out with disabilities or chronic illnesses that may flare up from time to time or that require constant or frequent treatment.
In the past, many, if not most, such individuals were seriously limited in the ability to travel far from home, whether for business, pleasure or family necessity.
But today, with careful planning and the aid of travel agencies and other organizations that cater to their needs, people with health problems are increasingly able to travel both here and abroad.


Ray Felix, 60, Is Dead; Knicks Center in 50's
Ray Felix, who played five seasons as a center for the New York Knicks in the 1950's, died on Sunday at his home in East Elmhurst, Queens.
His son, Ray Jr., said the cause of death was a heart attack.
Mr.
Felix was 60 years old.
Mr.
Felix, a New Yorker, played his college basketball at Long Island University under Coach Clair Bee.
After college, he and Coach Bee both joined the Baltimore Bullets.


Police Question Henderson
Oakland Athletics outfielder Rickey Henderson was questioned by the New York City police yesterday about an early-morning incident in which a woman said that Henderson struck her in the face during a dispute at his hotel.
The woman, Sandra Salarinatin, 23 years old, of Manhattan, filed an assault complaint against Henderson.
She told the police that the incident occurred at his room in the Grand Hyatt on 42d Street after the two had been drinking heavily.
She did not explain the nature of the dispute, but said that Henderson gave her a backhand slap, causing a bruise above her left eye.


Brooklyn Youth Is Slain By Two on a Motorcycle
A Brooklyn teen-ager was shot and killed early yesterday by two youths who chased him on a motorcycle for five blocks through the streets of Crown Heights.
The youth's mother said the killing may have been revenge for the youth's pressing charges two years ago against a man who is believed to have accidentally shot him.
The youth, Lateef Fitzgerald, 16 years old, of 1183 St.
John's Place, in the Crown Heights section, was riding a moped when he was shot once in the chest at 2:20 A.M. in the intersection of Park Place and Albany Avenue, less than four blocks from his home.
He was pronounced dead on arrival at Kings County Hospital.
Reginald Hardy, 17, of 275 Albany Avenue, who was riding with him, was shot in the leg.
He was in stable condition at Kings County Hospital.


Some Lessons for Life, Taught in the Cockpit
WHILE other sixth graders play on Little League teams and dream of pitching in Yankee Stadium, Ethan Dwyer flies airplanes and dreams of being a Navy pilot.
He is a star student of Cloud Chasers, a tiny, year-old aviation program intended to show that young people can be trained to be capable pilots.
The students -- the first class was made up of three 12-year-olds -- learn all aspects of flying single-engine aircraft, from fixing engines to coming out of a spinning dive.
They have each accumulated hundreds of hours flying small propeller planes, studying the regulations and physics of flight, and working on repair jobs.
All fly with instructors, since by law student pilots must be 16 before they can fly solo.


Alcoa President Quits, Citing Rift With Chief
C.
Fred Fetterolf, who was passed over for the chief executive's job at the Aluminum Company of America in 1987 but stayed on as president, announced yesterday that he was retiring, effective Friday.
In a memo to employees, Mr.
Fetterolf said his decision was prompted by his disagreement with the chairman and chief executive, Paul H. O'Neill, over "business principles." The company said Mr.
Fetterolf was not available for comment.
Mr.
Fetterolf, who is 63 years old, spent his entire career with Alcoa, starting as a sales trainee in 1952.
He was named president of the Pittsburgh-based company in 1983 and chief operating officer in 1985.


Gender Tests Set For Track Athletes
Physical examinations for verifying the gender of athletes will be introduced at the world track and field championships in Tokyo next month, the sport's governing body said today.
For years, the International Amateur Athletic Federation has used saliva samples to confirm gender.
But the federation said the saliva test proved to be scientifically unreliable and has caused ethically unacceptable problems for several athletes.


Wine Talk
HENRI ELWING, a French wine writer, once characterized a prominent wine shipper in the westernmost reaches of the Loire as "St.-Louis Metaireau du Muscadet."
Louis Metaireau might be eligible for canonization, but that, I suspect, is irrelevant here, although he did found an order, not of tonsured monks but of ruddy-faced winegrowers.


U.N. Team Finds Chemical Arms 4 Times Greater Than Iraq Claims
The head of a special United Nations commission overseeing the elimination of Iraq's chemical and nuclear arsenals told the Security Council today that his inspectors had found Iraqi chemical weapons in quantities more than four times greater than Baghdad had acknowledged.
The official, Rolf Ekeus, said that where Iraq had reported having from 10,000 to 11,000 chemical shells and warheads, the inspectors had found 46,000.
Instead of the 650 tons of raw material for such weapons Iraq had reported, he said the inspectors found 3,000 tons.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The Chrysler Corporation issued $1 billion of securities yesterday that are backed by loans made by its U.S.
Auto Receivables subsidiary to car dealers around the country.
Underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc. offered a $250 million issue of 7 3/8 percent securities due in two years at a price of 99.528 to yield 7.63 percent, or about 80-hundredths of a percentage point more than Treasury notes of comparable maturity.
A companion $750 million issue of 7 7/8 percent securities due in five years was offered at 96.464 to yield 8.76 percent, or 95-hundredths of a percentage point more than comparable Treasury notes.
Both issues pay interest semi-annually.


I.B.M. Group Is Optimistic On Computer
I.B.M. executives said yesterday that they were "cautiously optimistic" that they would meet a September introduction date for the company's most powerful mainframe computer, a product that analysts say the company must have to avoid a serious financial setback in 1991.
When it announced its new family of mainframe computers last fall, the International Business Machines Corporation delayed availability of the top-of-the-line water-cooled models, and many of its largest customers have been waiting for these machines to upgrade their systems.


Market Place; Surging Interest In Bond Funds
MUTUAL fund investors are pouring money into bond funds, seeking higher yields in the face of low short-term interest rates, fund managers said yesterday.
Several funds said July is likely to be the best month ever in terms of cash inflows.
Relatively short-term funds have done especially well, but the flood of cash has affected most types of bond funds, including those that specialize in junk bonds.


Solar Cars Can't Be Size of Gas Guzzlers; Park and Recharge
To the Editor:
Victor Wouk contends that cosmology prevents solar power from "propelling anything but a magnificently designed experimental car" (letter, July 15).


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Sent Jeff Ballard, Jeff Robinson and Paul Kilgus, pitchers, to Rochester of the International League.
Called up Stacy Jones, Mike Mussina and Jim Poole, pitchers, from Rochester.


Nations of Yugoslavia Must Keep Individuality
To the Editor:
While "Yugoslavia's Trap of Ethnic Confrontation" by Aleksa Djilas (The Week in Review, July 7) is admirable for its conciliatory tone and message, it makes a wrong assumption about Yugoslavia.
The peoples of Yugoslavia do not form, or even approximate, a single nation, but are distinct nations, each with its own historical, cultural and religious development and character.
Their mere proximity and the similarity of some aspects of their cultures does not imply national unity.
Poles and Russians, for example, have much in common, linguistically, culturally and historically, but no one would claim that they form or approximate a single nation.


Harlem Battles Over Development Project
One day next spring, ground breaking should begin on an effort to restore boarded-up buildings and bottomed-out lives in one of the most devastated areas of New York City: an urban wasteland that spans nearly 40 blocks in Harlem.
But as that day approaches -- a day that many have worked toward since the mid-1970's -- a consortium of Harlem's religious, civic and business leaders is locked in a fierce battle over who will control the project, known as Bradhurst.


Simms-Hostetler Play Needs Main Character
Quarterback battle? What quarterback battle?
Ostensibly, Phil Simms and Jeff Hostetler are fighting it out in the Giants' training camp here to decide which of them will start at quarterback for the Super Bowl champions.
But so far, it has been a battle without bloodshed, a contest between two friends who have high professional regard for each other.


Detroit Journal; When Life in the Projects Was Good
In the early 1950's, back when housing projects were considered the antidote to urban slums, back before drugs and violence exacted their heaviest toll, before projects like Pruitt Igoe in St.
Louis and Cabrini-Green in Chicago became high-rise horrors, Allen Hughes was just a child.
And as far as he was concerned, he was living the good life at the Brewster housing project in Detroit.
"At Brewster Center we played baseball, we pitched horseshoes, we went swimming, shot pool, we danced and we sang," Mr.
Hughes, now 53 years old, said last weekend.
"What I'm saying is that when you're poor, you don't realize you're poor till you see how the other person is living."


Pinch-Hitting for the Democrats; One Big Problem Is Politics
The debate over politics is stale and stifled. It is
flat.
-- Kettering Foundation report, "Citizens and Politics," June 1991.
The world has heaved during George Bush's Presidency, yet those words accurately describe what passes for discussion of public business.
Now, though there's less than a year till the conventions, there's not yet a campaign.
The Democrats, who ought to be leading the debate, sound more like many mouths mumbling.


U.S. Largesse Sticks in Soviet Craw
In lifting trade restrictions against the Soviet Union today, President Bush dismantled one of the major cold-war tank-traps still littering the East-West divide and released the Soviet Union from its long consignment to the status of an undesirable.
But neither the benefits of the measure nor all the gilded hoopla of the summit meeting could conceal the disappointment of Soviet officials that be it in trade or in arms, Washington and the West were still holding back, clearing away the debris of the cold war but not yet plunging to Moscow's side.


U.S. Said to Give Israel and Syria Private Assurances to Get Them to Talks
The United States has given Israel and Syria private assurances to persuade them to attend the proposed Middle East peace conference, American, Arab and Israeli officials say.
The most important of these, the officials say, is Washington's assurance to Israel that it would support Israel's insistence that no Palestinians from East Jerusalem or linked to the Palestine Liberation Organization would be allowed to attend the talks when and if Israel sits down with a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation to discuss self-rule in the West Bank.


New York City Note Sale Today
New York City's budget woes and weak economy do not appear to have posed much of a problem for securities dealers as they prepared to bid today for $1 billion of the city's notes.
The city's difficulties have forced it to pay unusually high interest rates on long-term bonds, with rates well above 8 percent likely for 20-year bonds at a $750 million financing scheduled for next week.
But today's short-term note sale is an entirely different matter.


Dr. Reuben Straus, 84, West Coast Pathologist
Dr.
Reuben Straus, a retired pathologist who directed laboratories in Los Angeles and Portland, Ore., died Saturday at his home in Lake Oswego, Ore.
He was 84 years old.
He died in his sleep of congestive heart failure, his family said.


COMPANY NEWS;
Alamo Rent-A-Car Inc. agreed to refund $3 million to customers who were overcharged for repair costs on damaged rental cars.
The agreement, which staved off a Federal investigation, covers people who were billed to pay for collision damage repairs on cars they rented from Alamo, the nation's No. 5 rental company, from January 1983 through December 1989.
Prosecutors said the company collected more from its customers than it paid for repairs, then kept the difference.


Judges Clear Way for New Council Election
A three-judge Federal panel removed yesterday what are most likely to be the last major obstacles to a Nov. 5 election for an expanded New York City Council.
The judges in Federal District Court in Brooklyn approved 25 election law changes that became necessary after the Justice Department cast the election process into some confusion by rejecting the city's initial redistricting plan.


A Day of Terror and Death on a Serb-Croat Divide
Terror still creased the faces of the Croatian villagers of Struga today as they described how their Serb neighbors rounded up dozens of their kinsmen four days ago and used them as human shields for a methodical march of death and destruction.
"It was a human wall," said Melita Blazevic, a 20-year-old Croat who described how she was pulled from her house by Serbian schoolmates, beaten and forced to join a procession of townspeople prodded forward by knives and gun butts.


Book Notes
The Editorial Boutique
Move over publishing houses and make way for the industry's latest creation: the editorial boutique.


Staff on Audubon Magazine Dropped in a Big Shake-Up
The editorial staff of Audubon magazine was dismissed Monday as part of the continuing shake-up at the 105-year-old publication, one of the oldest and most esteemed environmental magazines.
In March, Les Line, who had edited the magazine for 25 years, was dismissed and Malcolm Abrams, a former managing editor of The Star, the supermarket tabloid, was named acting editor.
Two weeks ago, Michael Robbins, a freelance writer and former editor of Oceans magazine, which is no longer published, was named editor.
Two days after he arrived, he began to dismiss members of the editorial staff.


Orion Fails to Pay Interest on Bonds
The Orion Pictures Corporation, which is trying to restructure a heavy debt load, said it had failed to make a $1.2 million interest payment on subordinated bonds that were due today.
The company said it could not make the payment because it was in technical default on its senior bonds.
That status prohibits Orion from making payments on subordinated debt.
Orion said it had exercised a 30-day grace period for paying $2.5 million in interest due Aug. 1, and had extended to Aug. 16 from July 31 the deadline for accepting a debt exchange offer.


Critic's Notebook; On the London Stage, a Feast of Revenge, Menace and Guilt
Tyranny, torture and vengeance were the subjects of plays here this summer as England's continuing concern for political theater assumed as a global perspective.
On various London stages there were outspoken plays from Chile, the Soviet Union and Trinidad, among other countries.
England itself was represented by a brief sketch by Harold Pinter entitled "The New World Order," inspired by the war in the Persian Gulf.
The intentionally ironic title of that piece resonated in a number of other works that questioned the results of sweeping geopolitical changes as well as revisionist history.
By far the most powerful of the plays was Ariel Dorfman's "Death and the Maiden," in the upstairs studio space at the Royal Court Theater.
Through the years, the Royal Court has itself been a frequent setting for plays that address challenging issues by playwrights from John Osborne through Caryl Churchill and Timberlake Wertenbaker.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Just hours before T.W.A. faced seizure of its planes, Carl Icahn averted a showdown by reaching a tentative agreement with creditors.
The deal is expected to force a temporary bankruptcy proceeding and calls for Icahn to give up majority control.  [ Page A1. ]
Crossland Savings will seek a merger with a stronger banking company, agreeing with Federal regulators to do so because its losses from bad loans had grown so large.  [ D1. ]


Something Sweet (and Hold the Consequences)
SUMMER incubates Dionysian forces.
The season's sauna aspect stokes the urge to bare (at least) the shoulders, arms and backs, calves, thighs and knees, while simultaneously kindling a desire to slurp something sweet and cool.
At a certain juncture -- like the gentle loll of flesh over the waistband of one's swimming costume -- the two forces collide.
If one is suffering cellulite fallout from ice cream ministration, for instance, one may be shy to offer generous portions of anatomy to be blessed by a rare breeze.


Sports of The Times; Short Trip But a Long Journey
THE flight from Miami to Havana takes 45 minutes, about the time it takes to fly from New York to Washington.
But there is no correlation here between time and culture.
A short flight carries its passengers to a country that in one sense seems glued to the past and in another remains vibrant as it wages a hard-nosed struggle to determine its future.
The spirit of General Motors haunts Havana streets as American cars from the 1950's rumble alongside more numerous Soviet-made automobiles.
As part of a system of material incentive, two of every three new cars here go to workers chosen as exceptional by their colleagues.


Indurain Goes Home
Church bells pealed and thousands cheered in Villava, Spain, yesterday in a welcome home for the Tour de France winner, MIGUEL INDURAIN.


Freeman to Buy Purity Supreme
Freeman Spogli &amp; Company, an investment firm with offices in New York and Los Angeles, said it had agreed to buy the Purity Supreme supermarket operations from the Supermarkets General Holdings Corporation for about $300 million, including the acquisition of debt.


Blues Get Christian
The St.
Louis Blues and the Boston Bruins solved their differences over right wing DAVE CHRISTIAN yesterday, with Christian going to St.
Louis as compensation for the Bruins' free-agent signings of defenseman GLEN FEATHERSTONE and left wing DAVE THOMLINSON.
The agreement also gives the Blues a third-round draft pick in 1992, and either the Bruins' seventh-round choice in 1992 or sixth-round choice in 1993.


Economic Scene; Tuition Aid Without Tears
COLLEGE tuition bills loom like a mountain above the finances of every middle-income parent.
And Washington, hard pressed to pay for urgently needed programs like extended unemployment benefits, is obviously in no position to trim them down to size.
But Representative Thomas E. Petri, known for his innovative efforts to coax a bigger bang from the Federal buck, is not giving up.
The Wisconsin Republican thinks he has found a relatively painless way to help middle-class students pay their own bills -- and in the process save Uncle Sam $1 billion a year.


ADDED PROBLEMS FOR HUBBLE CRAFT
The space agency is considering making repairs on the ailing Hubble Space Telescope sooner than previously planned because of recent failures in gyroscopes used to stabilize the spacecraft, an agency official said today.
But while the agency is taking the initial steps for mounting an early repair mission, the official said such a mission is unlikely at this time.


Dollar Advances in the U.S. After Strong Housing Data
The dollar rose yesterday in domestic dealings after the Government released a strong report on the state of the housing market.
The dollar slipped in overseas dealings early in the day.
But dealers said they bought dollars after the Government reported that sales of new homes surged 7.4 percent in June, with increases in every region except the South.


Solar Cars Can't Be Size of Gas Guzzlers
To the Editor:
Victor Wouk, vice chairman of the engineering section of the New York Academy of Sciences, is a well-published innovator and electrical engineer, and he's correct on his math about the size of a battery and solar array ("You Can't Drive Solar Cars to Work Yet," letter, July 15).


Stanford President's Decision Is Praised
Educators said yesterday that Donald Kennedy, who announced Monday that he would resign next year as president of Stanford University, bore responsibility for the problems Stanford has had in billing the Federal Government for research costs even if he was not directly at fault.
"The message of this case is that the buck stops here," said Donna E. Shalala, chancellor of the University of Wisconsin, speaking from a farm in North Dakota where she is on vacation.
"Whether or not you have personal responsibility for the decision of others -- and in this case no one believes that Donald Kennedy knew what decisions his accountants and financial staff made about indirect costs -- the chief executive ends up taking responsibility. The people held accountable always are the presidents or chancellors, not the deans or assistant vice presidents.


Political Memo; Democrats Find Issue: Helping the Unemployed
After months of agonizing, the Democrats have found a way of translating their talk about helping the middle class into a serious legislative proposal: to provide more unemployment benefits for people who have been out of work more than half a year.
They are rushing to send a bill to President Bush before they go on vacation this weekend, but may still fail at that.
Senate Republicans, who could thwart them, are uncertain how obstructive to be because they recognize the issue could put their party and President Bush at a disadvantage.


The Pop Life
Reseeking the Limelight
"It's been rough," said Jennifer Holliday the other day.
"I've been trying to make the transition from Broadway to becoming a recording artist, and for a lot of reasons it's been very hard."


Prudential Names Head Of Retail Securities Unit
George A. Murray gave Hardwick Simmons his first job as a management trainee at Hayden, Stone Inc. 25 years ago, not long after Wick Simmons was graduated from the Harvard Business School.
Mr.
Simmons, the recently appointed chief executive of the Prudential Securities Group, returned the favor yesterday, announcing that he had chosen Mr.
Murray to head Prudential's retail brokerage operations.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District priced $123 million worth of wastewater improvement 6 1/2 percent revenue bonds due in 2016 to yield 6.9 percent. *
Honolulu priced $100 million worth of 6.7 percent general obligation bonds with a yield of 6.9 percent for securities due in 2010 through Prudential Securities.


3 Arraigned as Adults In Glen Ridge Assault


Some Offbeat Instruments Move to New York
The orchestra of quirky, almost other-worldly instruments invented and built by the composer Harry Partch between 1928 and 1974, the year of his death, is to be moved from San Diego, where Partch spent his final years, to New York.
Danlee Mitchell, Partch's longtime associate and the guardian of the instruments since the composer's death, said he was giving the collection to Dean Drummond, whose Manhattan-based contemporary music ensemble Newband has performed several Partch works in recent years.
"I am putting the instruments in Dean's possession indefinitely," Mr.
Mitchell said in a recent telephone interview from his home in San Diego.
"I felt that having the instruments in New York would give Partch's music greater exposure than I can give it."


Dinkins's Resolve; Fiscal Speech Promises Big Changes But Unveils Few Concrete Proposals
To a city that has grown accustomed in recent weeks to words like "restructuring" and "downsizing," Mayor David N. Dinkins's speech last night served as a guide for change, but not a guarantee.
For example, Mr.
Dinkins talked about consolidating and reorganizing agencies, but the only specific idea he pointed to was the possibility of combining the city's youth and employment programs.


Closing of Bases Wins Final Approval
Congress effectively gave its blessing today to a plan to close 25 major military installations and nine smaller ones when the House of Representatives voted 364 to 60 to uphold a Federal commission's recommendations.
But House members who complained that domestic bases were absorbing the brunt of Pentagon budget-cutting also won approval for a proposal that would give the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission new power to close overseas bases as well.


Braves Hand Pirates 4th Loss in a Row
Pittsburgh lost its season-high fourth game in a row as Atlanta rallied late tonight behind the hitting of Terry Pendleton and won, 10-3.
The first-place Pirates were coasting at 3-0 behind Paul Miller, making his major league debut, when the right-hander lost his control in the sixth inning, loading the bases with no one out.
Otis Nixon opened the inning for the Braves, who had swept a doubleheader with the Pirates Monday, with a walk.
Jeff Treadway got an infield single and Pendleton also walked, loading the bases and bringing on reliever Bill Landrum.


Louis Rossetto Sr., 78, Typesetting Executive
Louis Rossetto Sr., a former vice president of the Mergenthaler Linotype Company who helped develop the photographic typesetting process that revolutionized newspaper printing, died on Friday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 78 years old and lived in Kings Point, L.I.
He died of congestive heart failure, his son Louis Jr. said.


People
*
Patrick J. McTigue has been promoted to president and chief operating officer at Frank J. Corbett Inc., Chicago, a division of BBDO Health and Medical Communications, from executive vice president-operations.
As president, he succeeds John J. Fisher, who earlier this month was named chairman and chief executive. *
Anthony F. Incalcatera, senior vice president of sales and marketing at Hachette Magazines, New York, has left the company, a spokesman said, and a successor has not yet been named.
The spokesman declined to discuss further information about the departure of Mr.
Incalcatera, who was the company's fourth-highest executive.


Ted and Joe, 1941: July 31


Nonsurgical Means Used as Alternative To Hysterectomies
A GROWING number of American women are undergoing a nonsurgical procedure to destroy the lining of the uterus as an alternative to hysterectomy.
The method, called endometrial ablation, also eliminates monthly periods and makes the womb inhospitable to newly fertilized eggs, and some women are using it as a form of permanent birth control, according to doctors who perform the procedure.
It was developed as a nonsurgical alternative to hysterectomies in women who suffer from excessive uterine bleeding.


Unapproved Breast Implant Seized
IN a continuing crackdown against unapproved medical devices and misleading advertising claims, the Food and Drug Administration yesterday instructed Federal marshals to seize 500 breast implants from the factory of the Minnesota manufacturer.
The company, Bioplasty Inc. of St.
Paul, did not seek F.D.A. approval to market the device, called an uninflated Misti Gold, said an agency spokesman, Don McLearn.


A Hambletonian Field of 19 Will Break In a New Format
The Hambletonian, the most prestigious event in harness racing, will have a new format and a field of 19 when it is staged Saturday afternoon at the Meadowlands.
In the past, a horse was required to win two heats to be declared champion; now all a horse needs to do is qualify for the final heat and win it.


Fuel Efficiency: New Japan Coup?
In a challenge to American auto makers, two of Japan's leading auto manufacturers say they will equip some of their compact cars with redesigned engines this fall that burn far less gasoline with virtually no loss of power.
The new engines improve mileage by achieving more complete combustion of gasoline.
But some industry experts and Big Three executives disputed the mileage claims and doubted the new engines could be used in any but the smallest and lightest cars without increasing engine emissions.


Group 243 Is Renamed Ross Roy Franchise
Three months after losing its $50 million Domino's Pizza account, Group 243 Inc., Ann Arbor, Mich., is moving into its parent company's headquarters and taking a new name: Ross Roy Franchise.
Patrick Morin, president of Ross Roy Advertising, said yesterday that about 25 to 30 of Group 243's 55 remaining employees will work at the headquarters in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
They will specialize in communications services for franchise operations, he added, with a goal of capitalizing on the unit's 14 years of Domino's experience to attract new business.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about Robert Bork referred incorrectly in some editions to the President who nominated him to the Supreme Court four years ago.
It was Ronald Reagan, not George Bush.


CHRONICLE
NATALIA MAKAROVA, the 50-year-old ballerina, is starring in her first dramatic stage role.
She received good notices when she made her debut last week at the Chichester Festival.
Once a dancer at the Kirov Ballet, from which she defected in 1970, Miss Makarova has appeared with the world's leading ballet companies.
She won a Tony Award in New York in 1983 as best actress for her role in the musical "On Your Toes."
In "Tovarich," a play by Jacques Deval, she plays a grand duchess "with great verve," said The Financial Times.
The Evening Standard said: "The feat is without precedent. This supreme dancer had made the leap into dramatic theater and achieved it in a language not her own."


Nations of Yugoslavia Must Keep Individuality; Croatia's Nationalists
To the Editor:
It is highly unjust for "Serbia's Ugly Nationalists" (Op-Ed, July 11) by Jacques Bacic, born in Croatia, to talk only of Serbia's ugly nationalists and completely ignore Croatia's ugly nationalists.


Agent Says Bonilla Is Set for Free Agency
BOBBY BONILLA's agent said yesterday that it was unlikely that the outfielder would agree to a contract extension with the Pittsburgh Pirates and that he would probably file for free agency after the World Series.
"We talked once and it doesn't look like the Pirates and Bonilla will bridge the gap," the agent, DENNIS GILBERT, said.
Gilbert did not rule out the possibility that Bonilla would stay in Pittsburgh.
But after Bonilla files for free agency, the Pirates would be competing with offers from other teams. (AP)


Platinum Falls Below Gold For First Time Since 1985
Platinum became cheaper than gold yesterday as Japanese selling and signs of enormous Soviet market influence put pressure on platinum futures prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Platinum last traded at a significant discount to gold in the fall of 1985.


I.B.M. Introduces 2 Phone Systems
The International Business Machines Corporation introduced two telephone systems that answer calls automatically and, using recorded messages, provide requested information.
I.B.M., based in Armonk, N.Y., said the equipment, similar to that in use by banks and airlines, uses recorded messages to prompt callers to press keys on touch-tone telephones.
It can be linked to computer data bases to provide information like product prices or shipping dates of orders.
While similar "voice processing" products are sold by other companies, I.B.M. said its equipment combined in a single product many of the functions commonly found in separate pieces of equipment.


Funeral Is Held for Stalin Aide


Nations of Yugoslavia Must Keep Individuality; Don't Blame the Turks
To the Editor:
"Amateur Soldiers Enjoy Respite of Fragile Truce" (news article, July 5) states that the Serbs inherited from the Ottoman Turks a "legacy of militancy and clannishness that were essential for survival in an almost lawless society." However, the rivalry and militancy among Balkan peoples, that is, Balkanization, existed long before the Turks ruled Eastern Europe.
Indeed, the Ottoman Turks brought peace and order to the Balkan peoples for nearly 400 years.


Amid Heavyweights, Moorer Is on the Move
With his knockout of Alex Stewart on Saturday, Michael Moorer leapfrogged over most of the heavyweight hopefuls jockeying for a 1992 shot at the title held by Evander Holyfield.
Earlier this year, Moorer was the World Boxing Organization light heavyweight champion.
In April, on the undercard of the Holyfield-George Foreman match, he fought for the first time as a heavyweight, knocking out Terry Davis.


'A Moment Of Insanity'
Bud Harrelson, the Mets' manager, said today that he had no intention of disciplining center fielder Vince Coleman for his outburst against Third-Base Coach Mike Cubbage last week before a game in San Diego.
"I'm going to let it ride," Harrelson said.
"It was a moment of insanity. I don't think it's going to be resolved by me involving myself."


Loud Sounds In Quiet Court
It was quiet in the packed Bronx courtroom where Lydia Feliciano testified yesterday -- except for Judge Burton B. Roberts.
It was a particularly bellicose day for him.
He kept lawyers, witnesses and jurors on their toes.
Some people were in awe.
Some were just in shock.


Direct Reply for Right-Field Rowdies
Jose Canseco's response to the right-field patrons at Yankee Stadium last night was not intended as one.
The business of chasing the Minnesota Twins is more significant than answering an assortment of Monday night projectiles that included cabbage -- cabbage? -- and an inflatable doll.
One night later, whatever the intent, Canseco's offering to right field was simple, direct and decisive.
It was a high fly ball, not even hit all that squarely, that passed beyond the leap of Mel Hall and over the right-center-field fence in the top of the seventh inning.
Canseco's 28th home run this season, the most by any player in the major leagues, became the winning margin in Oakland's 6-5 victory over the Yankees.


Warner-Lambert Chief
The Warner-Lambert Company, the drug maker, yesterday named Melvin R. Goodes chairman and chief executive, effective Aug. 1.
Mr.
Goodes, who had served as president and chief operating officer since 1985, succeeds Joseph D. Williams, who will be 65 years old on Aug. 15.
Mr.
Williams had recommended that Mr.
Goodes succeed him.
Warner-Lambert, based in Morris Plains, N.J., also named Lodewijk J. R. de Vink to succeed Mr.
Goodes as president and chief operating officer.


Latest on the Assembly Line: Prison Cells
Taking its cue from Detroit, a company in New Jersey is using a computerized assembly line to mass produce low-cost steel jail cells.
These can be added to existing prisons, placed into gutted buildings to turn them into prisons or bolted together in a prison courtyard.
The company, Mark Correctional Systems of Maywood, says its modular cells cost on average $12,000 each -- about half the price of cells in traditional concrete prisons.
Each weighs 6,000 pounds, compared with 32,000 pounds for a standard prison cell, said Michael J. Rosenberg, a vice president at the company.


About New York
New York City is home to more gay and lesbian people than any other American city.
Many violate stereotypes and live in places far removed from Greenwich Village.
Like Jackson Heights, Queens.
The other night, a group of gay and lesbian activists from Greenwich Village, probably this planet's gay epicenter, descended on the Queens community to provide a message of pride, promise and power.
They took everything from strategies on political organizing to literature on gay nudist camps and boxing clubs to urgent information on AIDS.


Chiefs Start the Training Grind With Confidence of a Title Contender
We last saw the Kansas City Chiefs in January in anguish in Joe Robbie Stadium, mystified over how a 16-3 fourth-quarter lead had dissolved into a 17-16 loss to the Miami Dolphins in the playoffs.
Remember Nick Lowery's 52-yard potential game-winning kick that soared and then fluttered a few feet short of the crossbar as time expired?
The Chiefs certainly do.
But here at the Chiefs' new training site, there is an unmistakable air of confidence that Marty Schottenheimer has helped to cultivate as he enters his third season as Kansas City's head coach.
The Chiefs are now certain that they are veritable divisional title contenders and possess Super Bowl potential.


Ex-Girlfriend Recalls Threat Before Flames
The former girlfriend of Julio Gonzalez took the witness stand yesterday and in quick, nervous Spanish recounted how he entered the Happy Land Social Club, threatened her and told her to leave her job, minutes before flames engulfed the building and killed 87 people.
The woman, Lydia Feliciano, who worked as a coat checker at the club, said she had broken up with Mr.
Gonzalez six weeks before the fire and there had been no fights between them.
But she said trouble unfolded in three short talks that the two had amid the din and crowds at the club in the early morning hours of March 25, 1990.
The talks left her feeling ill at ease, she said.


Morton H. Delson, 61, Manhattan Architect
Morton H. Delson, an architect who trained with Frank Lloyd Wright and supervised the building of Wright projects, died on Sunday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of liver cancer, his brother, Richard, said.


Corrections
A music review on June 27 about a concert by George Clinton and the P-Funk All-Stars at the Palladium on June 25 misidentified the group's drummer.
A letter from a reader -- confirmed by the group after its recent return from a European tour -- points out that he was Anthony Thomas, not Dennis Chambers.


CHRONICLE
INGRID CHAVEZ, a singer-songwriter, has sued LENNY KRAVITZ, a pop musician, in Federal Court in Minneapolis demanding credit as the lyricist of "Justify My Love" and a larger share of its royalties, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Ms.
Chavez wrote the lyrics to the song, which Mr.
Kravitz produced for MADONNA.
She says Mr.
Kravitz talked her into giving up credit for the lyrics and three-quarters of her royalties for $500.
Her full share of royalties from sales of the record, estimated at more than 10 million copies, would be hundreds of thousands of dollars, said Ms.
Chavez's lawyer, STEVEN KURTZ.


In Truth, Hispanic Groups Aim to Rewrite History
Buoyed by a growing population and by a greater presence on local school boards, Hispanic Americans have begun pressing textbook publishers and state education officials to include more about Hispanic contributions in the curriculums of public schools.
Still in its infancy, the effort is also intended to correct or eliminate school books and American history videos that give inaccurate portrayals of Mexican-Americans, Puerto Ricans and Cuban-Americans.


With a Flair for Music Making and Baking
THIS week at Avery Fisher Hall, Richard Stoltzman, the clarinetist, will be taking bows for his pastry as well as for his music.
Linzer tortes from his recipe will be served there this evening at a preconcert tasting supper, one of several such tastings given in conjunction with the Mostly Mozart performances.
And tomorrow night, at one of the concerts in the series, he will perform Mozart's Clarinet Quintet in A.
Mr.
Stoltzman was in New York last week preparing a sample linzer torte at Lincoln Center, and as he mixed the dough and spread the jam, he discussed the similarity between baking and making music.
"There's tremendous discipline in both," he said, "but there is room to interpret, and the end result is so rewarding." He said he never wanted to learn to cook anything but desserts because, of all dishes, they get the most applause.


As Moore Gets Well, Jets Look Better
Make no mistake, Rob Moore is glad to be back in action after being on his back for a little over a week, through last Saturday, when the Jets had their first scrimmage.
Moore, the team's second-year wide receiver out of Syracuse, didn't step into a hole.
He didn't get hit by anyone.
The team doctors had recommended that he not even come out and watch practice because of the back spasms he was suffering from.


Short-Term Yields Fall A Bit More
Yields on short-term certificates of deposit continued the downtrend of the previous week.
In fact, the Bank Rate Monitor, an interest rate publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla., noted that the drop this week was a little more pronounced than it was a week ago.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of the Monitor, said yesterday: "Deposit rates continue to decline even though they touched what we might call a theoretical 'bottom' of a down cycle three weeks ago. This reflects a further softening of the economy and indicates a longer period of recovery than many economists originally anticipated."


P.&amp; G. Assigns Ads For New Cosmetics
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, Cincinnati, announced yesterday that the advertising for several newly acquired cosmetics and fragrance brands had been assigned to four agencies with experience on other P.&amp; G. beauty-product accounts: Lotas Minard Patton McIver, New York; the Leo Burnett Company, Chicago; Grey Advertising, New York, and Dentsu Inc., Tokyo.
Advertising in the United States for Max Factor was assigned to Lotas Minard, while the brand's advertising overseas was awarded to Burnett.
Burnett and Grey will share overseas advertising for Betrix products.
And Dentsu has been assigned at least one Max Factor brand in Japan, SK-II.


Ending a Yale Tradition, Dinner in the Commons Is Over
Yale University has announced that dinner will no longer be served in Commons, the cavernous, white-columned building that has been a gathering place for freshmen since the 1930's.
Citing a need to cut the budget by more than $1 million, the university's dining hall director, Alan R. Kenney, informed Yale students of the decision in a letter dated July 26.


Foreign Affairs; Mr. Bush's Nightmare
President Bush has a nightmare: It's November 1992.
Deficits climb so high that even Republicans notice.
The Democratic Presidential candidate miraculously doesn't turn out to be an embarrassment.
And worst of all, CNN is doing a special from downtown Baghdad, featuring a smiling figure in desert uniform.
The figure is not Norman Schwarzkopf.
It's you-know-who, and he has just disclosed the existence of you-know-what's to Peter Arnett.


Serbian Enclave Reluctant To Allow Visit by Outsiders
Violence broke out again today in Croatia as the leader of the republic's insurgent Serb-populated region, known as Krajina, warned that European Community cease-fire observers would not be welcomed there until Krajina's government made a special decision to allow them in.
Serbs in the self-proclaimed autonomous region have mounted an armed uprising against the Croatian government since August.
Croatia's government does not recognize Krajina's autonomy, and its police and national guard units have been unable to quash the Serbian uprising and bring the region back under Croatian control.


Public &amp; Private; Babes in Toyland
The news that Barbie had been caught shoplifting sent shock waves through the world of little girls.
"Why did she do it?" said one.
"Barbie had everything. She had jumpsuits, business suits, and an astronaut uniform with a lavender helmet. She had a Corvette, a beach cottage and Ken."


More Than 100 People Feared Dead as Floods Ravage Romania


Judge Ousts Juror for Misconduct In Trial on Window Racketeering
Ending two days of confusion, the Federal judge presiding over the window-industry racketeering trial in Brooklyn dismissed a juror yesterday for discussing the case with "a person outside of the jury."
The judge, Raymond J. Dearie, replaced the juror with an alternate.
His action averted a mistrial in the case, which has been going on for almost four months in Federal District Court.


Oil Spill in West Takes Big Toll of Sea Life
An oil spill from a ship collision has fouled ocean beaches in Olympic National Park, threatening a vast population of sea birds and marine mammals that live in this spectacular setting in the far northwest corner of continental America.
The oil is gushing from a Japanese fish-processing vessel that sank July 22 after a collision with a Chinese freighter 22 miles northwest of the tip of Washington State.


Yeltsin Spurns Gorbachev on Meeting With Bush
President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic spurned President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's invitiation to take part in a summit meeting today with President Bush, saying that his republic would not be part of a "faceless mass audience" and was pursuing its own independent foreign policy with the United States.
The bold move was intended not as a rebuff to President Bush, who saw Mr.
Yeltsin later in a one-on-one meeting in the Kremlin, but rather as an unequivocal notice to Mr.
Gorbachev that the Russian federated republic can no longer be counted on as an obedient member of the Soviet retinue, either in the domestic or the foreign arena.


Soviet Trade Favor Costs U.S. Little
President Bush's announcement that he would submit a trade agreement with the Soviet Union to Congress and reduce tariffs on Soviet imports is unlikely to result in a substantial, immediate increase in Soviet-American trade.
But it could encourage foreign investment in the foundering Soviet economy, experts said today.
The United States accounts for less than 3 percent of all Soviet exports, and most of these exports consist of commodities that already enter the United States at very low tariff rates.
"In the range of things we can do for the Soviet Union, this is symbolically important and economically inexpensive," said Robert D. Hormats, the vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International.


De Klerk Vows Halt to Secret Payments
Acknowledging the damage caused by the disclosures of secret payments to the Zulu-based organization Inkatha, President F. W. de Klerk announced today that such aid to political groups had stopped, and he promised to scale back other covert activities.
"The Government accepts that there has to be political confidence in respect to the sensitive issue of secret funding," Mr. de Klerk told a nationally televised news conference.
"It is a fact that this confidence has been shaken and it is necessary to restore it."


Review/Film; Pilots in 'Hot Shots!' Shoot Down 'Top Gun' In a Hail of Parody
It's heartening to know that while we sat through one of the emptiest synthetic hit movies of the 1980's, the seeds of parody were being sown.
It's also nice to see that the three-headed Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker directorial entity, the one responsible for "Airplane!," has split into three fully formed talents without any apparent loss of verve.
Mr.
Abrahams has directed his brazen, funny "Hot Shots!" with much the same glee that shows up in David Zucker's "Naked Gun 2 1/2," and with a little something extra: a satirical view of other movies, one that might have been shaped by Mad magazine.
When the fighter planes of "Hot Shots!" are being readied for flight, in the kind of souped-up inspirational montage that was a "Top Gun" specialty, there are suitcases to load and marshmallows to roast in the flaming engines.
And when the planes, now airborne, engage in dizzying swoops and turns, watch out for Garfield dolls stuck to windshields and candy wrappers flying loose around the cockpit.


Milk Content of Egg Creams
To The Living Section:
I was astonished to read in Molly O'Neill's De Gustibus column "Where Seltzer Once Thrived, a Few True Fizzes Remain"  [ July 10 ]  that the U-Bet chocolate syrup man would suggest that an egg cream contains more milk than seltzer.


Red Square Is Beautiful. That's Agreed.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev explained to President Bush today that red is beautiful and, for the first time in four decades, there was no American rebuttal.
"Red and beautiful are the same word," the Soviet leader declared as the two men took a 15-minute stroll in Red Square, having a brief lesson in the Russian language that, for a casual hallucinatory moment, might conjure the whole cold war as some frightening, 40-year misunderstanding.
"Better dead than beautiful" never would have had the same ring in the old cold-war domestic debate back in America.
Nor would "Beautiful Army" have gone far in the Pentagon's weapons appropriation pleadings.
But Red Square was indeed "Krasnaya," beautiful, this afternoon, with the evergreens gleaming outside the wine-red Kremlin walls and red flags snapping in cloudless skies.
"Red Square means beautiful," the Soviet leader said as tourists hurried over to the peripatetic language lesson.
Mr.
Gorbachev was savoring a word from three centuries ago that has survived as both an archaic form of "Beautiful" and as the modern word for "red," a color favored for its beauty in all the seasons of the ancient square, most particularly when contrasted with the deep white winter snows.
"Beautiful," the American leader said, looking at some flowers down past Lenin's Tomb.
The Unlucky Ducklings
Barbara Bush's day was no less pastoral, at least when she showed up with Raisa M. Gorbachev on the shore of the lake outside the Novodevichy Monastery.
They went over to a bronze statue of a duck leading eight bronze ducklings, a copy of Nancy Schoen's sculpture, "Make Way for Ducklings," which stands in the Boston Public Garden as a tribute to Robert McCloskey's long popular children's book.
"There's something magical about the thought of American children loving and playing with ducks in Boston while children in Moscow are doing the same," Mrs.
Bush said of the gift.
Mayor Gavriil K. Popov promised to watch over the bronze creatures but looked at them with his lugubrious smile and advised, "You ducklings are not going to have as simple and easy a life here, just like all Muscovities."
There comes a time in every summit gathering when it is not enough to ask what are they saying.
Another important questions is, What are they eating?
It may reach back to the peace tableaux of prehistory, when leaders ate a campfire meal of some beast killed by a frightening shaft or missile of mutual destructive techology put to peaceful use.
Or it may reach no further than some chef's justified vanity.
Either way, the state dinner tonight at the Kremlin was described as caviar for starters, followed by white salmon with lemon and asparagus, fried duck stuffed with apples and prunes, fish stew, beef fillet with mushrooms, orange ice with lemon jelly, and fruit.
The CBS News crew covering the event had to settle for chili over rice, green salad and oatmeal raisin cookies, catered from one of Moscow's latest free-market ventures, Mrs.
Dobbs' Kitchen.
Yeltsin Draws a Line
With the vaporizing of cold-war shibboleths, each hour of the summit gathering brings fresh seedings of the new politics now taking root not only between Moscow and Washington, but more especially within the Soviet nation.
Thus everyone was talking of the success of Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of the Russian federated republic, in drawing distinctions between himself and Mr.
Gorbachev today simply by not showing at a photo opportunity of a "working meeting" amid the Kremlin summit panoply.
In Soviet politics, the moment resonated with the now-dated arcana of marking who was and was not atop Lenin's Tomb on May Day and what might it all mean.
More Western was a small moment when President Bush surprised a gathering of Soviet intellectuals at Moscow State Institute for International Relations.
He finished his speech and skipped down from the stage to begin shaking hands.
Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, who until he resigned recently was President Gorbachev's longtime senior adviser on reforming the nation, watched off the side, Garboesque as usual as he stared.
But then Mr.
Yakovlev sprang forward, as if suddenly remembering he had broken with President Gorbachev in proclaiming the Communist Party a failure and in founding a new opposition movement dedicated to open politics, openly arrived at.
Mr.
Yakovlev moved quickly around two colleagues, reached ahead of a third and firmly shook the hand of the President.
He beamed like an old Kremlin strategist learning firsthand the art of pressing the flesh.
Nancy Reagan's Shadow
People who claim to fathom such things insist that Mrs.
Gorbachev far prefers the company of Mrs.
Bush to that of Nancy Reagan.
Mrs.
Reagan's shadow flickered across Red Square for a moment when Mrs.
Gorbachev was asked at a news conference what she would whisper in her husband's ear nowadays in contrast to the word "peace."
"It wasn't me who spoke about whispering in my husband's ear," Mrs.
Gorbachev said.
"Maybe it was someone else," she added, alluding to Mrs.
Reagan.
Gridlock for Breakfast
Every big city has to work out its own way of being blase amid a big deal, and the breezy new television show "Vesti" set the tone here with the lead sentence of its evening news summary:
"The most important event here today was what all Muscovites discovered when they tried to get to work this morning and found the center of the city in gridlock." Together, the Target
Nostalgia buffs could find anti-American and anti-Soviet protesters in the city, but this time the two nations were a common target.
A few dozen people from what the Soviet press calls the neo-Bolshevist movement carried a sign that echoed with the old Bolsheviks' graphic clumsiness: "Down with the collusion between Bush, Gorbachev and Yeltsin behind the people's backs."
Outside the Kremlin in Manezh Square a few thousand Meskhetian Turks long displaced from their Georgian homeland demonstrated the new strength of ethnic politics.
They demanded compensation and a return of their lands and they shook their fists at a government bureaucracy.


BUSH IS PLEDGING TO ACCORD SOVIETS BEST TRADE TERMS
Proclaiming the onset of "a new age of promise" at the start of his fourth summit conference with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, President Bush promised today that he would seek as soon as possible to put the Soviet Union on equal footing with the United States' other trading partners.
"We have good reason to hope," Mr.
Bush said.
"One by one, the cruel realities of the cold war flicker and fade and a new world of opportunities beckons us forward."


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Reporter's Notebook; Red Square Is Beautiful. That's Agreed.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev explained to President Bush today that red is beautiful and, for the first time in four decades, there was no American rebuttal.
"Red and beautiful are the same word," the Soviet leader declared as the two men took a 15-minute stroll in Red Square, having a brief lesson in the Russian language that, for a casual hallucinatory moment, might conjure the whole cold war as some frightening, 40-year misunderstanding.


More Trouble for Tyson
ROSIE JONES of Bridgeport, Conn., the 1990 Miss Black America, told WTHR-TV in Indianpolis yesterday that former heavweight champion MIKE TYSON fondled her and propositioned her on July 18 during this year's contest, and that she complained about it to pageant officials.
Tyson is under investigation because of an 18-year-old woman's allegation that he raped her July 19 in an Indianapolis hotel.


Confidence Remains Weak
Consumers remained uncertain about the economy in July, an indication that the economic recovery will be slow, the Conference Board said yesterday.
The research group, which is sponsored by the nation's business community, said its consumer confidence index registered 77.7 in July, down slightly from 78.0 the previous month.
The index has narrowly fluctuated since March as Americans have remained pessimistic about economic conditions.


60-Minute Gourmet
BARBECUING a slab of steak requires constant vigilance, carving and serving.
An alternative is brochettes of beef with vegetables.
Brochettes not only cook much faster, they also are more forgiving to a backyard chef who wanders from the fire.
It's O.K. to overcook a brochette or two, but not the entire steak.


Eating Well
IN recent years Americans have listened to health professionals and Government agencies tell them to reduce their intake of fat to 30 percent of calories.
There seemed to be a consensus.
Now that consensus appears to be falling apart.
No one is suggesting that the current American diet, in which most people get 37 percent of their calories from fat and more than 10 percent from saturated fat, is O.K.
There's no turning back to a daily ration of steaks and baked potatoes smothered in sour cream.


Good Report for Garcia
Former major league second baseman DAMASO GARCIA is expected to make a full recovery after undergoing surgery to remove a malignant brain tumor, his doctor has said.
The 36-year-old Garcia was transferred Monday from Victoria Hospital in Miami, where he had surgery 10 days earlier, to West Gables Rehabilitative Hospital, where he will begin speech therapy to correct a slur resulting from the tumor.


Quotation of the Day
When a species is endangered or threatened, we guard their numbers very carefully.
The fact that these happen to be rattlesnakes, not four-legged furry things that go hippety- hop, is not relevant here." -- Edward S. Feldmann, of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.  [ B2:1. ]


N.A.A.C.P. Report Faults Thomas View On Equality Issues
The staff of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People has drafted a report strongly criticizing Judge Clarence Thomas for his views on affirmative action and his commitment to enforcement of civil rights laws.
Some of the group's board members predicted today that the report would be the basis for an announcement Wednesday that it would oppose the black appellate judge's nomination to the Supreme Court.


Suppliers Back Saks Despite Negative Talk
Several apparel manufacturers said yesterday that they would continue to ship goods to Saks Fifth Avenue, although Heller Financial Inc., a credit company to the industry, has told its clients that it will not guarantee payments for merchandise going to the specialty retailer.
Heller's announcement on Friday was the first public acknowledgment of the uncertainty about Saks's finances since the trade publication Women's Wear Daily reported this month that Saks lost $100 million in the second quarter.


ARCO Offering
ARCO yesterday offered $150 million worth of 9 1/8 percent debentures due in 2031 at a price of 99.20 to yield 9.2 percent through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
The 40-year debentures are noncallable and carry a yield about 80-hundredths of a percentage point more than 30-year Treasury bonds.
The issue was rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Corrections
A report in the Business People column yesterday about an executive appointment at the Seagram Company misidentified the base of operations for its chairman, Edgar M. Bronfman.
Although the company has its headquarters in Montreal, Mr.
Bronfman's office is in New York.


Bundesbank
The Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, sold two billion marks worth of 8 3/4 percent 10-year bonds yesterday.
The securities, worth $1.14 billion, were designated "Unity" bonds because the proceeds will be used to help finance German unification.
The bonds, which will mature in 2001, are being sold at 101 to yield about 8.6 percent, but they will bear a coupon rate of 8 3/4 percent.


Family Sought New Life Only to Find New Pain
In a white, neatly kept bungalow on this city's north side, the Sinthasomphone family grieves quietly for its youngest member.
The family who had fled repression in Laos more than a decade ago is trying to make sense of the death of 14-year-old Konerak, said family members, whose dismembered body was among the 11 found by the police last week in the apartment of Jeffrey L. Dahmer.
Sounthone, the boy's 52-year-old unemployed father, sits listlessly in the kitchen smoking cigarettes, unable to speak about his son's death.
His mother, Somdy, 50, has fainted three or four times since the news arrived, family members said, and early this morning was rushed to a local hospital by one of her sons because she was shaking uncontrollably.
His four brothers and three sisters have existed in a numb world in which they quietly reflect about their brother.


Pavarotti Celebrates by Singing in the Rain
It was billed as "Pavarotti in the Park," but Luciano Pavarotti's 30th-anniversary concert in Hyde Park this evening could just as well have been called "Pavarotti in the Deluge."
The Prince and Princess of Wales, the Duchess of York, Prime Minister John Major and his wife, Norma, the composer Andrew Lloyd Webber, the actor Michael Caine and a crowd estimated at 125,000 turned out despite an incessant downpour to hear the 55-year-old Italian tenor sing a selection of his favorite arias to observe 30 years of a sterling career.
He was accompanied by the 82-member Philharmonia Orchestra and the 120-voice Philharmonia Chorus, under the direction of Leone Magiera.  'Brollies Down!'
Though the rain stopped only once, and then only for several minutes, the mood onstage and in the audience was buoyant.
Mr.
Pavarotti, clutching his customary white handkerchief, appeared moved by the crowd's determination to stay and listen, and at one point he applauded the audience.
For their part, the spectators were tenaciously festive and loudly appreciative, roaring approval after each aria and song


CHRONICLE
PAUL and LINDA McCARTNEY have bought 80 acres of rural Somerset land and turned it over to an organization that protects wild animals from hunters in England.
The property, given to the League Against Cruel Sports, will be added to the league's existing sanctuaries, about 2,300 acres providing safety for hunted animals in the heart of a prime deer-hunting region.
The season opens this week.


Cuban Packs Fastball And Fires at the Pros
Until a few weeks ago Rene Arocha was in the starting rotation of Cuba's national baseball team, a right-hander with a 92 mile-per-hour fastball who was expected to help make his countrymen and their leader proud when the Pan American Games begin Friday in Havana.
Instead, the 27-year-old ballplayer was working out at a public park here last week, pausing occasionally to have his picture taken with one young admirer or to autograph the baseball cap of another.


Bronx Man Stole Limousine And Robbed Store, Police Say
A bodega robber stole a limousine to use as his getaway car and led police officers on a chase from Manhattan to the Bronx early yesterday, the police said.
The suspect, Gilbert Delgado, 28 years old, of 1076 Faile Street in the Hunts Point section of the Bronx, was arrested and charged with robbery, grand larceny of an automobile and criminal possession of a weapon.


Audubon Show Irks Cattle Ranchers
A century ago, in the days of pistol-packing cowboys and stagecoaches that rumbled through frontier towns, cattle ranchers and homesteaders fought for control of the land.
The confrontations were often bloody: 27 men were killed in only one of many such range wars.
Now the ranchers have a new target, a television documentary, "The New Range Wars." Produced by the National Audubon Society as part of a series of specials to be shown on both the Turner Broadcasting System and the Public Broadcasting Service, it looks at whether cattle-grazing is destroying what remains of the wide open spaces of the Southwest like New Mexico and Arizona.


Bridge
The Summer National Championships of the American Contract Bridge League, which began here on Friday and will end on Sunday, seem certain to be the biggest turnament ever played anywhere.
The record for the biggest session of play has already been broken twice: there were 1,220 tables Saturday afternoon and 1,297 Sunday afternoon.
The Spingold Knockout Team Championship began on Monday with a record entry of 162 teams.
The top eight seeds by captain are: 1.
Jim Cayne, Manhattan; 2.
Malcolm Brachman, Dallas; 3.
Steve Robinson, Arlington, Va.; 4.
Zia Mahmood, Manhattan; 5.
Cliff Russell, Miami Beach; 6.
Jeff Wolfson, Northbrook, Ill.; 7.
Dan Morse, Houston; 8.
Bill Root, Boca Raton, Fla.


An Agency Is Renamed for Real People
THESE days, when an advertising agency renames itself, it is usually to replace the names of long-departed founders with those of new owners.
But North Castle Partners is dropping a made-up name for those of the real executives now in charge.
North Castle, a shop here with $100 million in billings from mostly packaged-goods clients like Ocean Spray and Tetley, is being rechristened Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafeliece.
Spurring the switch is the arrival, effective Aug. 12, of a new vice chairman and chief creative officer.
He is John A. Lerch, one of six executive vice presidents and creative directors of Lintas New York, where he has worked since 1981.


Flooding Deaths May Reach 500 In a Remote Village in West India
A river fed by torrential rains burst a dike today and swept into a remote village in western India.
The police said that 500 people might have been killed and that thousands of homes had been destroyed.
Storms struck several other parts of India, where at least 59 people were believed killed in floods or house collapses, news reports said.


The Military Mind Worked
To The Living Section:
Marian Burros commenced her otherwise informative article "Lower-Fat Foods vs. U.S. Standards"  [ June 26 ]  by labeling "military intelligence" a world-class oxymoron.
While this labeling may be trendy and embraced in certain circles, it is also quite inaccurate.
Compared with other sources of information and evaluation, military intelligence has shown itself superior in analyses and prognostication.
The following illustrates this claim.


Crossland Will Seek A Merger
Crossland Savings, one of the largest savings institutions in New York state, announced yesterday that its losses from bad loans had accumulated to the point that it had agreed with Federal regulators to seek a merger with a stronger company.
Until a partner is found, the Brooklyn-based savings bank will remain open for business, and its deposits will continue to be insured up to the maximum of $100,000 per account allowed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Anchor Mortgage Services, Wayne, N.J., a unit of Anchor Savings Bank F.S.B., named William J. Kelley senior vice president and national wholesale sales manager for its new wholesale mortage-banking division. *
Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co., Philadelphia, a producer of metal containers and other packaging equipment, appointed Alan W. Rutherford senior vice president and chief financial officer.


Nations of Yugoslavia Must Keep Individuality; Alpine Slovenia
To the Editor:
Unfortunately, "The Dark Side of Disunity," Leslie H. Gelb's July 10 column on Yugoslavia, has things about Slovenia backward.


Cuban Exile Pleads Guilty in the 1976 Bomb Slaying of Chilean Ambassador
A Cuban exile pleaded guilty today to conspiring to murder Orlando Letelier, a former Chilean Ambassador to the United States who was assassinated here on Embassy Row nearly 15 years ago.
The plea came two weeks after the Chilean Supreme Court reopened an investigation of the killing and named a civilian judge to serve, in effect, as a special prosecutor.


Checketts May Find Trading Ewing Won't Be Easy
If indeed Patrick Ewing asks to be traded, will the Knicks be able to accommodate him?
One day after the Knicks' center lost his arbitration case in his bid to become a restricted free agent, Ewing was the talk of National Basketball Association yesterday as team officials debated whether he could be traded and if so, at what price.


Pentagon Is Increasing Staff To Look for Vietnam Missing
As a result of improving American-Vietnamese relations, the Defense Department said today that it was sharply increasing the number of people assigned to investigate the cases of servicemen unaccounted for in the Vietnam War.
Pete Williams, the Pentagon spokesman, said an expected increase in access to crash sites in Vietnam and to Hanoi's wartime archives had prompted the military to increase the number of investigators, analysts and other workers to 222 from 134.


INSIDE
Private Mideast Promises
Washington gave Israel and Syria private assurances to persuade them to attend talks, American, Arab and Israeli officials say.
Page A6.


Metropolitan Diary
POSTCARD FROM THE HAMPTONS The small fry are restless And grumpy and zestless.
The sodden towels droop on the line.
The games of Monopoly Always unhoppily End in a wail or a whine.
The guests wander idle With thoughts suicidal, And contemplate vistas aflood.
The hostesses stutter, The dunes become mountains of mud, And, all in all, listen, the sea Shore in rain is the place NOT to be! -- MAUREEN CANNON
. . .
The place is 92d Street between Park and Madison Avenues on a recent sunny afternoon.
Mary C. Fjeldstad passes an attractive, beautifully clothed and coiffed 30-ish woman walking with a small child.
The woman bends down to speak to the youngster.
"Jessica," Ms.
Fjeldstad hears her say, "do you remember walking down this street when you were in utero?"
. . .
Dear Diary:
It is my custom to pick up some worthwhile reading for a lengthy flight, so I stopped at a Doubleday bookstore to browse through a book recommended to me.
The book, "Composing a Life," is concerned with the essence and fulfillment of life as related by five successful women.
The clerk handed me the $9.95 paperback to look over.
As I stood at the sales counter trying to decide if I wanted to make the investment, another customer walked up and with bold confidence asked for a copy of "How to Have Beautiful Breasts at Any Age."
Reality set in.
With a tinge of envy I looked at the woman standing beside me.
"Well," I said to myself, "She knows what reality is for her, and I'm still searching. What's it going to be: the essence of life or 38C?" -- MARIE FABRY
. . .
Dear Diary:
The timing was perfect.
As I walked in my apartment and passed the front door, the Chinese menu scooted underneath.
Not missing a beat, I bent down and shot it back.
Silence.
I waited.
The menu was returned.
Then, for several minutes, sharply, swiftly, we volleyed back and forth.
A final fierce serve from my side.
Victory at last.
I heard my defeated opponent trudging up the stairs.
Triumphantly, I opened the door.
Across the hall were two Chinese menus, neatly placed side by side outside my neighbor's door. -- PATRICIA FIELDSTEEL
. . .
MY MOTHER AND THE MILKMAN
My mother, who arrived at Ellis Island in 1896 (give or take a year), was very proud of her diploma from Public School 62 and her Palmer Method Certificate.
Both hung proudly in our home, as we moved all over Brooklyn from apartment to apartment.
With each move we acquired a new milkman and a new milk box.
We never met the milkman face to face: he left the milk bottles in the milk box and each week my mother left the money in the same place.
On those occasions when my mother needed to change her order, she sat down at the kitchen table and in her best Palmer Method script, wrote a long letter to the milkman.
Never did she write: "Leave one quart." Instead, she wrote: "Dear Mr. Milkman, My husband and I wish you to know that we are going to visit my aunt on Saturday. Therefore, please do not leave the usual order. We appreciate all that you do for us, and we wish you, your wife and your children the best of health, good days and prosperity."
Then she signed her letter in her fanciest scroll and proudly left the letter in the wooden box.
"You always write to Mr. Milkman but he never writes to you," my sister and I teased her.
Accepting our rebukes, she said: "You wait. Someday he will write to me, too. He has too many people and doesn't have time to write to us all."
He didn't reply, of course.
And then one day we found a large envelope in the wooden box.
Eagerly, we waited for my mother to open the letter.
The enclosure was a disappointment to everyone but my mother.
After all, she said, he
had
written to her.
It was a form letter from the milk company informing us that they had changed to a new formula, with a new label.
It was to be called homogenized milk.
"You see," said my mother, "he did take the time to tell me he was making a change."
And we never teased her again. -- GERTRUDE LANGSAM


Howell for Abner
The San Diego Padres yesterday acquired third baseman JACK HOWELLfrom the California Angels in exchange for outfielder SHAWN ABNER, the first player taken in the 1984 draft when the Mets selected him.
The 25-year-old Abner earned the starting job in center field for the Padres this season, but soon played himself out of the lineup.
He has appeared in 53 games and is hitting .165 with one home run and five r.b.i.
Howell, 29, became a reserve when the Angels signed free agent GARY GAETTI to a four-year contract during the off season.
Howell appeared in only 32 games for the Angels, hitting .210 with two home runs and seven r.b.i. (AP)


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.68
5.66
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.55
5.58
7.49
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.69
7.32
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.03
8.04
8.26
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.37
8.39
8.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.34
9.34
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.12
7.11
7.35
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


MTV Plans Three Channels
The MTV cable network plans to expand to three 24- hour channels, each with a distinct musical format, in mid- 1993, executives of the music video network said yesterday.
"Cable television has entered the new age where fiber optics will significantly increase channel capacity," said Tom Freston, chairman and chief executive of MTV Networks Inc.


Suit Aims to Bring Back I.Q. Tests of Black Pupils
Five years after black parents won a statewide ban on using I.Q. tests to assess whether their children were learning-disabled, a second group of minority parents is suing to bring back the tests.
The new plaintiffs, backed by the Landmark Legal Foundation of Kansas City, Mo., say the black-only ban is discriminatory and denies black parents the option of having their children tested.


Senate Votes Doctors Power To Order AIDS Test of Patient
The Senate voted today to give health care workers the right to test patients for AIDS before performing invasive procedures.
The proposal was made by Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina.
He said the move completed action he had started earlier this month, when he won passage of a provision to require health care professionals who know they have the AIDS virus to inform patients of that fact before performing invasive procedures.


Dow Advances by 31.08 to Close at 3,016.32
Stocks advanced strongly yesterday on demand for blue chips.
The gain came after several sessions in which fears about a slow emergence from the recession contributed to lackluster market performance.
The Dow Jones industrial average posted its largest gain since July 18 -- 31.08 points, to 3,016.32, a gain of more than 1 percent, on expanding breadth and volume, with 169.1 million shares changing hands, compared with 136 million on Monday.
Four Stocks Push Dow
The market opened with vigor after gains in overseas markets and continued its advance through the day.


Red Sox End Losing Streak; Quintana Ties R.B.I. Mark
Carlos Quintana had a record-tying six runs batted in the third inning, and the Boston Red Sox ended their longest home losing streak in 64 years, beating the Texas Rangers, 11-6, today.
Quintana hit a grand slam off Oil Can Boyd (0-2) and a two-run double off Wayne Rosenthal as the Red Sox scored 10 runs in the third.
Boston, which had lost 10 of its previous 11 games over all, ended a nine-game slide at Fenway Park.
It was the team's longest losing streak at Fenway since 1927


Liquidation Of B.C.C.I. Is Blocked
A judge here today blocked the liquidation of the operations of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International after the bank's Abu Dhabi owners agreed to set up a fund to allow British depositors to borrow against their frozen deposits.
The Abu Dhabi owners also agreed to pay salaries and expenses of bank employees at least for a while.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Chang Holds On to Win Third-seeded Michael Chang survived two match points and held on to defeat Mikael Pernfors of Sweden, 2-6, 6-1, 7-6, yesterday in the first round of the Volvo tournament.
Second-seeded Pete Sampras had an easier time, beating Gilad Bloom of Israel, 6-0, 6-2.
Amos Mansdorf of Israel, seeded eighth, beat Thomas Hogstedt of Sweden, 6-4, 6-3.
Chang won the first game of the first set at love but his unforced errors gave Pernfors the next five games. (AP)


Correction
An editorial yesterday incorrectly rendered the name of an exhibit at the National Academy of Design.
The exhibit, drawn from the New York Botanical Garden, is "Illustrating Nature: The Art of Botany."


Assault-Weapon Ban Passes
The City Council passed a bill, 28 to 4, yesterday banning assault weapons in New York City.
Mayor David N. Dinkins said he would sign the bill as soon as possible.
Owners of registered guns had fought the proposal.
It defines an assault weapon as a semiautomatic or automatic firearm with such military-type features as a folding stock, bayonet mount, grenade launcher, flash suppressor or modifications of them.
A shotgun with a revolving cylinder magazine also falls under that category.
Owners have 90 days to get rid of the weapons once the bill is signed.
Violators could be fined up to $5,000.


Rape Victim Is Warned: Don't Testify
A 29-year-old rape victim who identified the man accused of a murder and rape spree in southeastern Queens told the police yesterday that she had been beaten and threatened by the man's girlfriend earlier in the day.
She said the woman had told her, "If you testify, you're dead."


Helmsley Conviction Upheld on Appeal; Sentence to Change
A Federal appeals court yesterday upheld the 1989 conviction of Leona M. Helmsley on tax fraud charges, but ordered that her sentence be revised on some counts.
Her lawyer said the resentencing, on 7 of 33 counts, might result in less prison time for Mrs.
Helmsley, who is 71 years old.
But other experts said it was more likely to reduce the amount of the fine originally imposed.


USAir Sets New East Coast Service
USAir said yesterday that it would begin hourly service next month between Logan International Airport in Boston and National Airport in Washington.
The move is intended to position the airline for an upturn in the economy, and perhaps to discourage rival carriers from increasing their presence on that route.


5 Rattlesnakes to Go Home to Woods
As Dr.
Seuss once said, a person's a person, no matter how small.
Now state environmental officials have decided that a threatened species is a threatened species, no matter how venomous.
For five poisonous timber rattlesnakes, that policy means they will be going back home to an Orange County forest where they were captured by a hiker last year.


T.W.A. Accord With Creditors Averts Seizures
Just hours before T.W.A. faced possible seizure of many planes because it could not pay its debts, the airline's chairman averted a showdown yesterday by reaching a tentative agreement with creditors.
The deal is expected to force the nation's seventh-largest carrier into a temporary bankruptcy proceeding sometime in 1992 and also calls for the chairman, Carl C. Icahn, to give up majority control.
The company, now 90 percent-owned by Mr.
Icahn, would be controlled by public stockholders for the first time since being taken private by Mr.
Icahn in 1988.


6 Officers Suspended in Beating of a Motorist
Six of the 19 police officers who stood by as fellow officers beat a black motorist have been indefinitely relieved of duty and 4 more were suspended without pay, newspapers here reported today.
None of the officers reported the beating of the motorist, Rodney G. King, or noted any improper activity before a videotape made by an amateur cameraman was broadcast nationwide, police officials concluded.


Bryan L. Milburn, 95; Retired Army General
Maj.
Gen.
Bryan L. Milburn, who served in the Army in three wars and helped to govern Berlin after World War II, died Saturday in his home in Laverock, Pa.
He was 95 years old.
He died after a brief illness, said his daughter, Ann Beal of Philadelphia.


Still Needed: ABM Defense
Since World War II, the world has lived free of a nuclear weapons calamity.
But that does not mean the U.S. remains safe from long-range ballistic missiles launched accidentally by the Soviet Union or deliberately by a third world country.
For example, a Soviet submarine caught fire and sank off America's East Coast in 1986.
None of its missiles were accidentally launched.
Earlier, in the 1980's, a Soviet submarine in Soviet waters inadverently launched a nuclear-tipped ballistic missile that fortunately traveled only several hundred yards.


A.L. Labs President Out
A.L.
Laboratories, a generic drug maker, said yesterday that its president of six months, Richard P. Storm, resigned by mutual agreement with the board.
Though Mr.
Storm, 53 years old, has 30 years experience in the pharmaceutical industry, he had no previous experience with a smaller, more specialized company like A.L.
Laboratories, said I. Roy Cohen, the vice chairman, whom Mr.
Storm succeeded as president in January.


