Mets Send Teufel to Padres In Exchange for Templeton
In a move that solved the mystery of Hubie Brooks's audition at first base and that is designed to lend stability to their late-game infield situation, the Mets today traded Tim Teufel to the San Diego Padres for Garry Templeton.
The Mets said their acquisition of the 35-year-old Templeton had been executed in an effort to gain a clear-cut, quality backup for shortstop Kevin Elster.
General Manager Frank Cashen said the use of Templeton at short in emergency situations would end the awkward shuttling around of Howard Johnson and the often myriad late-inning moves that were required whenever Elster was removed for a pinch-hitter.


Murray Woodrow, Lawyer, 66
Murray Woodrow, a lawyer, died on Thursday at his home in Rye Brook, N.Y.
He was 66 years old.
Mr. Woodrow died of bone cancer, his son, Robert, said.


Trump Denies Report
Donald Trump yesterday denied a published report that he might have to borrow money from his father to make a $46 million payment next month on bonds issued by the Trump Castle casino.
The Wall Street Journal said Mr.
Trump was considering borrowing from his father, Fred Trump, to avoid restructuring the Atlantic City casino's debt or having the property forced into bankruptcy proceedings.
The Trump Organization, in a statement, said Mr.
Trump had "no intention to ask, nor will he ask, his father for financial assistance to Trump Castle or anything else." The payment on the Trump Castle bonds is due June 15.


Sir Angus Wilson, Who Satirzed British Middle Class, Dies at 77
Sir Angus Wilson, whose observations of the English middle class made him one of Britain's most distinguished writers, died on Friday at the nursing home in Bury St.
Edmunds, southeast England, where he had spent the last several years.
He was 77 years old.
He died after suffering a stroke, said Malcolm Bradbury, a friend and fellow author.


Routine Check Produces Arrest In a '74 Slaying
From time to time, a police fingerprint expert sifts through the files of New York City's unsolved homicides.
As a result, a South Carolina man arrived in a Manhattan court yesterday to be charged with raping and murdering a widow in her apartment 17 years ago.
After the woman, Guadalupe Diaz, was found dead in her apartment on West 204th Street, investigators lifted fingerprints from a window and from a brandy glass, but no suspect emerged and no arrest was ever made.
Then earlier this month a fingerprint expert's routine review linked the objects to Herman Myers, a 36-year-old former resident of the Bronx, said Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman.


Steelcase Curbs Salary Expenses
Steelcase Inc., the maker of office furniture, said it was suspending pay increases for all employees and cutting the base salaries of 25 top executives because of slow sales.
The moves begin Saturday and will remain in effect until March 1, affecting a total of about 12,000 employees at all United States operations, Peter Jeff, company spokesman, said.
The cuts include a 5 percent salary reduction for the company president, Jerry K. Myers, and a requirement that each department cut its expenses by 15 percent, Mr.
Jeff said.
The cuts come after a 60-day voluntary leave of absence taken by 298 employees, which began in April and will end June 10.
Those employees will return, but the company is again asking another 300 employees to take the voluntary leave, which would continue through August, Mr.
Jeff said.


Elizabeth Peishoff Weds
Elizabeth Bridget Peishoff, an assistant store manager, was married yesterday to Harris Bateman Parsons Jr., a manufacturers' sales representative.
The Rev.
J.
Clifford Curtin officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church on Fishers Island, N.Y.
Mrs.
Parsons, 26 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and works for the Bermuda Shop, a boutique in Wellesley, Mass.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Peishoff of Fishers Island.
Her husband, 35, graduated from the Westminster School in Simsbury, Conn., and works for MPS Sales in Needham, Mass.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Parsons of Barrington, R.I.


U.S.-Japan Talks at Impasse On Access to Building Jobs
Declaring a "complete impasse" in negotiations to open the Japanese construction market, a top Commerce Department official said tonight that the United States would begin drawing up regulations to bar Japanese construction companies from receiving any contracts in the United States.
An American-set deadline for concluding the negotiations passed here tonight with both sides continuing to argue over individual projects in which United States companies could participate.


RESULTS PLUS
ROWING  Six Crews Set for Final


Religion Notes
Now, a Collegiate Bible
There has long been a Collegiate Dictionary, so why not a Collegiate Bible?
That is what the editors at the International Bible Society thought when they came up with their latest edition, which through study notes and introductions tries to show the relevance of the Bible to contemporary issues like war, terrorism, homelessness and AIDS.


Henry E. Petersen Is Dead at 70; Investigated Watergate Break-In
Henry E. Petersen, a career official in the Justice Department who conducted the initial investigation of the Watergate break-in that led to the resignation in 1974 of President Richard M. Nixon, died on Wednesday at his home in Sunderland, Md.
He was 70 years old.
He died of emphysema, his family said.


No Graham Tickets Left
The Martha Graham Dance Center has announced that because of overwhelming demand, no tickets remain for the free performance by the Graham company on Monday at City Center.


No Headline
Greater Power to Deport
The President's anticrime bill would permit special tribunals where foreigners accused of terrorism would not be allowed to know some or all of the evidence against them.
Page 6.
AIDS-Type Virus in Cows
Scientists say an AIDS-like virus is more common in American cattle than was thought.
There is no evidence of a threat to people; the effect on the industry is uncertain.
Page 8.
No Cameras in Courts
A law allowing cameras and tape recorders in New York courtrooms is lapsing because legislators cannot agree on whether witnesses should be able to testify without them.
Page 25.
Goldome Is Divided Up
New York State's largest savings institution, Goldome, will be closed and divided between two upstate competitors, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation announced.
Page 35.
At Last, Riley Signs On
After several weeks of negotiations, the Knicks signed Pat Riley, the former Los Angeles basketball coach, to a five-year contract.
Page 29.


Dourados Journal; For Brazil's Indians, a Final Way Out
There is an underside to the prosperity in this area of Brazil's agricultural frontier, a landscape of grain silos, sleek white cattle and a sea of soybeans extending west to the horizon.
In despair over the collective loss of Brazil's west, this municipality's original inhabitants are quietly killing themselves.
Last year, in a reservation of 7,200 Indians, there were 29 suicides, and 8 more were reported by mid-May of this year.


Special Prosecutor Is Accused by North Of Being Vindictive
Oliver L. North, the former White House aide who is seeking to overturn a criminal conviction in the Iran-contra case, has delivered a bitter verbal attack on Lawrence E. Walsh, calling the special prosecutor "a vindictive wretch" bent on destroying him.
"This has been investigated to death," Mr.
North said of his involvement in the Iran-contra affair, "and it's now a blatant case of vindictiveness, of dragging a family back through more and more of this incredibly expensive process, just in an attempt to ruin my family and me."


Corrections
A picture caption on Thursday about Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's meeting with a Soviet delegation misidentified the man at the left and omitted the identity of the man at the rear.
First Deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Shcherbakov was at the left; Grigory A. Yavlinsky, a senior economic adviser, was at the rear.


Permission Expires for Cameras in Court
Legislative talks on extending New York State's 3 1/2-year-old law allowing news cameras in courtrooms collapsed today, insuring that at midnight tonight the state will become one of just six in the nation that do not allow such coverage of trials.
The failure of the talks also means that the state will become the first to rescind a measure permitting news organizations to videotape, photograph or tape-record trials, said officials at the Radio-Television News Directors Association in Washington.


Warren H. Bacon, 68, Chicago Civic Leader
Warren H. Bacon, a civic leader in Chicago, died Wednesday at his home there.
He was 68 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Jury Backs Investors in Apple Suit
Two former executives of Apple Computer Inc. misled investors in 1983 about the fruitless attempt of the company to build its own disk drive and should pay millions of dollars in damages, a Federal jury has decided.
A.
C.
Markkula, an Apple co-founder, and John Vennard, a former vice president, failed to disclose the degree of technical problems Apple had in developing a disk drive that was nicknamed Twiggy, the panel decided on Thursday.


AIDS-Like Virus Is Found At High Rate in U.S. Cattle
After four years of research, scientists from the Department of Agriculture have found that a virus similar in genetic structure to the AIDS virus is more common in cattle in United States than researchers had anticipated.
The scientists say there is no evidence that the virus can infect people.
The virus, bovine immunodeficiency-like virus, or BIV, is spread through the blood and is a member of a family of slow-acting viruses that have been shown to reduce the activity of an animal's immune system.
Such immune suppression, veterinarians said today, can open the way for other infections.
The virus, which was first isolated in 1969, has been shown to cause illness in calves, a top scientist at the Department of Agriculture said today.
Scientists say they believe that the virus causes immune suppression in adult cattle, but how powerful it is remains uncertain.


At Wellesley, Advice To Seek Creative Path
Madeleine L'Engle, the author of "A Wrinkle in Time" and other books praised for their unusual blend of fantasy, science and autobiography, advised graduating seniors at Wellesley College's 113th commencement exercises yesterday to be aware of the integration of characteristics necessary to become "great human beings."
Borrowing from Greek mythology she told them to "use fully the Apollo, the intellect, which is a great glory, and rejoice equally in Sophia, the wisdom which makes the intellect creative instead of destructive." Ms.
L'Engle also advised the graduates to take charge of their lives through the choices they make.


Music in Review
Andre Watts and Others  Metropolitan Museum of Art
As listeners have had ample opportunity to learn, midway through this year of celebrating not wisely but too well, all-Mozart programs hold perils.
One is mode.
Mozart did exquisite work in minor keys, but relatively little of it.


Crime Bill Would Establish Alien Deportation Tribunal
The anticrime bill that President Bush has sent to Congress would permit the Government to hold special tribunals in which foreigners accused of terrorism would not be allowed to rebut or even see some or all of the evidence against them.
Justice Department officials say the tribunals, which would require the approval of a Federal judge, would give the Government a needed mechanism to deport alien terrorists without being forced to disclose evidence that would reveal the identity of confidential sources, make public the nature of investigative methods or damage relationships with foreign countries.


Climate May Best Explain Spread of Farming
To the Editor:
Your May 9 front-page article on early farmers and the sowing of languages discusses theories behind the transmission of languages in Europe.
You report on new scholarly support, using genetic evidence, for the theory that language spread into Europe along with agriculture between 10,000 and 4,000 years ago.
This theory is supposed to contradict the prevailing theory that language is spread by military conquest.


Music in Review
John Kamitsuka Pianist Alice Tully Hall
John Kamitsuka, who made his New York recital debut in 1984, has remained active in the area since then and, to judge from Wednesday evening's turnout, seems to have gained a sizable following.
But he has yet to develop a major career, and possible reasons quickly became apparent.


Bank Loans Show Drop
Commercial and industrial loans on the books of commercial banks, excluding acceptances, fell $1.21 billion, to $311.82 billion in the week ended May 22, the Federal Reserve Board said today.


Kennedy Nephew Pleads Not Guilty to Charges of Assault and Rape
William K. Smith pleaded not guilty today to charges that he attacked and raped a 29-year-old woman on Easter weekend at his family's Palm Beach estate.
Making his way through a swarm of reporters, photographers and television crews, Mr.
Smith, 30, appeared for his arraignment at the Palm Beach County courthouse, although he was not required to by law.


Disputed Purse Bid
DON KING said in Las Vegas, Nev., yesterday that the World Boxing Council would hold a purse bid next Saturday in New York for a heavyweight title fight between the champion, EVANDER HOLYFIELD, and MIKE TYSON.
King, who is Tyson's promoter, also said that the W.B.C. had mandated that the purse bid be split 60-40 in the champion's favor, rather than the traditional 75-25 split that accompanies purse bids.
But in Palm Springs, Calif., DAN DUVA, Holyfield's promoter, said that the W.B.C. purse bid was invalid.
"First of all, the mandatory date for Holyfield-Tyson is October 19," Duva said.
"So the purse bid shouldn't be until July at the earliest. Then there's the matter of which organization's turn is it to hold the purse bid. The way we see it, it's the I.B.F.'s turn and, in fact, the I.B.F. is holding its purse bid June 11.


China Doesn't Use Prison Labor in Africa
To the Editor:
In "China Has Used Prison Labor in Africa" (Op-Ed, May 11), Roberta Cohen of the International League for Human Rights alleges that "the Chinese not only export goods made by prison labor, but they export prison workers too." This is indeed a despicable practice, which flies in the face of the facts.


CHRONICLE
When the Tony Awards are broadcast on CBS tomorrow, ELLIOT LAWRENCE will be in the orchestra pit, his 25th year of conducting the show.
He is the musical director of N. W. Ayer Inc., supervising jingles for advertising commercials, and has helped produce hits like "Be All You Can Be," for the United States Army, and "Reach Out and Touch Someone," for A.T.&amp;T.
He won a Tony for conducting "How To Succeed in Business Without Really Trying," and tomorrow he conducts BOBBY MORSE singing "I Believe in You," from that show.


Toyota Has No Hold On Electrical Supplier
To the Editor:
"For the last two years, T. Boone Pickens, the Texas oilman who hates to be called a corporate raider, has been devoted to a colorful if quixotic effort to breach one of the strongest fortresses in Japanese business, the corporate empire built around the Toyota Motor Company.


Long Way From Toco, His Honor in the Lead
He is a mayor who likes golf rather than tennis and he is so good at it that he earns a decent living hitting fairways and making putts.
He is also the only player on the Senior PGA Tour with two putters in his bag among the 14 clubs allowed.
Mayor Rocky Thompson of Toco, Tex., (pop. 138) used both putters so effectively today in the opening round of the $400,000 Nynex Commemorative at Sleepy Hollow Country Club that he shot his best round of the year, a six-under-par 64 on the 6,545-yard course.


Hostage Is Freed to End Standoff After a Slaying
Early last night, 28 hours after a man wounded his former girlfriend and locked himself in her Edison, N.J., home with her mother and brother, the standoff ended when the man surrendered, the boy ran unhurt from the house and the mother was found dead inside, the police said.
Before a crowd of dozens of police officers and neighbors who had ringed the house since Linda Galbo, 20 years old, was critically wounded on Thursday afternoon, the man, John Arias, walked out of the front door after an armored personnel carrier had rumbled up to deliver a message: "Let's go John. Get out of the house. It's over. Do it now."


One Runner Just Didn't Believe in Parental Leave
Of nearly 3,500 women runners entered this morning in the Advil Mini-Marathon, a 10-kilometer race around the loop in Central Park, it's hard to imagine anyone less inclined to use the sponsor's product than Liz McColgan, the 27-year-old favorite from Scotland.
This is an athlete who continued running through the eighth month of pregnancy and resumed running 11 days after giving birth to a daughter, Eilish, last November.
By the time Eilish, which is the Gaelic version of Elizabeth, was seven and a half weeks old, her mother was winning races again.
She took four in a row, in fact, before she finished third in the world cross-country championships last March.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, a review of the film "Everybody's Fine" in Weekend yesterday omitted part of the credit listing in some copies and, in some additional copies, the related picture caption.
The affected passage should have said, "Directed by Giuseppe Tornatore, original screenplay by Mr. Tornatore." The photograph showed Marcello Mastroianni.


Magic's Pass to Nowhere Is Ticket to Final
They'll be talking about that pass Magic Johnson made to no one for, oh, 24 to 36 hours, and then it will officially become material for discussions that begin with "Remember when?"
Already, today, the focus shifted elsewhere.
As the Los Angeles Lakers rode a morning flight for Chicago and the start of the National Basketball Association finals Sunday, there was Magic in the air.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the budget passed by the Connecticut legislature misstated provisions of a proposed tax on mortgages.
It would be 0.5 percent, not 5 percent, and would be applied to amounts over $150,000 for first mortgages on residential property and to the full amount of commercial mortgages and second mortgages.


Hostage Policy by Lloyd's to Pay 3 Guards
Three guards held hostage this week at the prison for the state's most unmanageable inmates will receive $17,000 to $20,000 as a result of an insurance policy held by their union.
But the guard most seriously injured in the uprising at the Southport Correctional Facility is ineligible for the money.


Delay Reported in Sununu Travel Payment
The White House chief of staff, John H. Sununu, did not pay some personal travel bills for as long as eight months before making a lump-sum payment of $3,768 last year, The Washington Post reported today.
Mr.
Sununu's office was prompt in reimbursing the Government for personal trips by others on military planes.
The Post quoted an associate White House counsel, Gregory S. Walden, as saying no one had given a satisfactory explanation for the delay in payment for six or seven trips by Mr.
Sununu.


7 ASTRONAUTS SET FOR LIFTOFF TODAY
The space shuttle Columbia and a crew of seven astronauts are set to blast off today, Saturday, on a nine-day medical examination in space.
Mission planners said all systems associated with the flight were working properly.
On Friday a front carrying hail and lightning moved across Florida, threatening to delay some last-minute preparations.
But early this morning, workers began loading more than 500,000 gallons of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen fuel into the shuttle's external tanks.


Dollar Surges on Optimism At Signs of U.S. Recovery
The dollar surged against foreign currencies yesterday as investors rode a wave of optimism over prospects for a rebound in the United States economy.
The dollar ended at 1.7425 German marks, up from 1.7190 at Thursday's close, and it rose to 138.35 Japanese yen from 137.80.


Intruders Kill Man in Bronx Home
As he did most nights after work, Rafael Rodriguez drove his Dodge Ram to the gate of his driveway at 2193 University Avenue in the University Heights section of the Bronx Thursday evening, opened the lock and parked the truck behind his wife's car.
He locked the gate and went in the back door of his single-family home.
The police said they did not know if he saw the broken window.
"I heard shots and looked out," said Gloria Valez, who lives directly across from the Rodriguez home.


Music in Review
I Cameristi Lombardi  92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue
Using the newly discovered long-playing record, small Italian string orchestras similar to I Cameristi Lombardi did a lot to set the early-music movement in motion.
Postwar listeners were deluged with Vivaldi, Corelli and an entire company of brilliant and not-so-brilliant late Baroque composers.
A taste and a thirst were developed.


Walter J. Dilbeck, 72, Real Estate Developer
Walter J. Dilbeck Jr., a real estate developer and onetime business partner of Spiro T. Agnew who served a prison term for tax evasion, died Thursday at Deaconess Hospital in Evansville.
He was 72 years old.
He was admitted to the hospital on Tuesday with heart and kidney ailments, a brother said.


Orders to Factories Up First Time in 6 Months
Orders received by American factories rose in April for the first time in six months, the Commerce Department said today.
The 1.8 percent gain in April orders, following a revised 2.9 percent drop in March orders, was slightly above the 1.5 percent gain forecast by Wall Street economists.
The report provided a new piece of evidence that an economic recovery might be near.


Angola and Rebels Sign Pact Ending 16-Year War
The Government of Angola and the rebel faction that it has battled for 16 years signed a long-awaited peace agreement today aimed at ending civil war and preparing the ravaged southern African nation for free elections and democracy.
An official cease-fire went into effect after the accord was signed here tonight by Angola's President, Jose Eduardo dos Santos, and Jonas Savimbi, the longtime leader of the rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, or Unita.
An informal truce declared by the two sides on May 15 appears largely to be holding.


Marjorie Harley, Psychoanalyst, 77
Dr.
Marjorie Harley, a psychoanalyst who specialized in treating children and adolescents, died Wednesday at her home in Baltimore.
She was 77 years old.
She died of a brain tumor, an associate said.


Pay Cut at Top for British Airways
Top officials of British Airways will take pay cuts this year to avoid the recent criticism of huge pay increases that has been leveled at other British company officers, The Financial Times newspaper said today.
The company's chairman, Lord King, will have his $890,000 annual salary cut by about $170,000 following the airline's poor results, the paper said.
The chief executive, Sir Colin Marshall, will take a similar cut, putting his pay at around $540,000.


S.I. Home Port Fight Shifts to Its Closing
The long fight over opening the Staten Island Home Port has now turned into a fight over its proposed closing.
Just two years after the naval port began operating, a Federal panel yesterday placed it on the Pentagon's list of military installations that might be shut down to save money.
Thirty-four other additions to the list were also announced in Washington by the panel, the Base Closure and Realignment Commission.
The panel must still make a final recommendation, which will be subject to Congressional and Presidential approval.


Courts Watched Closely as Kuwait Resumes Trials
Kuwait's martial law tribunals, interrupted for two weeks after a storm of criticism by lawyers and human rights monitors, will resume in earnest on Saturday with the trial of two dozen people accused of helping publish a pro-Iraqi newspaper during the occupation.
But stung by the outrage against its first verdicts, which included a much-publicized 15-year sentence for a man who wore a T-shirt with Saddam Hussein's picture on it, the Government is approaching the new trials with great care.


Music in Review
William Matthews  Guitarist Weill Recital Hall
Much of the best music for the guitar was written by composers who played the instrument and had an intimate knowledge of its strengths and limitations.
William Matthews, a guitarist who teaches at several colleges in New York City, offered a few recent examples of this repertory and some familiar works by Villa-Lobos and Ponce at his recital on Wednesday night.


The Fall Book Lineup: Heavy Hitters Abound
The most rewarding part of publishing, editors and publishers say, comes when a book by an unknown author makes it onto the best seller list.
Meanwhile, to pay the rent, publishers sign up as many well-known authors as they can.
Luckily for an industry whose sales have been lagging of late, publishers have managed to sign up quite a few for this fall.


April Surplus Rises in Japan
Lower oil imports and reduced Japanese tourism overseas helped Japan's current account surplus almost quadruple in April from a year earlier to $7.77 billion, the Finance Ministry announced today.
Despite the sharp increase in the surplus from $1.96 billion a year earlier, ministry officials said unusual factors were responsible and a basic trend toward smaller surpluses would continue.
The current account includes trade and other financial flows like investment, repatriation of profits and tourism.


Bernard Chaus, 62, Innovator in Selling Women's Sportwear
Bernard Chaus, the founder, chairman and chief executive of Bernard Chaus Inc., one of the largest producers of women's sportswear and dresses, died yesterday morning at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a subdural hematoma, a business associate said.


Miss Pratt Wed To Paul Stewart
Laura Steele Pratt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Low Pratt of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday at St.
Andrew's-by-the-Sea Church in Hyannis Port, Mass., to Paul Gerard Stewart, a son of Mrs.
William J. Stewart of Boston and the late Mr.
Stewart.
The Rev.
Betty Ann Lehmann, a Universalist minister, performed an Episcopal ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
James Armstrong, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Stewart, 31 years old, graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is the president and her mother, Joan H. Pratt, the vice president of the Edward L. Pratt Company, a manufacturers' representative in Westport.
The bridegroom, 36, a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, is a referee for the National Hockey League.
His father was the athletic director and a coach at the English High School in the Jamaica Plain section of Boston.


Chapter 11 Filing By Enstar Group
The Enstar Group, a retail and financial services concern based in Montgomery, Ala., said that it and certain of its subsidiaries had filled for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from creditors.
Enstar said that with the filings, it and all of its direct and indirect subsidiaries, except for American Savings of Florida, F.S.B., its 50 percent owned subsidiary, were either in Chapter 11 proceedings or had discontinued operations.
Enstar said the decision to seek Chapter 11 protection was based on the substantial amount of the company's current debt, a lack of cash to meet obligations, continuing litigation expenses and a recent sizable judgment against the company.
The company's main retailing units -- Shoe City Inc., Amret Inc. and Enstar Specialty Retail Inc. -- filed for Chapter 11 protection in January.


Ms. Mansell Wed To Colin Ambrose
Jessica Lyman Mansell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank L. Mansell of Hobe Sound, Fla., and East Hampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Colin Trippe Ambrose, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry T. Ambrose of Glencoe, Ill.
The Rev.
Brenda Husson, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
James' Church in New York.
Mrs.
Ambrose, 31 years old, graduated from Boston College.
She is a freelance disk jockey.
Her father is an advisory director of Paine Webber in New York.
Her mother, Mona Lyman Mansell, founded and heads the Freedom Institute in New York, an organization that helps people with drug and alcohol problems.
The bridegroom, 32, a graduate of Utah State University, is the director of advertising at Top Shelf Magazine, a restaurant management publication in Ridegfield, Conn.
His previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bride's.
His father is a senior vice president of Continental Grain in Chicago.


Big 3 Charge Mini-Van Dumping
Faced with a continuing loss of sales to Japanese auto makers, the Big Three filed an anti-dumping petition with the Government today, accusing four Japanese concerns of importing mini-vans at unfairly low prices.
The industry's action seemed sure to aggravate trade tensions between the United States and Japan.
Although the petition focused on a relatively narrow category of vehicles, one Big Three executive who requested anonymity described it as a warning shot.


AIDS and Rape Suspects: A Smart Test?
This week it was revealed that the complainant in the Palm Beach rape case requested that her alleged assailant, William Kennedy Smith, be tested for HIV infection, the virus associated with AIDS.
Today, the issue of rape inevitably raises the possibility of HIV infection.
The question is, Is it really in a rape complainant's interests to compel a suspect to be tested for AIDS?
Increasingly, women who bring a charge of rape are asking for the results of an HIV antibody test of the suspect's blood.
In response, many district attorneys' offices have incorporated the HIV antibody test into plea bargaining by offering admitted rapists reduced sentences in exchange for submission to the test.


City Reviving Plan for Tolls At East River
New York City transportation officials are drafting a proposal to collect tolls on the four free East River bridges.
The idea has often been rejected, but officials say it is more plausible now because of the budget crisis and the cost of repairing the dilapidated structures.
The officials say new systems to collect the tolls would mean that tolls would cause less congestion and pollution than in the past and point to a new Federal law that would increase the financial benefit.


Herbert P. J. Marshall, Film Maker, Dies at 85
Herbert P. J. Marshall, a British writer whose career also embraced film making, theatrical direction and design, education and Russian literature, died Tuesday at the Homeland Nursing Home in Cowfold, West Sussex, England.
He was 85 years old and had homes in West Sussex, Manhattan and Carbondale, Ill.
The cause of death has not been determined, said his wife, Fredda.


For Most Frequent Fliers, the Hot Ticket Is in the Front Cabin
More and more travelers are discovering that one of the major advantages of airline frequent-flier programs is the right to upgrade tickets to first class.
The reward of free flights for logging a specific number of miles has attracted the greatest attention.
But moving to first class is the most-used award in many programs.


Traffic Alert
Lower Second Avenue Festival: Second Avenue will be closed today from 5th to 13th Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Plantathon: The east side of Broadway will be closed today from 72d to 79th Street from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for a street fair and plant sale.


Bush Is Feeling 'More Positive' On Kremlin Aid
President Bush said today after meeting a high-level Soviet economic delegation that he felt Moscow was really moving down the path of radical economic reform and therefore he was "feeling more positive" about the question of aiding President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Speaking after meeting for nearly an hour with the Soviet team headed by the Gorbachev adviser Yevgeny M. Primakov, Mr.
Bush said: "I had the impression that they are undertaking what for them is, and what the world will see as, radical economic reform. When you've had a totally controlled economy, to try to move to a market economy, it's not easy. You need help along the way."


Tighter U.S. Mortgage Rules Set
The Government said today that it was putting tighter lending standards into place for mortgages backed by the Federal Housing Administration.
One lending group charged that the move would reduce home sales by as much as 200,000 annually.
The new rules will require people financing their purchases with F.H.A.-backed mortgages to pay higher closing costs and for the first time they will have to make annual payments for mortgage insurance.


For Marsalis, It's Strike Up the Class
Wynton Marsalis borrowed 12-year-old Sandy Carhuayano's homemade plywood guitar and proceeded to pluck the wires that served for strings.
"
Plong
-- plong plong -- plong," he told the 110 fifth- and sixth-grade musicians assembled at Public School 8 in Brooklyn. "That's the rhythm I want to hear."
The occasion yesterday was a "Concerto for Found Objects" in the school auditorium, and the 29-year-old trumpet virtuoso was putting his talents to the test.
He is at home with jazz and classical styles, but had never worked with instruments made from hairpins, wood and scrap metal.


What Is So Rare as a Day In May? July Before June
A dome of very hot, humid air parked itself 20,000 feet over the northeastern United States about 20 days ago and just hung around, making the month of May the hottest that New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington and many other cities have experienced in meteorological memory.
And while the East sweltered, temperatures dropped to record-breaking lows in Southern California, and unseasonable snw fell in the Sierra Nevada.


Sir Angus Wilson, Who Satirized British Middle Class, Dies at 77
Sir Angus Wilson, whose observations of the English middle class made him one of Britain's most distinguished writers, died on Friday at the nursing home in Bury St.
Edmunds, southeast England, where he had spent the last several years.
He was 77 years old.
He died after suffering a stroke, said Malcolm Bradbury, a friend and fellow author.


Ethel Payne, 79, Dies; Was a Correspondent
Ethel Payne, regarded as the nation's pre-eminent black female journalist, was found dead Thursday in her Washington apartment.
She was 79 years old.
Miss Payne apparently died of natural causes on Tuesday and was discovered two days later, said her sister, Avis Johnson of San Diego.


2 Brothers Injured in Fall From a Window
Two brothers, 4 and 5 years old, were injured, one of them seriously, when they fell out of a third-floor window in Flushing, Queens, last night, the police said.
The children fell out of a screened window about 8:30 P.M. as they played in an apartment at 139-19 34th Road, said Sergeant Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman.
The boys were visiting friends with their mother, Sofia Ehsan, 34, of 120th Street in nearby College Point.


The Once, Future and Present Coach
Asked to describe himself, Pat Riley once said, "He is a coach and he will stay a coach."
At his introduction as the Knicks' new coach yesterday, Riley showed how true that statement was when he was asked about when he was aware that he missed coaching.


Corrections
An obituary on May 8 about Dr.
Hyman I. Biegeleisen, a New York physician who specialized in vascular diseases, omitted the name of a survivor.
She is Sherry Braude of North Andover, Mass., a daughter by a marriage that ended in divorce.


CHRONICLE
SYLVESTER STALLONE's 23-acre horse ranch, about 40 miles north of Los Angeles, is for sale for $6.75 million.
Mr.
Stallone is not alone in trying to sell property.
PIA ZADORA is asking $5 million cash for her house in the Bel Air section of Los Angeles, which she no longer needs because she and her husband, the deal-maker MESHULAM RIKLIS, bought Pickfair, which they then razed to rebuild.
ZSA ZSA GABORis asking $15 million for her Bel Air mansion, bought from the estate of Howard Hughes.
The asking price for Lucille Ball's house, on the market since she died in April 1989, has dropped to $4.25 million from $7.8 million.
"The market has been very bad," said MIKE SILVERMAN, the broker who handles the homes of many celebrities, including the Stallone ranch.
But he has just rented his own house in Malibu, Calif., for two months to DOUGLAS WICK, the producer, for $1,000 a day.


Climate May Best Explain Spread of Farming; Flaws in the Theory
To the Editor:
According to your May 9 front-page report, a team of biologists from the State University of New York campus at Stony Brook, L.I., believes it has found genetic links to support a novel theory, according to which the early farmers who spread the knowledge of agriculture from Turkey across to the Balkans and the rest of Europe were identical with those who disseminated the ancestral tongue of the Indo-European languages in a lengthy process that began about 9,000 years ago.


Kennedy Nephew Pleads Not Guilty to Charges of Assault and Rape
William K. Smith pleaded not guilty today to charges that he attacked and raped a 29-year-old woman on Easter weekend at his family's Palm Beach estate.
Making his way through a swarm of reporters, photographers and television crews, Mr.
Smith, 30, appeared for his arraignment at the Palm Beach County courthouse, although he was not required to by law.


Among Most Valuable
Unable to sort out a single defensive most valuable player, the World League of Professional Football settled for a troika instead.
In what is believed to be the first tri-m.v.p. selection in professional American football history, ANTHONY PARKER, a New York/New Jersey Knights cornerback, and linebackers DANNY LOCKETT of London and JOHN BRANTLEY of Birmingham share the honors.


CHRONICLE
I.
M.
PEI is to receive the first Award for Excellence from the Colbert Foundation, established by a group of French manufacturers of luxury goods.
It will be presented Tuesday at a dinner at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
The foundation chose Mr.
Pei for his design of the pyramid at the new entrance to the Louvre.
"Whether you like it or not, the quality of the work, the care, the fabrication, everything is of the highest quality," said JEAN-LOUIS DUMAS-HERMES, the chairman of the foundation and of Hermes.


Goldome Closed and Split Between Rivals
Goldome, New York State's largest savings institution, will be closed and divided between local competitors -- the First Empire Corporation of Buffalo and Keycorp of Albany, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation announced yesterday.
The troubled Buffalo-based savings bank failed to attract the new investors it needed.
Branches of Goldome will open under their new names either Saturday or Monday with no interruption in service or change in deposit insurance coverage.


Artistic License?
A slight snag has come up for PETE ROSE in the proposed made-for-TV movie "The Babe Ruth Story." The former player-manager of the Cincinnati Reds, banned from baseball, has been cast to play Ty Cobb, the man whose hit record he broke in September 1985.
But central casting and the commissioner's office may not see eye to eye.
"There may be a problem with Pete Rose wearing a licensed major league baseball uniform," said RICH LEVIN, a spokesman for the office of Commissioner FAY VINCENT.
"It's something the commissioner has to be alerted to, and also our lawyers." (AP)


COURT OVERTURNS CONVICTIONS OF 3 IN WEDTECH CASE
Saying prosecutors "should have been aware" that a crucial witness in the Wedtech bribery case lied, a Federal appeals court yesterday overturned the racketeering convictions of three men, including a close associate of former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, in the case.
The collapse of the Wedtech Corporation, a Bronx military contractor, became a scandal that reached to Congress and the White House during the Reagan Administration and led to the convictions of former Representative Mario Biaggi of the Bronx and the former Bronx Borough President, Stanley Simon, among others.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The leading indicators posted their third straight advance, signaling that the 10-month-old recession will soon be over.
The 0.6 percent rise followed increases of 0.7 percent in March and 1.2 percent in February.
In the postwar period, three straight advances have almost invariably signaled an imminent recovery.  [ Page 1. ]


Death Rates Provide Poor Hospital Yardstick
To the Editor:
A May 2 Associated Press article states that 161 hospitals across the country have higher than expected death rates among Medicare patients, according to an annual report of the Health Care Financing Administration.
The article states that this information "is intended to give consumers a yardstick for choosing a hospital." Only toward the end does the article tell of research that criticizes the assessment of mortality rates as flawed, and mention that the Federal agency acknowledges that the findings may be due to "special characteristics of the patients that we are not able to adjust for."


Connecticut's Nowhere Budget
Connecticut's General Assembly adopted a budget that was going nowhere, and the legislators knew it.
Its no-income-tax budget, concocted by a coalition of Republicans and nervous Democrats, barely squeaked through the House.
Given the certainty of Gov.
Lowell Weicker's veto and the remote chances of overriding it, the Assembly has wasted its time -- and its public trust.
Connecticut faces a $2.8 billion deficit, equal to almost one-third of the total budget.
New revenues are essential.
Governor Weicker has proposed a 6 percent income tax; he would also slash the state sales tax and cut taxes on corporate profits.
The Assembly clings to the notion that Connecticut can eke out another year of precarious solvency by keeping the sales tax at 8 percent -- the highest state sales tax in the nation -- and broadening it to include goods and services now exempt.


Speaker of New York Council Proposes Background Checks
The New York City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, proposed yesterday to require financial background checks by Council investigators for members being considered to head committees or for other posts that carry extra pay.
The reviews by the Council's staff and leadership would mirror those already conducted by the Council on mayoral nominees to various boards and commissions.
They would include checking the credit of appointees, verifying their resumes and assuring that they live in their districts, paid their taxes and properly filed tax returns and all required financial disclosure and campaign finance forms, paid parking tickets and registered their cars.


Weicker Vetoes Budget Bill; Special Session is Expected
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. tonight rejected the Legislature's plan to resolve Connecticut's budget crisis through a huge expansion of the sales-tax system, calling it unfair to lower-income residents and destructive to the state's economy.
It was the first time in 20 years that a Connecticut governor had vetoed a budget.
The decision, which lawmakers said all but guarantees a special legislative session after mandatory adjournment next Wednesday, was not unexpected.
But it was closely watched for the tone that it would take in rejecting the budget and for the language that might suggest a direction for compromise.


Drive On in Congress to Reverse Court on Abortion Counseling
Congressional leaders are preparing for a critical new round of debate over abortion rights that is expected to revolve around efforts to pass veto-proof legislation that would allow family-planning clinics to give abortion counseling.
Abortion rights supporters who had hoped to be spending their time passing a broader abortion rights bill got an unexpected blow last week when the Supreme Court upheld regulations banning such counseling in federally financed clinics.


Sports of The Times; New Coach, With Old Problems
Pat Riley got a bit steamed, in his cool-cat way, when someone asked if just about anyone could have coached the Lakers to championships, given such players as Magic Johnson and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.
"That's a question that I get all the time," said Riley, without a smile.
His reply to the question was that he loved having such great players, but he also gave the impression that he was pretty good at what he did, too.


Go-Video Plans To Appeal Verdict
Go-Video Inc. said it would appeal a jury verdict rejecting its claim that three Japanese electronics companies conspired to prevent introduction of a dual-deck videocassette recorder in the mid-1980's.
"I'll never give up," R. Terren Dunlap, Go-Video's chairman, said.
A United States District Court jury found Thursday in favor of the defendants, the Sony Corporation, the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company and the Victor Company of Japan.
Go-Video filed an antitrust lawsuit in 1987 against more than 20 defendants, contending that they had conspired to block the manufacture and sale of the VCR-2 because they had not been able to put the device together themselves.
Go-Video settled or gave up on all but the three defendants, receiving about $6.8 million in out-of-court settlements and an agreement with the Samsung Electronics Company of South Korea to manufacture the VCR-2.


Pirates, Bonilla Discount All Trade Rumors
In New York, New York, the Bronx isn't up and the guys in Flushing are still searching for someone with power to replace Darryl Strawberry.
So is it any wonder that in the spring both the Yankees and Mets were rumored to be interested in acquiring Bobby Bonilla, the powerful right fielder of the Pittsburgh Pirates?
Such a move by a team on either side of New York would seem to be a natural.
Bonilla was raised in New York.
And he might be available as the season goes on because he will be eligible for free agency at the end of the season and the Pirates might not be willing or able to sign him to the kind of multimillion-dollar contract he is seeking.


Your Money; I.R.S. Questions Gifts of Insurance
Financial advisers fear that a recent ruling by the Internal Revenue Service may place in jeopardy thousands of gifts of life insurance intended to benefit churches, synagogues, educational institutions, hospitals and other charities.
Technically, because it is a private-letter ruling (No. 9110016), it sets no legal precedent for other cases.
Still, lawyers and accountants study the I.R.S.'s private-letter rulings to see what positions the service is likely to take, and now they are advising charitably inclined clients in many states to consider other ways of giving.


Cross-Border Stock Trading
Japanese and British investors cut their buying of foreign stocks substantially last year, resulting in a sharp drop in cross-border transactions, according to an investment industry group.
Investors added only $17.9 billion to their foreign stock portfolios last year, compared with an increase of $58 billion in 1989, the Securities Industry Association said.


Connors Goes Up and Out as Chang Advances
Refusing as always to concede defeat, Jimmy Connors waited until he was one point ahead.
Then, just after blasting a backhand service winner past a flustered Michael Chang, an aching Connors withdrew in the fifth set and left it to Chang to advance into the fourth round of the French Open.
With his back so sore that he couldn't sink into his chair during changeovers, but with the same panache that has characterized his play as he accumulated a record 109 titles, Connors, at 38 the grand old man of the one Grand Slam he has never won, abandoned his efforts.
After 3 hours 35 minutes, Chang walked away with a 4-6, 7-5, 6-2, 4-6, 0-15 victory.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the civil rights bill proposed by Democrats quoted Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House majority leader, incorrectly on the year that President Bush, then a Representative, voted for fair housing legislation.
Mr.
Gephardt said 1968, not 1964.
An excerpt from the proposed bill mislabeled the section dealing with quotas.
It is section 111, not III.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.74
5.84
8.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.53
5.46
7.70
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.67
5.63
7.62
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.90
7.86
8.48
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.26
8.21
8.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.30
9.27
9.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.21
7.21
7.50
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Steroid Danger to Eyes
To the Editor:
Jane Brody should have added to her article on conjunctivitis and pink eye (Personal Health, May 9) an important warning: Steroids should not be used liberally in the treatment of red eye, especially when only one eye is involved.
A slit-lamp examination by an ophthalmologist should rule out the possibility of herpes keratitis before the use of steroids, whether in children or adults.
Eyes could be damaged and vision could be impaired by the use of steroids in such cases.
HESKEL M. HADDAD, M.D.
Clinical Professor, Ophthalmology, New York Medical College New York, May 10, 1991


News Summary
International 2-5
The United States is storing weapons in Israel for use in any future regional conflicts, Secretary of Defense Cheney said.
An arrangement to do so was reached years ago, but not carried out until now.
Page 1


Florida Slaying Investigators Name Their Leading Suspect
A state task force that is investigating the serial slaying of five college students last August named its prime suspect today.
He is Danny Harold Rolling, 37 years old, who is jailed in Ocala, Fla., as a suspect in an unrelated grocery store robbery.
In addition to that case, he has been identified as a suspect in the killing of three people in his hometown, Shreveport, La., where he is also wanted in the shooting of his father, a retired police officer.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 1


Australia TV Network Sold
The first phase of a restructuring of the Seven television network was completed today when the network was sold to a holding company owned by banks and unidentified investors.
The network was placed into receivership in November 1989 when its holding company, Qintex Group, collapsed.


Peace, but Little Else, Crystallizes for Angola
A quarter-century of bloodshed financed in large part by the United States, the Soviet Union, Cuba and South Africa preceded the handshake yesterday between Jose Eduardo dos Santos, the President of Angola, and Jonas Savimbi, the longtime leader of the Angolan rebels.
And with memories of a generation of violence still vivid in the minds of Angolans, the peace accord has laid to rest none of the questions about the country's future.


Electricity Markup Penalizes Small Businesses
To the Editor:
For years, commercial landlords in New York City have resold electricity to small businesses, marking up the bill an average of 30 percent to 35 percent, in some cases more than 100 percent.
This unfair practice affects thousands of small businesses, many in the garment and printing industries, and costs them more than $100 million a year in electricity overcharges.
The leases often conceal the basis for these markups.


Let the Spending Begin -- Within Reason, That Is


In Ethiopia, Guns but Too Few Services
As the guerrillas who took control of this city three days ago continued to patrol the streets, a sense of growing anxiety was reflected today by the lines forming outside closed banks and by mounting complaints of lawlessness and marauding gangs.
The victors, rebels from Tigre Province in the north, have maintained an off-and-on curfew.
But diplomats and aid officials say they have been unable to restore basic health services or to organize food deliveries.
The international relief workers also complain that since the takeover, aid shipments have not been getting through from the port of Assab, which fell to another group of rebels, from Eritrea.


Music in Review
Electronic Art From Rensselaer  The Kitchen 512 West 19th Street
Every few years, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y., takes work from its electronic arts program to Manhattan for display.
Rensselaer seems to boast more ambitious integrated activity in electronic and computer music, video processing and their application to traditional arts than most East Coast schools.
That said, Thursday evening's offerings at the hot and sweaty Kitchen seemed mostly drab and provincial.


MEDICARE LAYS OUT REVISED SCHEDULE FOR DOCTORS' FEES
Medicare officials today announced details of a new nationwide fee schedule under which family doctors and general practitioners would get much less of an increase than had been expected.
For some services, the doctors said, their reimbursement for treating Medicare beneficiaries might actually decrease.


Uranium Is Spilled at Plant But Little Danger Is Foreseen
More than 300 pounds of highly radioactive uranium contaminated a tank of liquid waste on Wednesday at a nuclear fuel plant on the outskirts of this city.
The accident created the possibility that radiation would be released within the plant.
But Federal officials called that possibility "unlikely," and they allowed the plant to remain open.


De Benedetti Sells Insurer
The Italian entrepreneur Carlo de Benedetti has sold an insurance company for about $400 million in the latest in a string of sales to cut the debts of his business holdings.
Mr. de Benedetti, who controls the computer maker Ing.
C.
Olivetti &amp; Company, sold Latina Assicurazioni S.p.A. to another Italian insurer jointly controlled by his cousin Camillo de Benedetti.


In the Nation; The Court v. Bush?
A Supreme Court majority, mostly put in place by Presidents Reagan and Bush, has dealt a clear setback to hard-pressed American women and families.
It may therefore have signaled trouble for the President and the Republican Party.
In Rust v.
Sullivan, the Court voted 5 to 4 to uphold Federal regulations barring federally funded family planning clinics from giving women information about abortion.
Since most of the women who seek help from such clinics are poor, they will suffer real -- even if legal -- discrimination.
Women who can afford it may continue to receive abortion information from private doctors.


More Military Bases Weighed for Closing
In a new turn in a politically charged process, a special commission identified 35 military bases for possible closing or consolidation, adding to a list of 46 already suggested by the Pentagon.
From this larger "menu of options," as the commission described it, the panel will devise a recommendation for the President and Congress.
Among the new candidates is the Staten Island Home Port, which began operating only two years ago after a long fight.
Its opponents include Mayor David N. Dinkins.


Chemical Sensor Uses Fiber Optics
Using fiber optics, researchers at the University of New Hampshire patented a chemical sensor this week that they say makes it easier to detect leaks in oil pipelines and to monitor processes ranging from beer brewing to drug production.
The most common sensors today employ chemically coated electrodes that react with particular substances and produce a measurable charge.
Other approaches analyze the way a sample of material absorbs or deflects light.
Although accurate, these sensors sometimes pose practical limitations: Electrodes buried with underground pipelines can be harmed by rust or the elements, and analyzing light diffraction requires isolating a sample for inspection.


Quotation of the Day
"A summer weather pattern has persisted here for three weeks in the spring. These are the kind of severe weather patterns that meteorologists live for. It's very exciting." -- Daniel H. Graf, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University.  [ 1:2. ]


U.N. CHIEF RATES IRAQI REPARATIONS
The United Nations Secretary General recommended today that the Baghdad Government pay up to 30 percent of its annual oil revenue as reparations for the invasion of Kuwait and the Persian Gulf war.
Iraq agreed to pay reparations out of current oil revenues as part of the terms of the gulf war cease-fire.
But in a letter this month to Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar, Baghdad asked for a five-year moratorium on reparations payments to give it time to rebuild its shattered economy.
That request is under study by the United Nations Compensation Fund, which received the Secretary General's recommendation and will determine what the actual payment level will be.


Sony, Nintendo's Partner, Will Be a Rival, Too
The video-game industry has apparently become too big for the world's largest consumer electronics companies to ignore.
The Sony Corporation said yesterday that it planned to enter the game market with a machine based on the latest Nintendo technology.
Sony's system will not only play Nintendo game cartridges but also games on compact disks.


Southeast Bank
The Southeast Bank of Miami said it expects no problem with its operating funds this year, even though the bank has seen a steady erosion of deposits.
Southeast's total deposits fell 11 percent between Dec. 31 and April 30.
The bank had $10.1 billion in deposits as of March 31, said George Owen, Southeast spokesman.
Mr.
Owen disputed analysts' comments in The American Banker newspaper predicting if the trend continued, Florida's fourth-largest bank would face a liquidity crisis, or become insolvent.


Review/Ballet; Return of Dance-Drama Brings a 1948 de Mille
A young woman at the turn of the century in a New England town has committed a murder.
Her mother slaps her wrist for soiling a crisp white petticoat with bright red blood.
For all its hyperbole, this extreme image is central to "Fall River Legend," a ballet that Agnes de Mille choreographed in 1948 to a commissioned score by Morton Gould.
In context, it is a scene more poignant than absurd -- a typical de Mille dream sequence in which everything is psychologically right.


New York Health Care: Less Money, More Ills, No Chiefs
New York City's health care system -- already struggling with shrinking budgets, growing numbers of AIDS patients and the resurgence of several 19th century plagues -- now finds itself with still a new problem: a shortage of leadership.
With the resignation of the City Health Commissioner, Dr.
Woodrow A. Myers Jr., on Tuesday, the top posts at both the City and State Health Departments are vacant, leaving two bully pulpits essentially silent.
The former State Health Commissioner, Dr.
David Axelrod, suffered a severe stroke on Feb. 25 and retired in April.


Microsoft Chief Sells Shares
William Gates, the chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, the computer software maker, sold 500,000 Microsoft shares in late April, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The company announced the sale today, and a spokeswoman said that as of March 31 Mr.
Gates owned 39.3 million shares, representing a little more than 50 percent of the company's outstanding shares.


Dow Rises to High Of 3,027.50
Propelled by solid signs of a reviving economy, stocks rose strongly yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average sprinting past the record it set six weeks ago.
The Dow, which hit its previous high of 3,004.46 on April 17, closed at 3,027.50, up 27.05 points for the day and 113.59 for the week.
The 3.9 percent weekly rise was the largest in more than four months.


T.W.A. Buys Back Trust Certificates
Trans World Airlines Inc. said it had bought back $30 million of its equipment trust certificates, thereby satisfying previously announced conditions for a 60-day moratorium on litigation that could have le to the repossession of some of its jets.
The company said it would continue to buy back its equipment trust certificates for $775 for each $1,000 principal amount.
As of Feb. 25, the Shawmut National Corporation's Connecticut National Bank unit held $129.5 million of the equipment trust certificates, according to a T.W.A. 10-Q filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The certificates represent T.W.A. assets including five Boeing 727's, four Lockheed L-1011's and one Boeing 747.
The bank had won a court order allowing it to seize the assets, but agreed to a delay if T.W.A. repurchases $30 million of the certificates by 9 o'clock tonight.


Review/Rock; Simple Minds, Singing Of Very Serious Things
For songs by Simple Minds, the age-old rock yardstick -- "Can you dance to it?" -- is usually irrelevant.
The more appropriate question is, can you march to it?
At the Beacon Theater on Thursday night, for the second date of the band's first tour in five years, the music had enough steady, somber cadences to propel a regiment.
Simple Minds emerged in the 1980's as Scotland's answer to U2.
Like the Irish band, it has a lead singer, Jim Kerr, who is a high-minded, slightly gawky baritone belter; a guitarist, Charlie Burchill, who favors open chords and ringing, echoey single notes; a martial drummer, Mel Gaynor, and material steeped in utmost seriousness verging on religiosity, as in "Sanctify Yourself."


Variable-Rate Lingo
Falling interest rates mean lower monthly payments on variable-rate loans.
Many lenders prefer a variable rate for mortgages, home equity loans, personal loans and charge cards.
Usually the variable rate is tied to some index like the prime rate.
Still, variable-rate loans are not always best.
For example, if the choice is between an 11 percent variable-rate personal loan and one at a 12 percent fixed rate, the weekly Bank Rate Monitor says the fixed-rate loan is the better deal because it is only a point higher and it won't go up in the future.
Here is a glossary of variable-rate loan terms, and some advice.
Margin: The percentage points the lending institution adds to an index.
Make comparisons among the lenders.
Index: Understand how the index moves and when yours could change.
Stick to loans with publicly known indexes, like the prime rate or Treasury bills.
Avoid banks that set the rate at their discretion.
Rate Changes: Ask how often the rate can change and when changes are effective.
Some banks will time cuts in their prime rate so as to force borrowers to pay the higher rate a month longer.


Nintendo Goal: Bigger-Game Hunters
Nintendo of America, which generated frenzied demand for its original video games by limiting the supply, must now build sales of an improved system rapidly enough to overcome a rival's head start.
Nintendo is planning to open the Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago today by introducing a video-game machine with sharper graphics and better sound to compete with a system that Sega Enterprises has been selling since 1989.
Nintendo aims to continue its domination of the $4.7 billion video-game market.


Review/Film; How to Use a Murderer To Increase Book Sales
The bookstore clerk seen dusting off copies of a new nonfiction book about a mass murderer in "Ambition," which opened yesterday at the Sutton and other theaters, happens to be the mass murderer himself.
It is this film's scary premise that an over-eager writer who has been unable to sell his own memoir might improve his fortunes by laying claim to a real killer as a subject -- and then goading the killer into renewed violent activity, just for the sake of a more salable story.
Lou Diamond Phillips, who wrote the offbeat but sometimes overly mild screenplay, stars in "Ambition" (which was directed by Scott D. Goldstein) as a bookstore manager and aspiring author named Mitchell Osgood, who is a strenuously assimilated Filipino-American.
Frustrated over his own stalled career, Mitchell decides to manipulate the fragile pysche of Albert Merrick (Clancy Brown), who has been released from prison after what looks like a remarkably short stay, in view of his widely publicized murderous rampage through a crowded nightclub.


Arch of Pride
The first Washington Square Arch, constructed for the centennial of our first President's inauguration, was made of wood and stood at the foot of Fifth Avenue.
Placed on top was a primitive wooden statue of the general himself, left arm akimbo and eyes fixed on uptown.
Three years later, in 1892, a permanent arch was put in place, made of marble this time and designed, like the first, by Stanford White.
This one was set a few feet into the park and eventually acquired two statues: one of the general in uniform, the other of him in mufti.


Unisys Selling Office Building
The Unisys Corporation, the computer maker trying to reduce its $3.9 billion debt, signed a contract to sell its Detroit office building and 31 acres of surrounding land to a Michigan health-care company.
The property was the headquarters of the Burroughs Corporation, the computer supplier that bought the Sperry Corporation in 1986 to form Unisys, Mark Lipscomb, company spokesman, said.


Police Head to Speak On South Africa Panel
At the request of Mayor David N. Dinkins, New York City's Police Commissioner, Lee P. Brown, will attend an international conference of law-enforcement experts in South Africa next week on policing issues facing that nation as it moves out of an era of apartheid.
The conference, organized by the Center for Criminal Justice at Harvard Law School and financed jointly by the State Department, the Ford Foundation and the Canadian Dialogue, will be held at the University of Natal in Pietermaritzburg next Tuesday through Thursday.


Barfield's Shot in 9th Wins Game, But Yanks Feel a Loss
Five pitches into the game last night, the Yankees hit a bump in the road.
Pascual Perez, almost 10 months after shoulder surgery and less than three weeks since he rejoined the pitching rotation, walked off the mound and disappeared into the runway.
The evening could well have ended there.


Judge Drops Threat to Fine Reporter $1,500 a Day
A judge today dropped his threat to fine a Los Angeles Times reporter $1,500 a day for as long as the reporter refused to disclose who gave him a secret police report on officers' beating of a black motorist three months ago.
But the judge, Bernard Kamins of Superior Court, said he was still seeking a one-time $1,500 fine.
Judge Kamins had decided on the daily fines on Thursday in a ruling that appeared to set the stage for a major test of California's shield law, which allows reporters to refuse to disclose the names of confidential sources.


An Indian Village Talks of Rajiv and Sonia Gandhi
This farming town is barely 40 miles from New Delhi, but camels, not cars, traverse its narrow dusty lanes.
Its sturdy farmers of the Jat caste, whose worth is measured in cattle and crops, have had a week or so to think about the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, and they have their own, bluntly stated views about India's latest time of crisis.
To sit in on the Hasanpur "think tank" -- four string beds under a banyan tree -- is to hear all the pat urban theories of political behavior upset.


Assembly in Albany Begins to Pass Budget Measures
Two months after the start of the fiscal year, the Legislature began passing budget bills today that would slash spending by state agencies by more than 2 percent.
The Cuomo administration predicted that the cuts would cause the loss of 7,000 jobs, mostly through layoffs.
As the lawmakers debated the first budget bills, legislative negotiators continued to tinker with plans for paying for the budget after dropping a plan to create a new state lottery based on the results of Giants, Jets and Buffalo Bills football games.


35 More Bases Considered for Closing
The politically charged effort to select military bases that will be closed or consolidated took a new turn today when a commission reviewing the issue nearly doubled the number of installations under consideration.
Three dozen additional military installations, including Fort Drum army base in Watertown, N.Y., and five new naval home ports championed by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, could be affected under the plan released today by the base closing commission.


Anti-Abortion Groups Win Suit's Dismissal
A Federal district judge has dismissed a lawsuit that accused anti-abortion groups of violating racketeering and antitrust laws by demonstrating at abortion clinics.
The five-year-old lawsuit had sought an injunction against protests at abortion clinics around the country.
It was filed by the National Organization for Women, which contended that demonstrators engaged in extortion by threatening clinic personnel, blocking entrances, trespassing and damaging equipment.


CHRONICLE
FRANK J. MACCHIAROLA , who was Chancellor of New York City schools from 1978 to 1983, has been named dean of the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law of Yeshiva University.
Mr.
Macchiarola is chairman of the New York Districting Commission, which is creating lines for 51 new city council districts.
He will assume his new position in August, succeeding MONROE E. PRICE, who has been dean since 1982.
Mr.
Macchiarola is a professor at the Columbia University Business School.


Bridge
Youth was in the ascendant and age in decline in the Reisinger Knockout Teams this week.
When quarterfinal play resumed last night at the Gotham Club in Manhattan, four young stars had a useful lead.
Alex Ornstein, Jon Heller, and Brad and Andrew Moss, whose average age is 23, were teamed with Mel Colchamiro and Keith Garber.
They led by 22 imps at the midpoint of their match against a group headed by John Roberts.
However, the sentimental favorites were in a deep hole.
Alfred Sheinwold, Edgar Kaplan, Norman Kay and Leonard Harmon, who won for four straight years from 1956-59, were teamed with Ivar Stakgold and Brian Glubok.
They trailed by 58 against a foursome led by Andy Goodman of San Francisco.


Gretzky and Kurri, Together Again
Give WAYNE GRETZKY an assist for helping the Los Angeles Kings reunite the lethal line combination of Gretzky and JARI KURRI that was broken up in August 1988 when the Edmonton Oilers traded Gretzky to the Kings.
When the 31-year-old Kurri agreed late Thursday night to a three-year deal worth $1 million a year, it was only an hour before the option on Kurri's services by the Milan Devils was to take effect.
Kurri thinks his telephone conversation with Gretzky last week helped seal the deal.


Japan's Newest Bete Noire Is French Prime Minister
Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, has lost her title in Japan as the "kanateko o motta josei," which loosely translates as the "Crowbar Lady," to Edith Cresson, the new Prime Minister of France.
The title reflects a comment from Mrs.
Hills during her confirmation hearing in 1989, when she said would seek to open foreign markets "either with a crowbar or a handshake."


Pope Begins Visit Today to a Changed Poland
Pope John Paul II's last trip to his native Poland in 1987 turned out to be something of an anti-Communist processional, with Poles joyously professing their Roman Catholic faith while simultaneously showing their contempt for a Communist regime then on its last legs.
When the Pope returns Saturday, he will be welcomed by a vastly different Poland, one in which the church, no longer the unifying bulwark of anti-Communist struggle, is facing challenges for its social and political agendas.
Most recently it has stirred up opposition by its strong advocacy of a legal ban on abortion, which for decades has been the country's main form of family planning.


Observer; He's Done It Again!
A certain magazine whose editors hate to see a poor writer make a living once abused me for blurbing a book by a writer who had once blurbed a book of mine.
We two struggling writers were ridiculed as shameful human specimens debasing literary art by swapping advertising banalities.
You might have thought us the literary equivalents of Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky, conniving to bilk the gullible book buyer of millions.


'Embarrassed' Boden Recovers and Wins Third Javelin Title
Former world-record holder Patrik Boden of the University of Texas won his third consecutive javelin title at the National Collegiate Athletic Association track and field championships with a throw of 260 feet 4 inches today.
Boden won by more than 24 feet over John Richardson of Tennessee, but had a frightening moment on the way.
As Boden planted to throw on his first attempt, his left foot slipped and he fell face-first to the runway with his head over the foul line.
The javelin traveled only 100 feet.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press yesterday about a long-running dispute over the isolation of the AIDS virus referred incorrectly in some editions to a letter from Dr.
Robert C. Gallo published in the journal Nature.
Dr.
Gallo, a researcher at the National Institutes of Health, maintains his claim to be a co-discoverer of the virus with Dr.
Luc Montagnier of the Pasteur Institute in Paris.
His letter formally conceded only that some virus samples in his laboratory had been contaminated by a strain of the AIDS virus sent him by Dr.
Montagnier.


Now the Hard Part for Riley: Coaching Knicks
Lured by the challenge and unable to resist the opportunity, Pat Riley has returned to coaching, confident he can return the Knicks to glory.
Ending weeks of speculation and arduous negotiations, the 46-year-old Riley was officially introduced as the Knicks' head coach at a news conference at Madison Square Garden yesterday afternoon.
Never has a Knicks coach arrived accompanied by as much of a buildup, or saddled with as much expectation.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Ametek Inc., Paoli, Pa., producers of high-technology materials, named Doyle K. Cavin vice president. *
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc., Rochester, appointed James N. Doyle Jr. vice president.


Gunman Captured After Killing a Hostage in Edison, N.J.


Platinum Up, Palladium Off; Moves Seen as Corrections
Platinum futures prices rose modestly yesterday in a move widely viewed as correcting an overreaction to news that a Japanese car company had developed a platinum-free catalytic converter.
The futures price of palladium, the alternative metal for the converter, drifted lower after having soared on the same news.


Kennedy Nephew Pleads Not Guilty to Charges of Assault and Rape
William K. Smith pleaded not guilty today to charges that he attacked and raped a 29-year-old woman on Easter weekend at his family's Palm Beach estate.
Making his way through a swarm of reporters, photographers and television crews, Mr.
Smith, 30, appeared for his arraignment at the Palm Beach County courthouse, although he was not required to by law.


Journal Swap Offer
The Journal Company, which owns The Trentonian and eight other daily newspapers, said it was extending a debt exchange offer and would make an overdue bond interest payment.
The company said it had received a loan from affiliates of E. M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Company, its controlling shareholders, to meet a $7.6 million interest payment that was due May 1.
The grace period was to have expired today on the semiannual payment on debentures paying 14.825 percent and 14.625 percent interest.
The Journal Company, a unit of the Journal Register Company, also said it was extending through June 12 a debt exchange offer announced May 1 that was to have expired Wednesday.


Good Deeds in Ethiopia, Punished
It is U.S. policy to help repair, not dismember, Ethiopia.
Americans know little about the ethnic groups vying for power there -- the Amhara, Tigreans, Oromo and Eritreans.
Yet a U.S. diplomat in London is now blamed by enraged mobs in Addis Ababa for seeking a democratic solution to Africa's longest, harshest civil war.
As someone once said, no good deed goes unpunished.
American mediation was sought weeks ago by all of Ethiopia's warring factions, each professedly Marxist.
Herman Cohen, the State Department's chief of African affairs, helped negotiate the departure of President Mengistu Haile Mariam.
Washington also bargained for the airlift to Israel of 14,000 Ethiopian Jews trapped in a collapsing dictatorship.


3 Die in Shelling Outside Belfast
Three soldiers were killed and 18 people were wounded in a mortar attack late tonight on an Ulster Defense Regiment post south of Belfast, the police said.
Belfast's Downtown Radio reported that several missiles had been fired at the post in Glenann, County Armagh, about 40 miles south of Belfast.


Surgeons Tell of Series of Successes In Transplanting Small Intestines
Surgeons at the University of Pittsburgh said yesterday that they had achieved the first successful series of transplants of the small intestine.
While the transplants and post-operative treatments were difficult, the success suggests that intestinal transplantation is becoming a practical clinical treatment, they said.


Pirates Make It 7 in a Row as Walk Makes It 1 in a Row
Bob Walk got his first victory since last season as the Pittsburgh Pirates beat the Philadelphia Phillies, 5-1, tonight for their seventh victory in a row.
Walk (1-0) made his fourth start of the season and allowed three hits and one run in five and two-thirds innings.
His last victory was over St.
Louis on Sept. 29.
Stan Belinda, Neal Heaton and Bill Landrum finished the combined five-hitter tonight.


Few New Jerseyans Act on Gun Law
The first day of the state law banning the possession of "assault" firearms brought confusion and scant compliance from gun owners.
No figures on the number of people who turned in or listed their weapons as inoperable will be collected statewide before Monday.
But Lieut.
William Hillis of the state police said there did not appear to be a rush to comply with the law.
"Unfortunately, we haven't had that," he said.


Shielding Insurer From Its Parent
For the third time this year, a major life insurance company has been seized by regulators.
This time, though, the reason was bad real estate investments rather than "junk bonds."
The insurer taken over by state regulators is the Monarch Life Insurance Company of Springfield, Mass.
Unlike the other big insurers that have failed this year -- the First Executive Corporation and the First Capital Corporation -- Monarch Life appears to be in sound financial shape.
Its 250,000 policyholders are not expected to lose their coverage or premiums while the company is under state control.


Sasser's Swing Shows No Trace of a Hitch
Mackey Sasser's hitch in his throws back to the pitcher has made him the subject of endless curiosity.
He is interviewed at every stop in the National League.
Tonight, there would be no need for Sasser to wince at any questions.
His heroics had won a game, and so a discussion of them would dominate the post-game interviews.


Minnesota to Provide Assistance to NWA
NWA Inc., the parent of Northwest Airlines, will receive nearly $800 million in assistance and tax incentives from the State of Minnesota under legislation signed by Gov.
Arne Carlson.
The bill, signed Thursday, allows the state to sell up to $250 million in bonds to build a maintenance base in Duluth and up to $100 million in bonds to build an engine repair base in Hibbing.
Northwest would repay the financing by leasing the facilities from the state.


Barcelona Counts Up Olympic Side Effect
More than 15 months before the opening of the 25th Summer Olympics, Barcelona has already decided that the stars will be the artists, designers and architects who are using the games to promote this city as a major European cultural center.
There is little talk about athletics here these days, but a $50 million program called the Cultural Olympics is in full swing.
Further, a $7 billion urban renewal program preparing the city for the games is as much a tribute to sculpture and architecture as it is to engineering.


NATO, in Search of a Mission
Finally, NATO is adjusting to the collapse of the Warsaw Pact, its cold war rival.
On Tuesday it announced that it would cut troop strength by 20 percent and reorganize what's left.
The 320,000 U.S. troops now stationed in Europe will be reduced by half.
That's a start, but NATO could cut deeper.
A U.S. force of about 75,000 would suffice to meet existing threats.
The cuts, in any case, mask a deeper question: What's NATO for?


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Conagra Inc., Omaha, a foods concern, and Idea Industrie, a French company, said their proposed joint venture in the French meat industry had been approved by the European Commission.
Conagra is buying a 50 percent stake in Idea for undisclosed terms. *
Campbell Soup Co., Camden, N.J., completed an agreement to sell its D. Lazzaroni &amp; C. SpA subsidiary to the Lazzaroni family of Saronna, Italy.


Malnutrition Ravages Children of an Iraqi City
In the market here, amid flies and dust and hawkers, it is possible to purchase microwave-ready meals and tinned soup from America, all looted during Iraq's occpation of Kuwait and brought here.
There is, too, for the wealthy, canned beer from Turkey and bottled beer from Beirut, padlocks from China and corned beef from Poland.
But not so easily available is a far less specialized product -- baby formula -- and its absence lies at the core of the gravest threat to perhaps 100,000 children in postwar Iraq: malnutrition and disease, specifically typhoid.


An All-Bach Program
Eric Milnes is to conduct I Cantori di New York in an all-Bach program at 7 P.M. tomorrow at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
The program includes the motets "Jesu, Meine Freude" (BWV 227) and "Der Geist Hilft Unser Schwachheit Auf" (BWV 226) and the cantata "Christ lag in Todesbanden" (BWV 4).
Tickets are $15.
Information: (718) 522-4269.


Late Rally Steadies Credit Markets
A late rally stabilized the Treasury securities market yesterday after prices were slashed earlier by a flow of Government reports indicating that the economy was rebounding or at least bottoming out.
Before the market opened, for example, the Government reported that its index of leading economic indicators rose in April for the third consecutive month, while factory orders rose for the first time since October.


Guarding Against Mail Fraud
In its continuing battle against fraud, the United States Postal Service has announced new regulations to prevent companies that sell goods or services through the mail from masquerading as Government agencies.
In a typical deception, a company with a name or an emblem "that could reasonably be construed or interpreted as implying Federal Government connection" offers to supply for a fee items that are available free or at very little cost directly from the Government.


Economic Index Posts 3d Advance In a Sign Recession May End Soon
Posting a third straight advance, the Government's main economic forecasting gauge signaled today that the 10-month-old recession would soon be over.
"The end is imminent," said Maury N. Harris, chief economist at Paine Webber Inc.
"We're going to have a summer recovery."


Mouthpiece Enriches Wind Instrument Tones
Philip L. Rovner, owner of a small company in Timonium, Md., that makes components for woodwind instruments, patented a mouthpiece this week that he said produces a richer saxophone and clarinet tone.
Like a traditional mouthpiece, the new device has a reed, which vibrates as a person blows on it, and a "window," or passageway that allows air to pass to the instrument itself.


U.S. BEGINS STORING MILITARY SUPPLIES IN ISRAELI BUNKERS
Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney announced today that the United States was stockpiling American military equipment in Israel for use in any regional conflict.
"We currently are implementing an agreement with Israel to pre-position materials and equipment here," Mr.
Cheney said as he left a meeting here this afternoon with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.
"That's under way as we speak."


Top Steel Executive Retires From USX


Highway Project May Bring Boston to a Standstill
When Boston's Central Artery and Third Harbor Tunnel project was formally presented to the public eight years ago, the price tag for unsnarling one of the most congested, dangerous and unsightly stretches of interstate highway in the country was put at $2.2 billion.
That figure has since more than doubled, to $4.9 billion.
But cost is just one of the concerns, now that the project has won final Federal approval.


Milk-Derived Protein May Help Fight Cancer
Researchers at the Pennsylvania State University this week patented a protein derived from milk that they said might help fight cancer.
The protein appears to block cancer cells from reproducing by curbing their ability to synthesize cholesterol.
"Cancer cells have an abnormal requirement for cholesterol, because they multiply so rapidly," said Arun Kilara, a professor of food science at the university and one of the inventors.
"We don't know if this affects normal cells, but the turnover of cholesterol in healthy cells is much lower."


Robert Wallach, at Heart of Wedtech Scandal
In the sordid tale of how a small South Bronx tool-and-die maker corrupted officials from the Bronx to the White House to become a $100-million-a-year military contractor, E. Robert Wallach, is a pivotal if eccentric character.
A liberal California lawyer who once campaigned for a United States Senate nomination on a platform that included a call for the decriminalizaiton of marijuana, Mr.
Wallach was the unlikely nexus between the contractor, the Wedtech Corporation, and conservative figures in the Reagan Administration.


New York and Virginia Inventor Conventions
People interested in surveying new inventions can choose between two conventions, one taking place in New York this weekend and the other in Crystal City, Va., next week.
Admission to both is free.
International Inventors Affiliates Ltd., a group that sponsors trade shows to promote licensing deals between inventors and potential investors, is holding an exposition at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center through Monday.


About New York
In May 1954, Beth Israel Medical Center waxed euphoric about a new mural in one of its buildings.
"Within the artistic embrace of the mural we have a compassionate and stirring picture of man's humanity to man," the dedication program said.
The colorful geometric mural was featured in American Artist and Hospital Management magazines, as well as on the cover of a book on New York's Jewish hospitals.
Beth Israel reproduced it in a 1964 book honoring its 75th anniversary.


Madrid Air Service Dispute Is Settled by U.S. and Spain
The United States and Spain agreed yesterday to allow American Airlines and United Airlines to begin service to Madrid today and to let Delta Air Lines fly to Spain from Atlanta.
Under a memorandum of understanding reached by both sides, Continental Airlines may offer daily service to Madrid from Newark International Airport beginning in 1993.


North Korea Denies Interest In Developing Nuclear Arms
North Korea said today that it had neither "the need nor the capacity" to develop nuclear weapons, and that there are signs that the country's leadership may be rethinking its refusal to allow international inspection of a major nuclear center north of the capital, Pyongyang.
The statement appeared in the ruling party's official newspaper, Rodong Sinmun, according to North Korean news agency reports monitored in Tokyo.
But the report made no mention of North Korea's approach to the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna earlier this week.


Judge Off Base
To the Sports Editor:
The story on the rise and fall of Bowie Kuhn ("Kuhn's Descent From Commissioner to Legal Outcast," The Times, May 12) quotes Judge Prudence B. Abram: "If Mr. Kuhn is worth $3 million, Mr. Kuhn has a serious problem in this case." Is this an example of "jurist prudence"?
OLIVER BERLINER Beverly Hills, Calif.


SUMMER PLACES: ARIAS AND ARUGULA
THE night before his big party, Alexander Smalls telephoned one of his favorite Southern cooks -- his mother, Johnnie Mae Smalls -- from his country cottage in Tea-Town, a suburb of Ossining, N.Y.
He recited a sampling from the menu: baked ham, barbecued chicken, sage cornbread, shrimp and pickled okra, deviled eggs.
Oh, and he was trying out two new recipes for the afternoon event, a she-crab corn salad and a salad including black-eyed peas and arugula.
"Black-eyed peas and arugula?" Mrs.
Smalls demanded, speaking from her house in Spartanburg, S.C., where Mr.
Smalls began his cooking lessons at age 5.
She usually approves of her son's elegant improvisations on the unadorned standbys she has been feeding him since childhood, but this time, she was skeptical.
"What is arugula? I think I'll pass on that one."


Ben and Jerry's Home Town
A CLERK at the Cold Hollow Cider Mill in Waterbury, Vt., unceremoniously reduced the price of a piece of cider cheesecake.
"I think $1.25 is too much," she said, ringing up an even $1.
Down the road, a bartender at Tanglewoods managed to finagle some soup and a hamburger out of a kitchen that had technically closed.
"I'd hate to send you away hungry," she said.
At the Grunberg Haus Bed and Breakfast, a late arrival found a note from the owners listing which rooms were available and exhorting guests to "help yourselves to munchies" at the bar.
Only 10 miles south of Stowe, Waterbury is short on the glitz of that resort town but long on courtesy and cheerful service.
Stretched along the Winooski River, Waterbury, with its aging brick and clapboard buildings, has more of the look of a Massachusetts mill town than a quaint Vermont village.
And while Stowe has a stylish atmosphere, the operative word in Waterbury is friendly.
A recent visit proved it to be interesting as well.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Mahwah
THE Leni Lenape Indians called it Mawewi -- the meeting place of rivers and paths -- and though its modern name, Mahwah, is slightly different, it is as appropriate today as it was in 1700, when the first white settler, Blandina Bayard, established a trading post there.
The township is on the New York-New Jersey state line.
Two major highways, Routes 17 and 202, pass through and it is within a mile of the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway and less than 10 miles from the Garden State Parkway.
Its largest commercial ratable, the 22-story, $66 million International Crossroads complex, which includes a Sheraton Hotel, offices, and a convention center, was built where a Ford plant used to stand.


The 'Roses' Man
In 1965, Frank D. Gilroy, 39 years old, won the Pulitzer Prize in drama for "The Subject Was Roses." In 1991, Frank D. Gilroy, 65 years old, wishes there were some other way to identify him.
"I'd like to walk into a room sometime," he says, "and be introduced as the author of something other than that play."
"That play" is being revived by the Roundabout Theater Company, in a production opening Wednesday, directed by Jack Hofsiss and starring John Mahoney, Dana Ivey and Patrick Dempsey.
But there is, the playwright acknowledges, little chance of a change in identification, for the play has been his only major theatrical success.
Although Mr.
Gilroy (in photograph) has written three novels and three other Broadway plays and written and directed five movies, none has had the impact of "Roses."


Prison Unrest Shakes Elmira's Peace
The two state prisons in the Elmira area have provided jobs for residents for generations, a local historian says, but until recently they never thought of it as a prison town.
Instead Elmira identified itself with another resident -- Mark Twain, who spent summers here for 20 years.


Inattention to Its Neighbors' Fears Could Compound India's Problems
THE domestic problems facing India in the wake of Rajiv Gandhi's assassination are enormous: social disorder, political instability and violence, an economic crisis and the uncertainty of the monsoon rains, on which food crops depend.
But whoever wins the national elections now rescheduled for mid-June is also going to have to pay careful attention to India's relationships with its neighbors -- particularly Pakistan -- or New Delhi will only compound its domestic woes.
India's turmoil at home is, in many ways, a reflection of the ethnic conflicts tearing at hopes for peace in this and other regions.
If New Delhi doesn't mend its prickly relationships with many of its neighbors -- a result of overbearing behavior indulged in for decades -- the tensions could stand in the way of getting needed help from the developed world, and cooperation from its most powerful neighbor and adversary, Pakistan.


FILM
Here are some of the most tempting summer movies, compiled by Lawrence Van Gelder.
A warning to consumers: opening dates are subject to change. (In some cases, studios have decided only on the month -- or season -- a film will open.) June


Headliners; Overqualified
In their lawsuit against the former directors of Denver's defunct Silverado Savings and Loan Association, Federal regulators accuse Neil Bush and his associates of gross negligence and promoting "unsafe and unsound" practices "designed to achieve the appearance of growth at the expense of the long-term health of the association." Though Mr.
Bush has denied any wrongdoing, last week he and the 12 other former directors agreed to pay the Government $49.5 million to settle the suit.
The President's son also agreed to settle another dispute, this one on the tennis court.
During the Memorial Day holiday, Mr.
Bush and his partner, Bob Shopneck, were kicked out of an amateur tournament after complaints that Mr.
Bush's U.S.
Tennis Association rating was too high for him to be playing in the division he had entered.
"I suspect he just didn't know," said Harold Aarons, head of the Colorado Tennis Association.
"The bottom line is that it's the player's responsibility. He blew it, as far as that goes."


Sports Briefings; Hockey League Sets First Draft
The new North American Hockey League will hold its first draft Monday in Cleveland.
Each of the six franchises will select 60 players to stock rosters for the 70-game regular season, which will begin on Nov. 7, said Gordon Stenback, chairman of the league's board of governors.
Any player not under contract to a professional team will be eligible for the draft.


Europeans Want Gorbachev at Talks
Although Britain and the United States say they have not yet made up their minds, there is growing pressure from Europe to invite the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, to London next month when the leaders of the Group of Seven industrial democracies gather for an economic summit meeting.
In recent days, France and Germany have joined Italy in publicly endorsing Mr.
Gorbachev's attendance in London, if not as a formal participant in the summit conference, at least to take part in separate discussions on the Soviet economy with Group of Seven members.


Is a Movie Really Awful? Let Us Count the Ways
One little word: Bad.
And yet it can mean so many different things about so many unhappy moviegoing experiences.
Some bad films are merely inert; some, only disappointing.
Some actively give offense; some are actively painful.
The special ones make you gape with disbelief.
The
really
special ones call for closing the eyes and thinking of England.
We tend to lump all bad films together, without the slightest respect for the individual differences that make them what they are.
This does a disservice to all concerned.
Badness deserves to be taken as seriously as merit, since the two are often integrally related.
This year's dud may well hold the seeds to next year's happy comeback.


Nuggets Make a Move
The Denver Nuggets, who had the National Basketball Association's worst record and lowest home attendance last season, took another step yesterday in shaking up the front office.
TIM LEIWEKE, an executive with the Minnesota Timberwolves, was named a senior vice president with prime responsibilities in marketing.


Lisina A. Noel, Decorator, Wed
Lisina Adrienne Noel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter M. Noel Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Yanko Della Schiava, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Giuseppe Della Schiava of Milan, Italy.
The Rev.
John W. Bishop performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Della Schiava, 26 years old, is an interior decorator in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University.
Her father is an investment management consultant in Greenwich.


Unheard Of in Bridge: Cavendish Club Folds
The world's most illustrious bridge club played its last hand late Friday night -- five clubs bid and made, as quickly and unceremoniously as ever.
Then the members left their green felt tables on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, and 10 minutes later, at midnight, the Cavendish Club was officially defunct.
It was founded in 1925, the year that the modern bridge scoring system was devised by Harold S. Vanderbilt, a longtime member, and it became the hub where dozens of world champions met to play one another and redistribute the wealth of the millionaire members.
It was a place where you could look across the table at Charles H. Goren and suggest that maybe he was not bidding according to Goren.


TELEVISION
Here is a sampling of summer television shows, movies and specials, compiled by Peter M. Nichols.
Dates and times are subject to change.
JUNE


Midwest Fish
To the Editor: As proprietor of the Lark, another Michigan restaurant offering walleye, Stizostedion vitreum, I enjoyed Regina Schrambling's article on our best local fish (Fare of the Country, May 5).
What few Americans realize is that the Stizostedion lucioperca, an almost identical relative of walleye, is perhaps the most prized table fish in Europe.
Known there as sandre, zander, fogas or pike perch, it is featured at Michelin three-star restaurants such as Auberge de l'Ill in Alsace.
JAMES D. LARK West Bloomfield, Mich.


Dumbfounded
To the Editor:
It was gratifying to read Professor Francis V. O'Connor's attack on that foul book about Jackson Pollock by Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith  [ "An Undeserved Pulitzer for a Pop Biography?," May 12 ]  and to see the strong editorial implication that the Pulitzer judges didn't know what they were doing when they awarded it the prize for biography.


Algerians Campaign In an Election to End Single-Party System
Campaigning opened today for Algeria's first multiparty parliamentary election in 29 years in an atmosphere dominated by uncertainty over whether fundamentalists would participate or take to the streets to pursue their demands for an Islamic state.
Candidates from the ruling National Liberation Front began wooing voters in their constituencies.
But the main opposition, the Islamic Salvation Front, left in doubt whether it would take part in the general election.


Susan Langtry Stewart Weds Jeffrey John Wilks
Susan Langtry Stewart, an associate at the Bankers Trust Company in New York, and Jeffrey John Wilks, a vice president of the advertising agency of Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York, were married yesterday at the Ethel Walker School Chapel in Simsbury, Conn.
Richard Wagner, a justice of the peace in Simsbury, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Wilks, 26 years old, graduated from Ethel Walker and Union College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Stewart of West Simsbury.
Her father is a sales representative for Lewis, Boyle Inc. in Berlin, Conn., which sells and leases industrial equipment.
The bride is a member of the New York Junior League.


Tuesday's Primary Election Offers Subtle Warning of a Coming Storm
LIKE the calm before a storm, the primary election on Tuesday offers New Jersey residents subtle warning of a developing political maelstrom.
With Senate and Assembly candidates running unopposed in nearly half of the state's newly drawn 40 legislative districts, and with only a handful of the remaining districts as the focus of hotly contested races, this year's primary appears at first glance to offer only spotty excitement for political scientists and party stalwarts.


GANDHI SUCCESSOR RESUMES CAMPAIGN
The Congress Party, bereft of the young leader it hoped would sweep it back into power, resumed its shattered political campaign tonight with a new president, P. V. Narasimha Rao.
In a public meeting attended by a few hundred party workers and several thousand other people brought in by bus and truck, Mr.
Rao made his first address as party leader.
By the time his turn came to speak, just before sundown, members of the audience were leaving in droves.


Vicki Hobbs Wed To Marc Hamet
Vicki Anne Lee Hobbs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Hobbs Jr. of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to Dr.
Marc Ronald Hamet, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irv Hamet of Baltimore.
Msgr.
Robert Paul Mohan performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Mercy Roman Catholic Church in Potomac, Md.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from Smith College and is studying medicine at the University of Maryland School of Medicine in Baltimore.
Her father is a network analyst at the National Education Association in Washington.


Elizabeth Allen Is Engaged
July wedding plans for Elizabeth Hall Allen and James Hayes Edgar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Edgar Jr. of Glenmont, N.Y., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew M. Allen of Armonk, N.Y.
Miss Allen, 22 years old, teaches music at St.
Veronica School in Mount Carmel, Ohio.
She graduated summa cum laude from Dartmouth College and is a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
Mr.
Edgar, 23, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth.
He is a sales representative in Cincinnati for the Macmillan Publishing Company.


American Speakers -- Loud and Clear
While many American products have trouble competing overseas, American loudspeakers get an eager welcome.
This week, at the Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago, a large number of buyers from abroad are expected to bolster an otherwise sluggish business.
"Our company has always maintained a global outlook," says Sidney Harman of Harman International, which makes speakers under well-known brand names like Infinity and JBL.
"But lately, the export side of our business exceeds domestic sales."


What Sights to See, Big Time (and Small)
THERE is too much to see in New York City and it is all moving too fast and there isn't enough time and there never will be.
Groucho Marx once said that when it is 9:30 in New York, it is 1937 in Los Angeles.
The curious thing is that New York remains New York in essential ways.
The architecture reflects successive visions of brilliant new worlds; the rivers of yellow cabs on the avenues are all racing somewhere just over the rainbow, and one can only wish that all these smart-alecky Nyawkus thought half as fast as they talk.
But just listen to them!


SUMMER PLACES: SEASONAL CELLAR
LIKE clothes and vacations, the wines favored in summer are not necessarily those enjoyed in winter.
The magisterial Bordeaux so perfect in January, the muscular Rhones and earthy Burgundies that enliven long winter nights somehow lose their charms when days grow longer and the first warm breezes blow.
Except, perhaps, for Champagne or an occasional Corton-Charlemagne, summer is a time for good wines, not great.
It calls for the lively and uncomplicated wines whose pedigrees don't count, that sommeliers rarely recommend.
After all, great wines demand respect, deliberation and thought -- maybe a bit of reverence.
Summer is for relaxation and fun.


Campus Life: Swarthmore; Fear of AIDS Causes Lesson To Be Canceled
Fears that students might contract the AIDS virus has caused a genetics laboratory project at Swarthmore College to be canceled.
The project involved drawing blood from 10 students in the upper-level human genetics seminar.
The students would have used the blood to study chromosomes, which contain genetic data.


Greek in Corruption Scandal Extradited From U.S.
A central figure in a corruption scandal linked to former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou was extradited from the United States today to face fraud and forgery charges.
The prisoner, George Koskotas, was met at Athens Airport by a flood of journalists and television crews as well as by hundreds of heavily armed security guards.


Susan L. Gilbert Wed To Stephen M. Cohen
Susan Lynne Gilbert, the daughter of Deborah Gilbert Smith of Maplewood, N.J., and the late Dr.
Donald K. Gilbert, was married last night in Short Hills, N.J., to Stephen Michael Cohen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley I. Cohen of Orange, Conn.
Rabbi Barry H. Greene performed the ceremony at Temple B'nai Jeshurun.
Mrs.
Cohen, 29 years old, is a manager in the market analysis department of Coopers &amp; Lybrand in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Mr.
Cohen, 32, is a project architect in the New York office of the Sverdrup Corporation, an engineering and architectural firm.
He is a cum laude graduate of the University of Michigan.


Sports of The Times; The Knicks' Philosophy Professor
When the National Basketball Association finals begin today, Pat Riley will be fulfilling his NBC contract, but his season on camera made him realize that his heart was still on a bench with a basketball team.
"After the studio show each week," he recalled, "I'd walk out of NBC alone. I'd get in a cab alone. I'd take a flight back to California alone, then the next weekend I'd get on a flight to New York and come back alone. After you've been around a team for 30 years, it's hard being alone like that."


A Tony Encore: More Applause for the State's Regional Theaters
CONNECTICUT theaters will share in the glitter of tonight's Tony Awards presentation.
In acknowledgment of the importance of the nation's regional playhouses, an award is to be presented to the Yale Repertory Theater of New Haven, the sixth of the state's theaters to be so honored.
And to prove that the state goes on infusing Broadway with dramatic and musical life, the Hartford Stage Company production of "Our Country's Good" is up for six Tonys, for best play and best director (Mark Lamos) among them.
Even "Oh, Kay!" a failed musical derived from a production at Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam holds two nominations.
The awards presentation will be broadcast on CBS from 9 to 11 P.M.


Biblical


North Korea to Earth: Coming Back
North and South Korea are now both set to assume full United Nations membership this fall, following Pyongyang's reluctant decision to submit its own separate application.
That's a welcome sign in one of the last corners of the cold war.
By responding promptly, the U.S. can help encourage a wider thaw.
The North's move is a pragmatic response to the South's courtship of Moscow and Beijing.
It offers Washington an excellent chance to upgrade its own discussions with Pyongyang.
They have a lot to talk about, from de-nuclearizing the peninsula to ending Pyongyang's dangerous isolation.


No Headline
Japanese Reversal on Trade
To avoid retaliation by the United States, Tokyo agreed to let foreign companies bid on a variety of big construction jobs.
Page 21.
Bush Assails Rights Bill


Miss Ingram Wed to Eric SchaeferCorrections
Suzanne Allison Ingram, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
W.
H.
Ingram of Dallas, was married there yesterday to Eric Albert Schaefer, the son of the late Mrs.
Samuel H. McIver and the late Dr.
J.
Albert Schaefer. the Rev.
John Drake performed the Episcopal ceremony at st.
Michael's and All Angels Churh.
Mrs.
Schaefer, 27 years old, is an associate program manager in Norwalk, Conn., with MBI Inc., a retailer of consumer products.
She graduated from Yale University and recevied an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is a physician in Dallas.
Mr Schaefer, 29, is a senior associate at G. E. Capital Corporation in Stamford, Conn.
He graduated from Clarkson Univeristy and also received an M.B.A. from harvard. his father was a physician in Syracuse.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Camille Paglia's essay, although it is almost weirdly reductive, is also deliciously fatuous, and it is this latter quality that makes it so endearing to anyone who was more or less awake during the fearless 60's.
Amid an embarrassment of dopiness, my odds-on favorite specimen is the one that reads: "When I saw  [ "Waiting for Godot" ]  in 1966 in college, I recognized it as a repressive anxiety-formation of defunct modernism, which the 60's revolution, energized by rock music, had swept completely away."


Extra Care to Install Outdoors Outlets
HAVING an outdoor electrical outlet is convenient.
Most newer homes feature at least one.
If your home does not or if you would like to add more, the job is usually fairly easy.
An outdoor outlet requires a special receptacle with a device that protects against electric shock in damp conditions.
The device is called a ground-fault circuit interrupter.


Northeastern Edges Penn In Battle for Supremacy
In their continuing competition to decide the nation's best college crew, Northeastern and Penn wound up in another duel today at the Intercollgiate Rowing Association's 89th annual regatta.
The Huskies from Boston prevailed by rowing through the Quakers in the third part of the 2,000-meter race on Onondaga Lake to win by three-fourths of a boat length, or 2.5 seconds.
Cornell was third, Brown fourth, Princeton fifth and Boston University sixth in the final for varsity heavyweight eights.


Angolan Revelers Celebrate the End of Civil War
Thousands of Angolans danced and cheered in the streets early this morning in rousing imprompu celebrations marking the formal end of this country's 16-year civil war.
I was too early to tell how well the cease-fire was being observed, Western diplomatic sources and relief workers said today, but so far there were no reports of renewed fighting.


Born in the U.S.S.R.
FROM LENIN TO LENNON
A Memoir of Russia in the Sixties.
By David Gurevich. 307 pp.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $21.95.


Shaw's Initial Drama Is Updated By a Century
IN "Widowers' Houses," George Bernard Shaw's first play, at the Long Island Stage through next Sunday, a real-estate developer seems to stride with confidence from the 19th century into the closing decade of the 20th.
To ease the passage of Mr.
Sartorius from one era into another, the director, Clinton J. Atkinson, has kept Shaw's dialogue intact while making the sets and costumes quite contemporary.


Airborne Summer Pest: More La Guardia Traffic
WHEN Don Vidler's plane circles over La Guardia Airport, he can frequently pick out his home in New Rochelle.
But it is not something he is happy about.
As thousands of his neighbors are also discovering, malfunctioning navigational equipment at La Guardia is forcing a significant portion of the airport's traffic to be diverted over the Sound Shore area of the county.
Barbecues, ballgames and neighborhood tranquillity in the area have been interrupted for months by low-flying jets.


This Week: Start Seeds
Plant more beans, lettuce, carrots and other favorites for continued harvests through the summer.
Start broccoli and brussels sprout seeds in a protected seedbed; don't let them dry out.
Thin seedlings as they grow and transplant into the garden in midsummer for a fall crop.


Fashion; Striking Poses
IN THE FICTION OF MARTIN AMIS, THERE ARE two kinds of model: the glamour girl propped invitingly against the bright sedan, whose demeanor, Amis writes in "London Fields," "proclaimed you could do what you liked with her"; and the fashion model, a more rarefied breed, whose demeanor "proclaimed she could do what she liked with you."
In the dollars-and-cents world of fashion, and especially on American runways this spring, these conflicting signals often converged.
In recent years, fashion's prevailing esthetic has called by turns for women whose type varied from coltish to brooding to formidably haughty.
But the runway models currently commanding attention (and the $750 hourly rate that is sometimes its reward) convey a brand of cool edged with availability.
They are "sensual, not sexy," says Ellen Harth, who heads Elite Runway Inc., one of New York City's top suppliers of talent.


Ideas &amp; Trends; The Invasion Of the Nina, The Pinta and The Santa Maria
AMID many passages complaining about the weather and the mood of his men, there are a few sentences in Christopher Columbus's diary that read as if penciled in later to meet contemporary rules of political correctness.
Take an entry from December 12, 1492, describing Columbus's discovery of a "very young and beautiful girl," a native Bahamian woman who was sent, presumably as a gift, to the Admiral's cabin.
"I clothed her and gave her glass beads, hawks' bells and brass rings, and sent her back to the land very honorably, as I always do," he wrote.


Travel Advisory; Italian Exhibits Honor Designer
The work of Valentino, the Italian fashion designer, is being celebrated in Rome this summer with two exhibitions.
The Accademia Valentino Museum, adjacent to the Valentinio couture house in the Piazza Mignanelli, off the Piazza di Spagna, will offer a display of 300 of Valentino's complete creations, including 10 of his first "dream dresses." The show, called "The Creations," will run from June 8 to Nov. 3.
Admission is about $8.
The second exhibition, "The Images," will be held in the Orazi and Curiazi halls of the Campidoglio Museum at Rome's City Hall on the Piazza del Campidoglio from June 7 to July 28.
It will include 150 photographs and 25 magazine covers by leading photographers and some 40 drawings.
Admission is about $6.50.
Proceeds from the two shows will go to a fund for AIDS patients.


A Three-Concert Gala Opens Chamber Festival
"MUSIC MOUNTAIN," said its president, Nicholas Gordon, "is not only the nation's oldest, continuously held chamber music festival, attracting highly acclaimed musicians from throughout the world, but it offers a unique presentation of chamber music, with the string quartet literature as the centerpiece of its concert program."
For its 62d season, four of America's finest quartets -- Chester, Shanghai, Franciscan and New World -- will be heard alongside four visiting ensembles: the Sorrel Quartet of Britain, the Manfred from France, the Cuarteto Latino-Americano of Mexico and from the Soviet Union, the Leontovitch Quartet.


CORRECTION
A report in the Business Diary column on May 19 describing CBS's efforts to attract viewers referred incorrectly to a promotional plan, based on airlines' frequent flyer programs, that would reward customers for watching more CBS programming.
The promotional idea was one of many considered by the company, but has not been carried out.


Ambiguity on Tapes at a Racketeering Trial
For more than three weeks, a jury has listened to taped conversations of reputed mobsters who are accused of rigging bids on lucrative contracts to install windows for the New York City Housing Authority.
On one tape, Peter Savino, a Mafia associate who ran a window-installation company, talked to a defendant, Vincent Ricciardo, about how companies bid for window contracts.


For a Reluctant Maestro, Relief, No Regrets, in Berlin
Bernard Haitink is the quiet man of music: a conductor who refuses to participate in the power politics of the international classical-music scene and who uses his status only to make sure his musical standards are met.
With weariness tempered by a touch of self-deprecating humor, he acknowledges that he is a worrier, a loner and a reluctant maestro.
"I get very allergic when people talk of
great
conductors and careers," he said recently. "I hate that word.
We are all musicians, one way or another." Mr. Haitink, who will appear with the Berlin Philharmonic at Carnegie Hall on Thursday, Friday and Saturday, is best remembered for his many years as chief conductor of the Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam (1964-88). Now, at the age of 62, he is the music director of the Royal Opera, Covent Garden. He quickly signaled his reluctance to take on future music directorships, crying, "No more jobs!
I want to be free."


Could Be 1992's Biggest Wedding
The wedding gown, two years in the making, is 280 feet long (train included) and weighs 935 pounds.
Though you will not find this particular dress in any shop with a name like Big Women Only or One Size Fits All, it will be on display from June 7 to 30, draping the 10-story glass wall of the Winter Garden at the World Financial Center in Battery Park City.
The gown (white with black trim) and veil (layers of red, pink, mauve and blue tulle 310 feet long and weighing 1,000 pounds) were designed by Antoni Miralda, a 49-year-old Spanish artist who uses only his last name.
The exhibition is the latest and most elaborate event yet in what is known as the Honeymoon Project.


A 'Happy Fella' With Less Offers More
With so many big, expansive musicals all around us today, we sometimes forget how satisfying an intimate one can be.
Like "The Most Happy Fella" by Frank Loesser.


WINDSOR KNOT
Hitchens misses a point.
There may not be a Charles III.
Should Queen Elizabeth live into her 90's as her mother has, she could very well outlive Charles.
In which case, England would have a relatively young monarch in William, always an exciting scenario for watchers of the royals.
BARBARA C. KROLL
Kennett Square, Pa.


Just for Fun
Some of the following events have been planned by city agencies like the Department of Parks and Recreation and its subsidiaries, like the Urban Park Rangers.
If Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposed city budget is adopted for the fiscal year that begins July 1, these programs may be canceled.
The dates, times and specific programs for many events -- not only those sponsored by the city -- may change, and it is advisable to check by calling the information number at the end of each listing.
This Week
SUNDAY TEA, Bartow-Pell Mansion Museum, Pelham Bay Park, Shore Road near the Split Rock Golf Course Clubhouse, Pelham Bay Park, Pelham Bay, the Bronx.
Visitors can tour the 1840's mansion with a formal garden and bird sanctuary.
Tea will be served in the conservatory known as the Orangerie today, 2 to 4 P.M.
Also the first Sunday in July.
Tickets: $4 ($2 for children, $10 for families).
Museum hours: Wednesdays, Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 4 P.M., and by appointment.
Museum admission: $2 ($1 for the elderly and for children 12 and younger) Information: (212) 885-1461.


The Dollar Gains On Franc, Mark
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
138.35
138.35
151.95
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7425
1.7037
1.6985
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1448
1.1496
1.1753
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6970
1.7350
1.6810
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$361.30
$356.25
$358.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Travel Advisory; Hotel Projects For Tobago
Two large estates on Tobago, the sister island of Trinidad, have been sold to buyers who plan to build hotels on them.
Neal &amp; Massy, a conglomerate on Tobago, intends to build a 200-room resort and a golf course on the Courland Estate.
Angostura, the bitters and rum producer, will construct a hotel and tourism complex on the Lowlands Estate.
In addition, said Dr.
Bhoe Tewarie, the Tourism Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, work on five new small hotels in Tobago will start this year.
They will add 130 guest rooms to the island's current 700.


Commercial Property: Times Square Signs; Things That Go Blink in the Night
THEY say the neon signs will be even brighter on Broadway, as the Ramada Renaissance hotel rises over Duffy Square with blazing billboards.
But there is some darkness around the edges.
"We feel the recession, but not nearly as much as the retail business or the real-estate market," said Richard Schaps, president of Van Wagner Communications of Manhattan, who estimates that his company handles 85 percent of the signs around Times Square.


Powerboat Newcomers Are Mounting a Serious Challenge
New faces are appearing this year in the top ranks of both hydroplane racing and offshore powerboating.
Although it is early in the season, experts from both circuits say that any number of newcomers can win.
The Offshore Professional Tour plans its third race of the season, the Lakefest Offshore Challenge, next Sunday in New Orleans.
Forty powerboats are expected to race, 10 of which are the 35-to-50-foot turbocharged Superboats.
The craft, which carry engines of more than 4,000 horsepower, race 150 miles over eight laps.


BEST SELLERS: June 2, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
2
4
62
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
3
6
4
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
4
5
12
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
2
5
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) Kinsey Millhone probes an insurance scam.
6
11
2
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
7
3
15
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman enables them to solve romantic problems. (LP)
8
8
8
THE SEERESS OF KELL, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) The fifth volume in the "Malloreon" fantasy saga.
9
7
4
BRIGHT CAPTIVITY, by Eugenia Price. (Doubleday, $20.) Romance comes to a plantation owner's daughter during the War of 1812. (LP)
10
15
3
THE CROWN OF COLUMBUS, by Michael Dorris and Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $21.95.) A couple who have long disagreed about everything find understanding on a Caribbean research trip.
11 *
1
THE CAT WHO KNEW A CARDINAL, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $16.95.) To save a friend who is a prime suspect, Jim Qwilleran investigates the murder of a town's most despised man.
12 *
1
IMMORTALITY, by Milan Kundera. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) Through the lives of characters in 19th-century Weimar and present-day Paris, the author reflects on contemporary life.
13
10
7
THE NOVEL, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $23.) Life as lived by writers, critics and book editors in Pennsylvania and Manhattan. (LP)
14 *
14
3
HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT, by Whitney Otto. (Villard, $18.) The reminiscences of eight women, members of a quilting circle.
15
12
3
OBJECT LESSONS, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $19.) An Irish-Italian girl comes of age in suburbia during a summer in the late 1960's.
16 *
13
6
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $21.95.) An insurance company investigator probes the murder of a millionaire.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
3
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How the President and his high military commanders made their decisions during the first two years of the Bush Administration.
2
1
6
NANCY REAGAN, by Kitty Kelley. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized biography of the former First Lady.
3
4
28
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
4
3
10
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Random House, $22.) A producer's experiences in Hollywood.
5
1
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) The murder of a young Orange County, Calif., woman and the tangled family relationships that brought it about.
6
9
3
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
7
6
6
THERE ARE NO CHILDREN HERE, by Alex Kotlowitz. (Talese/Doubleday, $21.95.) Two brothers growing up on Chicago's mean streets.
8
10
3
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated on campus.
9
8
9
A HISTORY OF THE ARAB PEOPLES, by Albert Hourani. (Belknap/Harvard University, $24.95.) A comprehensive account by an Oxford scholar.
10
9
THE NEXT CENTURY, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $16.95.) A journalist's assessment of the prospects for various countries.
11
1
MICHAEL JACKSON, by J. Randy Taraborrelli. (Birch Lane/Carol, $21.95.) A biography of the pop star.
12
13
43
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Morrow, $18.95.) The different languages men and women speak.
13
1
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
14 *
5
6
MOVING PICTURES, by Ali MacGraw. (Bantam, $20.) The movie star looks back on her career.
15 *
1
THE DAY AMERICA TOLD THE TRUTH, by James Patterson and Peter Kim. (Prentice Hall, $19.95.) Americans' beliefs about sex, drugs and many other matters, as revealed through a poll.
16 *
11
9
SLEEPWALKING THROUGH HISTORY, by Haynes Johnson. (Norton, $24.95.) A social history of America during the Reagan era.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
LIGHT HER FIRE, by Ellen Kreidman. (Villard, $18.95.) Ways by which men can excite women romantically.
2
1
42
HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal with today's problems.
3
4
73
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a fellow named Waldo.
4
2
30
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
5
3
113
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's advice about how to make a personal fortune.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
A VERY THIN LINE: The Iran-Contra Affairs, by Theodore Draper. (Hill &amp; Wang, $27.95.) A richly detailed, formidably researched analysis concludes that the Iran-contra cover-up -- funds secretly raised for Nicaraguan rebels as well as diverted to them from illegal arms sales to Iran -- was no aberration unique to circumstances within the Reagan Administration, but evidence of what can happen when a President overreaches himself.
ON THE EVE OF UNCERTAIN TOMORROWS, by Neil Bissoondath. (Clarkson N. Potter, $18.95.) In these stories of exile by a Trinidadian now living in Canada, the West stands in for a dream denied, and for most of his emigres there is no going back.
WHAT WAS MINE: Stories, by Ann Beattie. (Random House, $20.) Portraits of forlorn men and unpredictable women from an author whose famous detachment has given way to greater tenderness.
DRINKING DRY CLOUDS: Stories From Wyoming, by Gretel Ehrlich. (Capra, Paper, $9.95.) Eloquent and often comic linked pieces set in the West in the 1940's, in which the humor derives not from wit but from the characters' bewilderment.
WOMAN HOLLERING CREEK: And Other Stories, by Sandra Cisneros. (Random House, $18.) Unforgettable characters march through a satisfying collection of tales about Mexican-Americans who know the score and cling to the anchor of their culture.
A MODEL WORLD: And Other Stories, by Michael Chabon. (Morrow, $18.95.) Short fiction of kaleidoscopic beauty that explores estrangement and other modern phenomena.
THE CONTINUING SILENCE OF A POET: The Collected Stories of A. B. Yehoshua. (Penguin, Paper, $9.95.) The realities and contradictions of Israeli life, plumbed by a renowned storyteller.


Sunday Menu; Chicken, Simple, With Choice of Couscous
In this simple, straightforward meal, you can use either instant whole-wheat or instant regular couscous.
Both cook in the same time, 5 minutes.
Whole-wheat couscous is preferable because it has more fiber, but it is not easy to find at stores.
Chicken With Onions and Cilantro
12 ounces skinless, boneless chicken breasts  2 teaspoons olive oil  16 ounces whole onions or 14 ounces sliced onion (3 1/3 cups)  8 ounces no-salt-added tomato puree  1 tablespoon Worcestershire sauce  Freshly ground black pepper to taste  1/2 cup chopped fresh cilantro (coriander).
1. Cut each breast into quarters and saute in hot oil in a nonstick pan.
2.
If using whole onions, slice them thinly.
When the chicken is browned on one side, turn it and brown on the second side and add onions.
3.
When onions have begun to soften and brown, add tomato puree and Worcestershire sauce.
Season with pepper, cover and reduce heat to simmer.
Cook until chicken is tender, about 10 minutes.
4. Stir in cilantro before serving.
Yield: 2 servings. Couscous With Peas and Corn
3/4 cup couscous  1 cup frozen corn kernels  1 cup frozen peas  1 teaspoon cumin  2 scallions  1/8 teaspoon salt, optional.
1. Following package directions, bring water to boil to cook couscous.
2. Run the corn and peas under hot water in a strainer and drain.
3.
When water boils, stir in couscous, corn, peas and cumin.
Cover, turn off the heat, and allow liquid to absorb, 3 to 5 minutes.
4.
Wash, trim and chop scallions, and stir into couscous when it is cooked.
Season with salt, if desired.
Yield: 2 servings.


Battling Poison Ivy Requires a Strategy
POISON ivy is problably one of the worst plants around.
It seems to be everywhere.
Those who would like to go out and pull a few weeds in the garden are often hesitant because of the presence of this most unwanted plant.
It is in full leaf now, and those who do not know what it looks like, should.
If you are not positive about its identification, seek help from someone who knows the plant, because knowing the enemy is the first defense in this case.


Chess
Tournament players display a variety of attitudes toward rivals.
One is exemplified by Viktor Korchnoi, who usually refuses to look his opponent in the eye before a game and can hardly bring himself to give the formal handshake of greeting.
The former challenger for the world championship, who now lives in Switzerland, believes hostility is the proper demeanor until the game is over.
Even as mild a personality as Svetozar Gligoric deftly avoids socializing with an opponent before they have played their game.
Here the reason may be something else -- some speculate that Yugoslavia's greatest grandmaster believes that getting chummy before a game invites embarrassing draw offers.


A Lesson in Tackling the Bigger and Bolder Blues
Having showed him how to catch snapper, or baby bluefish, in a salt pond five years ago, it seemed only proper that I introduce Morgan Child, one of my grandsons, to surf fishing for adult blues this year.
I mentioned this to Morgan, who is 11, last winter while teaching him and his younger brother, Jesse, how to fly cast and tie fresh water flies for trout and black bass.


J. J. Yordan Weds Elena Ostrowski
Elena Marina Ostrowski, an assistant treasurer at Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in New York, and Jose Juan Yordan, a senior consultant with the accounting firm of Price Waterhouse in New York, were married yesterday in New Canaan, Conn.
Msgr.
Charles McDonagh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Jaime Yordan, brother and sister-in-law of the bridegroom.
Mrs.
Yordan, 28 years old, graduated from Trinity School in New York and Smith College.
She is the daughter of Clara Ostrowski of New York, the principal of Public School 165 in Manhattan, and the late Walter Ostrowski, who was a dispatcher for American Shipping Lines in Hoboken, N.J.


Poverty, Not Politics, Drives Cubans Out Now
When his only income dried up, money from the sale of secondhand clothes sent to him by relatives in the United States, Juan Alfredo Molenillo Grenup decided that he had had enough of spartan life in Cuba and set out in desperation on a raft for Florida.
Three days later, after being picked up by boaters off the Florida Keys, Mr.
Molenillo had arrived, joining more than 600 other Cubans who have escaped their country on makeshift vessels this year in the largest wave of refugees from the island since the Mariel boatlift in 1980.


Table for 2, Court for 2 In Paris
Every day in Paris they share a practice court, the stocky red-haired player who's seeded ninth at the French Open and the big former Northwestern University star who needed to qualify just to be here.
And every night they eat the same thing in the same place at the same time; tennis players, regardless of their status, seem to be creatures of habit.
Jim Courier, one of the clay-court artisans with legitimate designs on winning this Grand Slam event, always allows his friend Todd Martin, a Grand Slam and clay-court novice who retains a smattering of French from his days as a linguistics major, to do the ordering.


FOOTBALL: Notebook; Will Teams Follow the Leader In Hiring of Minority Members?
With the recent appointments of Leo Miles as the supervisor of officials and Harold Henderson to the job of chief labor negotiator, Paul Tagliabue has shown a commitment to hiring members of minority groups for high-level management positions in the league office.
But few of the National Football League teams are following Tagliabue's lead on the club level.


BUSH HAILS ACCORD
The United States and Soviet Union announced today that they had settled their differences on a far-reaching treaty reducing conventional arms in Europe and that they were preparing for a summit meeting, possibly by the end of June, between President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
After a long meeting with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today's agreement would allow the two sides to step up negotiations on a new strategic arms reduction accord, which is scheduled to be signed at the summit meeting.


He Was No Jack Kennedy
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER
A Life of John F. Kennedy.
By Thomas C. Reeves.
Illustrated. 510 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $24.95.


Campus Life: Duke; An Effort to Insure That 9th Graders Won't Drop Out
As law makers struggle with budgets and bureaucracy to improve the public school system in North Carolina, the class of 1991 at Duke University has added its own resources to the effort.
This year's seniors chose to give money to a program at the high school here that is intended to help ninth-graders at risk of dropping out.


Review/Dance; Guest Star in Robbins's 'Watermill'
In its quiet way, Jerome Robbins's "Watermill" is probably one of the most controversial works in the New York City Ballet repertory.
It is either a stark spectacle that probes the human condition or the world's most boring ballet.
But the piece re-entered the City Ballet repertory, on Friday night at the New York State Theater, in a performance that underscored its virtues.
This was due in large part to the performance of Jean Guizerix, a principal dancer with the Paris Opera Ballet whom Mr.
Robbins invited to dance the lead role.
In some lights, Mr.
Guizerix bears a facial resemblance to Edward Villella, for whom the ballet was created.
Mr.
Villella brought a charismatic intensity to the role, seeming to rein in his gutsy attack and presence for the part.
Mr.
Guizerix has a quieter, more modest presence in the role, but he remains a potent center throughout the ballet, even when lying to the side in shadows in a sea of evocative sounds created by Teiji Ito's score for wooden flute, bells and other ancient Oriental instruments.


L.S.U. and Tennessee Win Team Titles
Carlette Guidry won the battle -- all the battles -- but lost the war.
Esther Jones lost the battles -- three of them to Guidry -- but she and her Louisiana State teammates piled up enough points to beat Guidry and the Texas team to win the women's team championship at the National Collegiate Athletic Association track and field championships here at the University of Oregon's Hayward Field today.
In the men's competition, Tennessee and Washington State battled down to the final two individual events -- the 5,000 meters and the decathlon -- before Tennessee pulled out the team title, 51-42.


The Nursing Home Rip-Off
The last thing this country needs is more nursing homes.
What's required instead is a shift in rules governing the billions of dollars the Government doles out for long-term care of elderly and disabled Americans.
A nursing home may charge residents up to $60,000 a year.
Yet they typically receive less than three hours of care a day, according to two University of Minnesota researchers, Robert L. Kane and Rosalie A. Kane.


Fashion: American Report; The Magnificent Eight
WHEN THE NEW YORK FALL COLLECTIONS CAME TO A close this past April, the general feeling was that America's contribution to new fashion was somewhat less than visionary.
There were some nice small changes -- the infusion of colorful tweeds and plaids, for example, and the sway of flippy, pleated skirts. (Hemlines, however, stayed above the knee.) But coming on the heels of the forward-looking shows in Paris, the American shows for the most part lacked the slight silhouette changes and the imaginative accessorizing that nudge fashion forward.
It was especially disappointing that several of the newer talents who had brought excitement to the last season settled for doing the same stuff over again in winter fabrics.
The reluctance of so many American designers and manufacturers to go off into uncharted territories, though regrettable, was understandable.
These collections had been produced amid the uncertainties of the Persian Gulf war.
More important, the fact that the recession had already cut deeply into the retail and fashion industry and still showed no sign of receding made the status quo a safer route.
Nevertheless, the majority of the new clothes were O.K. and, mercifully, from a store buyer's point of view, quite wearable.


Paul Ziffren, 77, Former Leader in Democratic Party in California
Paul Ziffren, a Democratic Party leader in California in the 1950's, died Friday night at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 77 years old.
His family declined to disclose the cause of death.


Results Plus
COLLEGE BASEBALL  No. 7 Creighton Upsets No. 2 Clemson
Scott Stahoviak had three hits and two runs batted in and Steve Hinton drove in three runs, powering seventh-seeded Creighton to an 8-4 College World Series victory over second-seeded Clemson in the first round at Omaha yesterday.
The game matched two of the nation's top offensive teams.
Creighton led the county with a .361 batting average and Clemson was tops in team scoring a 10-run average.
Creighton (50-20) rewarded the fourth-largest crowd in C.W.S. history with 11 hits off six Clemson pitchers and the 16,244 in attendance made plenty of noise for their hometown team in its first national championships.
Creighton pitcher Mike Heathcott scattered seven hits and earned a school record 15th victory against one loss.
The Bluejays advanced to Monday night's winners bracket game against the winner of the Wichita State-Long Beach State game last night.
Clemson (60-9) dropped to an elimination game Monday afternoon against the Wichita-Long Beach loser. (AP) Jacksonville State Wins Division II Title: Mark Adams drove in five runs in an 11-run sixth inning as Jacksonville State coasted to its second straight N.C.A.A.
Division II championship, routing Missouri Southern, 20-4, in Montgomery, Ala. (AP) GOLF  Walker Leads Bradley by Two Strokes
Colleen Walker got off to a slow start but birdied the 16th and 17th holes to take a two-shot lead over Beth Daniel after three rounds of the Ladies Professionl Golfers Association Rochester International.
Walker, who has not won a tournament this year, was one over after nine holes, but collected four birdies on the back for a three-under-par 69.
She is at 10-under-par 206 after three rounds on the 6,162-yard Locust Hill Country Club course.
Daniel shot a 71 and was followed by Pat Bradley, a two-time winner of the Rochester tournament, and Trish Johnson of Wales, both at 209.
Michelle Estill, who started the day leading at eight-under-par, had one birdie and seven bogeys to fall to two under. (AP) Ballesteros Leads by Seven in England: Seve Ballesteros of Spain stretched his lead in the British Masters to seven strokes by shooting a four-under-par 68 in the third round yesterday at Woburn, England.
The nearest challenger to Ballesteros, who has a 54-hole total of 200, is Eamon Darcy of Ireland, who eagled the final hole for a 71.
Two strokes behind Darcy him are Tony Charnley, Keith Waters and David Gilford of England and Sam Torrance of Scotland.
Gilford shot the best round of the day, a 65, while Charnley fired 66 and Torrance 71.
Waters struggled to a 73.
Mark Calcavecchia, four strokes back when the third round began, had two bogeys to go with his four birdies over the first 12 holes and then had a double-bogey at the 13th.
He bogeyed the next hole, too, and dropped further back with another at the 17th to slip to five under par.
In five holes, Calcavecchi had dropped as many strokes and finished with a 74 for a share of seventh place. (AP) CYCLING  Soviet Wins Sixth Stage in Tour of Italy
Vladimir Pulnikov of the Soviet Union sprinted ahead in the last seconds to win the sixth stage of the Tour of Italy cycling race yesterday in Rieti.
Franco Chioccioli of Italy kept his overall lead.
Pulnikov finished the mountainous stage in 5 hours 19 minutes 47 seconds.
He moved up to third in the overall standing, 51 seconds behind Marino Lejarreta of Spain.
Greg LeMond of the United States finished 41st, dropping 2:32 further back in the standing.
He is now nearly four minutes behind Chioccioli. (AP) BOWLING  Ballard and Benoit Take P.B.A.
Doubles
Del Ballard Jr. and Bob Benoit captured the Professional Bowlers Association's Beaumont Doubles Classic yesterday, beating Steve Hoskins and Philip Ringenar, 243-200, in the title match of the Texas event. (AP)


Dr. Michele Grodberg Wed to Dr. Seth L. Gendler
Dr.
Michele Grodberg, the chief resident in the dermatology department of the New York University Medical Center, was married last evening to Dr.
Seth Lorin Gendler, an assistant professor of clinical medicine at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons.
Rabbi H. Phillip Berkowitz officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from Swarthmore College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received an M.D. degree from N.Y.U.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerson Grodberg of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.


Bonds's Personal Tale of Lost and Found
For the first six weeks or so of the season, one could not have blamed the Pittsburgh Pirates if they had issued a missing person's report on one Barry Bonds.
You remember the guy.
National League most valuable player of 1990.
Gold Glove left fielder.
Only the second player in history to hit 30 or more home runs and steal 50 or more bases in the same season.


Market Message: From Bust to Boom?
The recession seems to be ending.
But the overwhelming consensus is that the recovery will not amount to much.
There is talk of a "double dip" downturn, and few expect strong growth.
The stock market, however, seems to have a different opinion, That contrary notion, of coming strength in the economy, is conveyed not just by the fact that the Dow Jones industrial average last week rose 113.59 points, to 3,027.50, setting a record and closing above 3,000 for the first time since April 17.
It may also be significant that it is no longer the recession-resistant consumer stocks, like Procter &amp; Gamble and Philip Morris, that are leading the charge.
Of the 30 stocks in the Dow, four are now at least 10 percent higher than they were when the average first closed over 3,000.
All are big, grimy, cyclical stocks: Du Pont, Goodyear, General Motors and Bethlehem Steel.
International Paper and Union Carbide have risen almost as much.
If those moves are to make sense, then this economy needs than a weak recovery.
The bond market's refusal to rally may also be sending a signal of surprising economic strength,.
The Federal Reserve has pushed short-term interest rates dopwn sharply, and American investors have taken the hint.
Sales of mutural funds are booming.
And yet, as Fred Leiner, an economist at Continental Bank, points out, long-term interest rates have been stalled for six months, making minor moves but essentially going sideways.
"I'm concerned by some similarities with late 1986," he said.
"We see money pouring into bond funds, yet the bond market is unable to move higher. Those similarities suggest the market may move lower from these levels."
In late 1986 and early 1987, he recalled, the bond market stalled while stocks leaped.
Then bond prices crashed in the spring, and stock prices followed the fall.
This year, there are certainly plenty of reasons to doubt that the economy can rebound strongly.
The debt overhang that helped to bring on this recession has not disappeared, and the Government's efforts to fight the recession have been limited by the severe fiscal problems brought on by the profligacy of the 1980's.
It is hard to imagine a new boom in commercial construction.
Moreover, the evidence that the recession is ending, while persuasive to a lot of stock traders, is still limited,.
The leading indicators have risen for three consecutive months, and factory orders turned up in April.
Consumers tell pollsters the present is bad, but the future will be better, and they seem to translate those beliefs into cautious spending, not a panicky increase in savings.
Stock market analysts note that secondary stocks, which were leaders in the winter rally, are lagging as summer begins, Their particiaption would make this rally a more impressive one.
But for all that, it is a fact that the economy usually finds a way to surprise the seers.
A strong recovery this year would certianly qualify as a surprise.
Perhaps, just perhaps, that is the current message of the markets.


Thousands March in South Korean Protests
Tens of thousands of militant students and dissidents staged protests today to demand the ouster of President Roh Tae Woo and the withdrawal of United States troops.
About 50,000 students launched two days of protests in the southeastern port city of Pusan, said the national news agency Yonhap.


Anne C. Norton Weds C. W. Perry
Anne Crowninshield Norton and Christopher Philip Perry, business executives in Florida, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Dedham, Mass.
The Rev.
Earl W. Mullins officiated, assisted by the Rev.
George Zabriskie.
Mrs.
Perry, 28 years old, graduated from Connecticut College and is an account supervisor at the McFarland &amp; Drier advertising agency in Miami.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Norton of Dedham.
Her father is a clinical professor of dermatology at Boston University and practices in Wellesley Hills, Mass.


Lori Silverstein Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence I. Silverstein of Clifton, N.J., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Lori Hope Silverstein, and Jerome Howard Solomon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Solomon of Elizabeth, N.J.
Miss Silverstein, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president of Republic National Bank of New York.
Mr.
Solomon, 27, is an analyst with the Office of Management and Budget of the City of New York.


The Phoenix Is Shifting To a Lighter Repertory
UNFAZED by an arts crisis in the country or the decline of professional theater in the county, the Phoenix is rising for a fourth summer season in Westchester, with budget untrimmed, private financial support increased fourfold and a spiffy theater space, costing twice as much as its former location.
But don't expect the company's repertory to include, as it did in previous years, the likes of a Restoration comedy or a play by Ibsen.
Or Tennessee Williams.
Or Shakespeare.
And the reduced company that's playing together will no longer be living together.
One of the secrets of the Phoenix talent for survival seems to be: keep it light, and simplified.


Air Travel
To the Editor: In the past decade, commercial aviation in the United States has degenerated from being a fine service filled with glory to an industry filled with sleaze.
Bait-and-switch advertising, noise and air pollution, old equipment and bankruptcy are now its symbols.
Where once a flight schedule was based on the traveler's need, computers are used to bait the unwary into the purchase of cheap but nonexistent seats to go someplace most had not planned to go in the first place.
The time has come for Congress to write a new public policy on the real purpose of commercial aviation and to debate the real mission of the Federal Aviation Administration in the 21st century.
Aviation should be useful, not frivolous, and should certainly not be dominated by dealmakers.
WESLEE LYNCH Summit, N.J.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I live in a very old apartment, and the three walls that surround my bathtub were long ago covered with a type of wallboard that has an imitation tile pattern on the surface.
This has been painted over many times, and now the paint is starting to flake off on the lower 18 inches around all three sides.
Can you tell me how to eliminate this flaking condition and make the paint to adhere after I repaint?
A.
This type of hardboard originally had a very slick glossy finish on it, and paint does not usually adhere well to it if the surface is not properly prepared.
The reason most of the flaking is on the lower part is probably because the moisture tends to creep up from the edges of the tub.
To solve the problem, you should scrape and sand off all the loose or flaking paint.
Then sand the exposed tile board with a medium-grit No. 80 paper.
Dust thoroughly.
Apply one coat of a shellac-based primer like BIN or Enamelac.
Then apply two coats of alkyd enamel, sanding lightly between coats.


Abortion Protest Leads to Arrests in Massachusetts


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Avian Repairs IN Caumsett State Park in Lloyd Neck, robins sing, mockingbirds mimic, and now eagles cry.
Most of the crying comes from Henrietta.
"Henrietta is head eagle," said Peter Schmidt, director of the Queens College Environmental Center at the park.


Eliza P. Wilson to Wed David J. Ingle
William Parmenter Wilson of New York and Mrs.
Mortimer W. Hall of Millbrook, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Eliza Parmenter Wilson, and David Jervey Ingle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Addison Ingle 3d of Charleston, S.C.
Miss Wilson, 23 years old and a Middlebury College graduate, is a student with the Merce Cunningham and Erick Hawkins dance companies in New York.
Her father is a motion picture producer and a partner in the Screen Connection Company, a film distributor, in New York.
Her mother is the fiction writer Emily Brooks.


An Opposition Leader Seeks to Reinvent Soviet Agriculture
The green flourish of spring across the Russian earth is so inviting and the shortage of food in the city so daunting that increasing numbers of desperate urban families are migrating to start patchwork country farms, ignorant as all pioneers.
"We figure there are 20,000 small family farms in Russia right now and by the end of next year there will be 150,000," said Yuri Chernichenko, founder of the new Peasants Party of Russia, who is not at all delighted with such a bumper crop of humans hurrying to the land from their worsening lives in Moscow and other urban centers.


Fashion; Hot Looks to Look Cool
WHEN the sun feels like a blowtorch and the air clings like angora, New Yorkers don't lose their cool.
Out come the mesh tank tops, loose surfer jams, skimpy bandeaus and cool linens.
Every year the weather seems to get a little hotter, a little more oppressive.
Clothing designers have responded with high-performance wools, unconstructed tailoring and skin-baring cutouts.
Here are some styles, from suits to swimsuits to the perfect sun dress, for surviving the oven season.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Camille Paglia's diatribe is a brilliant satire on the excessive hostility and twisted logic that characterize the contemporary debate about the role of the humanities in higher education.
Her jingoism is part of a calculated contradiction: espouse intellectual open-mindedness theoretically, demonstrate excessive closed-mindedness practically, and readers will be treated to a compelling example of what's wrong in English departments around the country.
Swift would be proud!
BRADFORD K. MUDGE Denver


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bethpage 137,000
9 North Pershing Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, attic, 70- by 90-foot lot; taxes $2,200.
Bohemia 175,000
75 Aron Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old ranch; den, finished basement, 2-car garage, 0.75 acre; taxes $3,800.
Hicksville 190,000
42 Cornell Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; dining room, den, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700.
North Bellmore 161,000
2167 Sanders Place  6 bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,500.
Oakdale 181,750
60 Bayview Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, den, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,900.
Sayville 160,000
265 Astor Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
OTHER AREAS Scarsdale, N.Y. 646,500
35 Springdale Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, Jacuzzi; taxes $14,621.
Farmington, Conn. 540,000
147 Mountain Spring Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old Normandy chateau; custom design, dining and living room with cathedral ceilings, screened porch, 1.8 acres; taxes #,806.
Freehold, N.J. 158,400
43 Windham Way  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 2 1/2-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $3,516.


Lingering Guest


Corrections
An article on May 12 about New England desserts misspelled a restaurant in Sandwich, Mass.
It is the Baretree Inn, not the Beartree.


Soviets' Real Issue: Aid
In clearing away the last obstacles to the treaty reducing nonnuclear forces in Europe, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union has today sent another strong signal that he wants to focus on what for him is a real life or death issue: economic assistance from the West.
The increasingly desperate requirements of the Soviet leader for Western economic help bring with them both opportunities and demands for the Bush Administration.
The opportunities are for Washington to squeeze the Soviets for as many concessions on arms control as possible, while at the same time pressing Mr.
Gorbachev to undertake economic reforms far more sweeping than he is now prepared to consider.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Camille Paglia's rhapsodic diatribe against Francophilic dullards embodies the personality of the American popular culture she praises as "rude, vital, brassy." Yet for all the vitally brassy rudeness of dismissing Foucault as "an absolute ninny" and university leftists as "strutting wannabes, timorous nerds," Ms.
Paglia calls for a return to "the old German style -- sober, practical, precise, lucid and learned." The fact that her own prose is nothing of the kind is nowhere more evident than in her adulation of Elvis Presley, who any sober analysis would concede was a sottish and ignorant boor.
STEVEN G. KELLMAN  San Antonio


Salute Berries in Ways Plain and Fancy
THE berry season has arrived.
Strawberries to purchase at farm stands or to gather at farms that permit pickers are the first of a succession of locally grown berries that ripen through the fall.
After the strawberries come raspberries and blueberries, then blackberries, then raspberries again.
Finally, some areas will have locally grown cranberries.


Broadway Fare


Sherri Cohen Wed To David Shapiro
Sherri Cohen, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan B. Cohen of Warren, N.J., was married in Livingston, N.J., yesterday evening to David Shapiro, the son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Howard Shapiro of Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
Rabbi Shapiro performed the ceremony at Temple B'nai Abraham.
Mrs.
Shapiro, 24 years old, graduated from Cornell University and received a J.D. degree cum laude from Georgetown University.
She will join the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin this fall.
Her father is a gastroenterologist in Plainfield, N.J.
Her mother, Jill Cohen, is a certified public accountant in Martinsville, N.J.


Sarah Whiting Is Wed
Sarah Seymour Whiting, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Royal G. Whiting of Big Indian, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Dr.
David M. Jenkinson, a son of Agnes Horgan Jenkinson of Brockton, Mass., and the late Dr.
William Jenkinson.
The Rev.
Andrew C. Hamersley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Winnisook Club.
Mrs.
Jenkinson, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Maine.
Dr.
Jenkinson, 32, is an intern at the St.
Lawrence Hospital in Lansing, Mich.
He also graduated from the University of Maine and received a doctor of osteopathy degree from the University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine.


Dab Hand
To the Editor:
I noted with interest the reproduction of the portrait of Benjamin West in the article by Simon Schama, "Wolfe Must Not Die Like a Common Soldier"  [ May 12 ] .
I believe this painting, which is in the collection of the National Gallery of Art in Washington, is no longer attributed to West.
Rather, West's "Self-Portrait," of which the above is now considered a studio copy, is in the collection of the Baltimore Museum of Art.
SONA JOHNSTON Baltimore
The writer is a curator of paintings and sculpture at the Baltimore Museum of Art.
Nicolai Cikovsky Jr., curator of American and British paintings at the National Gallery, replies: This portrait of Benjamin West, given to the National Gallery by Andrew Mellon, has traditionally been accepted as being by West himself.
Scholarly research on all the works of art in the gallery's collection is a continuing process, however.


Pope Visits a Non-Communist Poland
With a solemn kiss of the tarmac at a military airport here, Pope John Paul II returned to his native Poland today for the first time since the fall of Communist government he had challenged for a decade.
The Pope's first trip here in 1979 encouraged the formation the following year of the Solidarity movement, which now governs the country.
Today, he began an eight-day trip that, with three visits to the Polish-Soviet border, seems intended to advance the church's hopes of extending its influence eastward.


The Region; Uprising Challenges 'Maxi-Maxi' Prison Idea
TO New York State prison authorities, it seemed a flawless concept that had succeeded elsewhere in the country.
They would quarantine their toughest inmates in a super-secure penitentiary and lock them in solitary confinement 23 hours a day until they learned how to behave.
But the plan backfired last week when prisoners at the remodeled Southport Correctional Facility in western New York rebelled, holding three guards hostage for 26 hours.
The hostages were released unharmed after prison officials said they would review procedures without promising substantial changes for Southport's 600 inmates.


VIDEO
Here is a sampling, compiled by Peter M. Nichols, of movies that are scheduled to be released on videocassette this summer.
Exact dates and accurate price information are not available at this time.
These tentative dates are subject to change.
JUNE


Beaches; The Sand. The Surf. The Junk Food.
ALL New Yorkers want a private beach.
They want to flip-flop down a lonely path, unfold their chairs or spread their towels on an empty patch of sand, and bask in the security of isolation.
Certainly a public beach is a more perilous prospect.
One risks being boinged by a stray paddle ball or sprinkled with sand as some carefree teen-ager races past.
One risks empty Coke cans in the sand, and having one's physical imperfections exposed to strangers.
One risks humanity, perhaps throngs of it, all united in the same democratic pursuit of sun, open air, the smell of salt water, the song of crashing surf.
Yet public beaches offer pleasures that no private beach can rival.
There is junk food, sumptuous arrays of it, from french fries to pretzels to lemony Italian ices to Good Humor ice cream; the feel of a Popsicle stick against the tongue captures the essence of summer.
There are boardwalks, those casual roadways of beach traffic that never stray off a parallel line with the water's edge.
There are brawny dudes and voluptuous babes, all wearing bathing suits more outrageous and colorful than you'd ever dare.
Public beaches offer an unusual and intriguing sense of community: impervious to class, race or income, they encourage you to drown your identity in an ocean of bodies, coconut oil, laughter and warmth.
From Astroland amusement park at Coney Island to the terrace at Orchard Beach, New York City's public beaches present a rare opportunity for adventure.
Early architecture and old-fashioned signs allow a glimpse into the past, while the weathered snack shacks and sturdy, well-kept boardwalks bring it smoothly into the present.
These beaches are more than just sand and surf; they're culture, experience, a history of a city at play.
Brighton Beach
2.5 miles, on the Atlantic Ocean, from Brighton 15th Street to West 37th Street, Brooklyn, (718) 946-1350.
ATMOSPHERE: Brighton Beach is from another place, another time.
It has a ghostly, romantic quality that comes as much from the old apartment buildings and slightly run-down seaside concession stands as from the aging Soviet emigres who wander the boardwalk, murmuring in their native tongue.
The ocean view stretches all the way to the horizon, suggesting distant lands.
PEOPLE: Predominantly Soviet immigrants, many of them over age 50.
Men with white chest hair and straw fedoras; women wearing kerchiefs on their heads and embroidered sweaters.
To shade themselves from the sun, the men wear white noseguards; the women simply hold their purses or newspapers above their heads.
SAND: Hazardous -- broken glass, jagged pieces of shells, bottle tops.
But then, the beach itself isn't really the point here.
SURF: Swimming isn't the point, either.
BOARDWALK: The center of activity.
People gossip and philosophize, walking with unhurried steps or perched on benches like pigeons on a wire.
Riegelmann Boardwalk continues all the way to Coney Island (a 10-to-15-minute walk), and the barren frame of the Parachute Jump is clearly visible in the distance.
A plank mural between the two beaches asks rhetorical questions like "Will listening to the ocean add years to your life?" and "Did it rain yesterday?"
MUSIC: Ethnic folk songs with people dancing and clapping along; gentlemen serenading their lady friends with 1940's pop ballads played on tinny portable radios.
FOOD: Signs with old-fashioned lettering announce "Hirsch's Knishes," "Filipp's Cafe," "Gastronom Moscow." Faded Pepsi logos, plastic chairs and tables with umbrellas.
The Boardwalk Cafe doubles as a grocery store, with petrified-looking seafood in glass cases and canned goods with labels in Russian.
ARCADE: None; too modern a concept.
DIVERSIONS: Playground and tennis courts nearby.
One mysterious building is labeled "B A DW LK MENS LUB," with a crooked "For Members Only" sign hanging in the dark entrance.
NEIGHBORHOOD: Bustling street with discount stores and coffee shops in the shadow of elevated subway tracks.
CLAIM TO FAME: Neil Simon's "Brighton Beach Memoirs." Orchard Beach
1.1 miles, on Long Island Sound in Pelham Bay Park, the Bronx, (212) 885-2275.
ATMOSPHERE: Seriously beachy.
Orchard Beach is New York City's last resort; at the turn of the century, it was a popular bathing spot for the affluent residents of Pelham Manor.
A large, luxurious stand of trees skirts the beach, giving the place a feeling of anti-urban festivity.
From a patio vantage point between the two halves of the old bathhouse, one can gaze over the entire expanse of sand and see people, umbrellas and bathers dotting the shore, as idyllic as on a picture postcard.
PEOPLE: A vibrant, ethnically mixed crowd -- children with their hair tied back with uninflated balloons, raucous teen-agers in bikinis and knee-length trunks, young families on outings.
SAND: Relatively clean and deep.
SURF: Pretty lame.
Orchard Beach fronts on Long Island Sound, so there are virtually no waves.
At low tide the water dissolves into muddy pebbly puddles.
BOARDWALK: Broad concrete walkway partly shaded by trees and perfect for ogling; brawny, sly-faced men sit on the backs of benches and grin at passers-by.
MUSIC: Salsa, urban dance hits, Madonna booming out of complex, multiple-component radios.
FOOD: The shopping-mall approach to dining.
Two open-air food courts with a melting pot of ethnic selections -- Spanish, Greek and Italian cafes, Texas barbecue, raw bar and chowder, even a "Coney Island" vendor with hot dogs and fries.
Booths inside, tables with red-and-yellow-striped umbrellas outside.
ARCADE: Yes.
DIVERSIONS: Basketball and handball courts, volleyball nets, playground; the Kazimiroff Nature Trail, a hike winding through 189 acres; a swamp-grassy area between trees with a sign that boasts "Natural Meadow."
NEIGHBORHOOD: None.
No buildings, houses or sidewalks.
Orchard Beach is approachable only by lush, green, tree-lined lanes that serve to separate it physically and psychically from the grim heat wave and hustle one is leaving behind.
CLAIM TO FAME: The sand came from New Jersey in the 1930's, on barges. Rockaway Beach
7.5 miles, on the Atlantic Ocean from Beach First Street, Far Rockaway, to Beach 149th Street, Neponsit, Queens (718) 318-4000.
ATMOSPHERE: Unlike the other public beaches, Rockaway has no distinctive New York flavor; its plain plank boardwalk, pale arc of sand and high-rise condos are welcoming enough, but they could just as easily belong to Long Island, Virginia or any other point on the East Coast.
That's not to say it's without character.
The beautiful old buildings, nearby hotels and ornate subway station have a kind of windswept, sunburned grandeur, and the fact that it's accessible only by bridge gives it the aura of adventure and isolation.
PEOPLE: Suburban teen-agers, office workers in their 20's, bored-looking mothers, dogs with names like Champ.
SAND: Soft and dross-free close to the boardwalk.
Below tide level, strewn with shells, pull tabs, some glass, the occasional broken toy.
SURF: Glorious.
BOARDWALK: Called Ocean Promenade.
Nondescript.
A few old-timers are scattered on benches.
MUSIC: INXS, Whitney Houston, other pop and rock hitmakers.
FOOD: The Sand Bar, an open-air, garagelike space with a fast-food counter on one side, a square bar serving draft beer in 32-ounce cups on the other.
ARCADE: Situated in a row of buildings just off the boardwalk, but boarded up, apparently for ages.
"It never opens," a woman at the food counter said sadly.
DIVERSIONS: Playground at the opposite end of the boardwalk from the main entrance.
NEIGHBORHOOD: The center of town is a cute small-business district, but the area closer to the beach has the gaunt, washed-out look of a summer community long past its prime.
Cracked and peeling sign boards, rubble-filled lots; ghost buildings like Danny's Cocktail Lounge, with its shadowy interior musty and decayed from disuse, and the Hotel Lawrence, a once-gorgeous structure whose upstairs porch has fallen into seedy disrepair.
CLAIM TO FAME: "Rockaway Beach," by the Ramones. Manhattan Beach
0.3 mile, on the Atlantic Ocean, Oriental Boulevard, from Ocean Avenue to Mackenzie Street, Brooklyn, (718) 946-1373.
ATMOSPHERE: A beach in the most generic sense of the word.
Sand, jetties, picnic areas, ocean.
PEOPLE: Homeboys, teen-age girls with big hair, screaming children.
SAND: Well tended up to the tide line, where there are unnervingly large piles of debris -- twigs, driftwood, even a section of a picket fence.
SURF: Calm.
BOARDWALK: None -- just a cement sidewalk that curves around the short strip of sand.
MUSIC: Funk, rock.
FOOD: The sign on the building just reads "Food Concession" in big block letters.
ARCADE: None.
DIVERSIONS: Basketball courts.
OTHER BUILDINGS: The bathhouse is a rectangular tan-brick structure that looks like an Army barracks, except for the maple-leaf logo of the Parks and Recreation Department on the front.
NEIGHBORHOOD: Nice middle-class houses on a two-lane road.
CLAIM TO FAME: President Ulysses S. Grant dedicated the Manhattan Beach Hotel in 1877; it was demolished in World War I. Coney Island
2.5 miles, on the Atlantic Ocean, from West 37th Street to Corbin Place, Brooklyn, (718) 946-1350.
ATMOSPHERE: A seemingly endless stretch of sand, a Boardwalk offering every possible greasy food, water-squirt games, a roller coaster that defines the term death-defying, a Ferris wheel you can see from miles away at night, carnival music, the world's best hot dog, cheap beer, buildings saddened by decay, a century's worth of memories -- Coney Island has everything a beach could ever dream of.
And more: Coney Island has presence, life, a tingling timelessness in its air that penetrates your skin faster and more deeply than a ray of sun.
Its wondrous and strange history is horribly apparent in the crumbling walls of its old bathhouses, in its chipped tiles and peeling paint, in the blackened corpse of the Thunderbolt roller coaster.
Yet even though it's lost much of its grandeur, it seems, today, somehow richer for it.
Coney Island has seen more than any human being ever will.
It has soul.
PEOPLE: Black, white, Puerto Rican, Asian, Indian, yuppie, drifter, tourist, hipster, lonely heart, crazy drunk, anyone and everyone.
SAND: Take off your shoes and feel it under your feet.
SURF: Venerable.
BOARDWALK: Epochal.
Souvenirs like pinwheels and inflatable toys, spillover from Ruby's bar and restaurant; a view of the teeming amusement park to one side, the ocean and infinite horizon to the other.
MUSIC: Rap from the Break Dance ride, organ from the carousel, soft rock from Ruby's, and disco from boom boxes all mingle with the shrieks and thunder of the Cyclone.
FOOD: Coney Island is proud of its junk food.
Gregory &amp; Paul's, the snack joint on the Boardwalk with the Astroland rocket on top, has signs that brag of "hygrade frankfurters, hamburgers, french fries, hot corn, Italian sausage, seafood, frog legs, fried shrimp, cold beer, drinks, popcorn, cotton candy, ice cream, hot knishes, hot pizza, coffee cake, Italian ices, fried chicken."
ARCADE: Faber's Fascination Sportland, Astroland Arcade, among other thrills.
NEIGHBORHOOD: Tawdry, desperate.
On Neptune Avenue, east of Astroland, a vacant lot is set off from the road by a chain-link fence.
A small, innocuous Parks and Recreation sign bears the inscription Steeplechase Park, on the site of the park that closed in 1964.
ADDED ATTRACTIONS: Sideshows by the Seashore, a museum, theater and sometime live-music venue.
Recently renovated, it houses photos of freaks, memorabilia and other tributes to Coney's past lives.
CLAIM TO FAME: The most renowned and infamous beach in the world, perhaps of all history; a place where one is free, briefly, to melt time.
NO SAND, NO SALTY TANG, BUT WATER, REFRESHING WATER
All outdoor pools listed are open 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. daily, with free admission, unless otherwise noted.
Under Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposed city budget, the pools would be open from July 4 through Aug. 18.
They would remain open longer only if the city receives private donations to cover the costs of staff and maintenance.
Brooklyn
BETSY HEAD, Hopkinson and Dumont Avenues, Brownsville, (718) 965-6581.
BUSHWICK, Flushing Avenue and Humboldt Street, Bushwick, (718) 965-6597.
COMMODORE BARRY, Flushing Avenue and North Eliot Place, Fort Greene, (718) 965-6592.
DOUGLASS-DeGRAW, Third Avenue and Nevins Street, Gowanus, (718) 625-3268.
HOWARD, Glenmore and East New York Avenues, Brownsville, (718) 965-6595.
KOSCIUSZKO, Marcy and DeKalb Avenues, Bedford-Stuyvesant, (718) 965-6585.
RED HOOK, Bay and Henry Streets, Red Hook, (718) 965-6579.
SUNSET, Seventh Avenue and 43d Street, Sunset Park, (718) 965-6578.
The Bronx
CLAREMONT, East 170th Street and Clay Avenue, Morrisania, (212) 822-4217.
CROTONA, East 173d Street and Fulton Avenue, Crotona, (212) 822-4440.
HAFFEN, Ely and Burke Avenues, Baychester, (212) 822-4176.
MAPES, East 180th Street and Prospect Avenue, East Tremont, (212) 822-4249.
MULLALY, East 165th Street and River Avenue, High Bridge, (212) 822-4343.
VAN CORTLANDT, West 244th Street, east of Broadway, Mosholu, (212) 822-4222.
Manhattan
ASSER LEVY, East 23d Street and Avenue A, (212) 447-2020.
CARMINE STREET, Clarkson Street and Seventh Avenue South, (212) 397-3107.
DRY DOCK, East 10th Street between Avenues C and D, (212) 397-3110.
HIGHBRIDGE, Amsterdam Avenue and West 173d Street, (212) 397-3173.
JACKIE ROBINSON, Bradhurst Avenue and West 146th Street, (212) 397-3146.
JOHN JAY, east of York Avenue at Cherokee Place and 77th Street, (212) 397-3177.
LASKER, Central Park, at 106th Street, south of Lenox Avenue, (212) 397-3106.
MARCUS GARVEY, 124th Street and Fifth Avenue, (212) 397-3124.
ROBERT F. WAGNER, East 124th Street, between First and Second Avenues, (212) 397-3125.
SHELTERING ARMS, Amsterdam Avenue and West 129th Street, (212) 397-3126.
WEST 59TH STREET, 533 West 59th Street, (212) 397-3159.
Queens
ASTORIA, 19th Street and 23d Drive, Astoria, (718) 626-8620.
Hours: Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, 1 to 7 P.M.
Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays and Sundays, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
FISHER, 99th Street and 32d Avenue, Corona, (718) 520-5375.
LIBERTY, 173d Street and 106th Avenue, South Jamaica, (718) 520-5354.
Staten Island
FABER, Faber Street and Richmond Terrace, Port Richmond, (718) 816-5259.
JOLINE, Hylan Boulevard and Joline Avenue, Tottenville Beach, (718) 356-8242.
LYONS, Pier 6 and Victory Boulevard, Tompkinsville, (718) 816-9571.
WEST BRIGHTON, Henderson Avenue between Broadway and Chappel Street, West Brighton, (718) 816-5507.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
The Shifting Play of Emotion
We yearn, Alan W. Watts wrote, for an unchanging sublimity, yet no such state is possible, for our happiness in reality depends on contrast and on change.
His argument is in "Nature, Man and Woman" (Vintage, paper).


Managing; Breaking Chaos Into Constituent Parts
When they closed the Friday before Memorial Day, they were Goldome bank branches scattered through New York State.
When they reopened last Tuesday, all traces of Goldome had been wiped away.
From the signs on the door to the deposit slips on the table, they belonged to the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company.
To the untrained eye, it seemed the work of benign gnomes.
In fact, it was the culmination of a 10-month project that, at its height, occupied as many as 250 people.
"They were all pushing toward one goal: getting the branches open Tuesday without a hitch," said Leonard E. Malkin, the Manufacturers Hanover managing director who orchestrated the project.


Sarah Tabler Wed To C. J. Lindblad
Sarah Alice Lee Tabler, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerry L. Tabler of Cedarville, N.J., was married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass., to Christopher John Lindblad, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Lindblad of Portland, Ore.
The bride's father, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Chapel.
Mrs.
Lindblad, 26 years old, is a graduate of M.I.T. and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is starting her own company, Net Work Capital Inc. of Boston, which will provide consulting services for computer security.
Her mother, Sally Tabler, is an artist specializing in landscapes who exhibits at the Abstein Gallery in Atlanta.


No-Win Situation
To the Editor:
Bravo!
I welcomed Francis O'Connor's article about the Naifeh-Smith book.
It's about time someone made a public cry about this nonsense that artists' works are only reflections of their psychoanalytical makeup, childhood impressions and other drivel.


In the Record Business, East Is Often West, Too
The rapid decentralization of businesses in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe has inevitably spilled over into the record industry.
Monolithic enterprises like Melodiya in the Soviet Union and Hungaroton in Hungary no longer have the field to themselves.
Deals are now being made directly with foreign entrepreneurs to record new material, license old recordings and distribute recordings around the world.
One of the first American enterprises into the Soviet Union was MCA, which helped market a new Soviet label called Art and Electronics.
That label is now jointly owned by several Soviet organizations and Mobile Fidelity, an American company that recently took over management of MCA's classical activities.


The Executive Computer; A Sleek and Powerful Portable From A.T.&amp; T.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, which has not earned much distinction in the personal computer market, recently introduced one of the most technically innovative portable computers.
Designed especially for executives, the A.T.&amp; T. Safari NSX/20 is a 6.5-pound laptop with a sleek, stylish design and powerful communications and networking features.
It is also the first portable to make the Microsoft Corporation's Windows its standard operating system.
A.T.&amp; T. has set up the system so the user is deposited gently into the Windows environment whenever the machine is turned on, and the opening screen has a simple menu that makes the Safari useful from the minute it comes to life.
There is even a tutorial for those making the transition to a graphical operating system.


Vietnam
To the Editor: I just returned from a trip to Vietnam.
I spent large amounts of time on the streets and in the markets talking to ordinary people while unaccompanied by a guide.
I never had "little hands digging around" my person, as Steven Erlanger said (Travel, April 28).
There are many Americans with less adventurous stomachs than Mr.
Erlanger who would be delighted to stay at the "modern but soulless" Saigon Floating Hotel (actually controlled by the Pritzkers of Hyatt fame, not the Australian operators).
This hotel has safe Western food and amenities, including a disco that is a great deal busier than the Superstar near the airport.
Everything is new (including the air-conditioning and pool).


Postings: 30-Story Tower; Filling In A Big Hole On 5th Ave.
For more than two years there has been a gaping hole at the northeast corner of Fifth Avenue and 46th Street.
Now a huge, noisy backhoe is tearing into the earth in preparation for putting up a 30-story office tower there.
While no leases have been signed, 5th Midtown Company, the development group whose principals include Axel Stawski, is moving forward with construction of the 324,000-square-foot building.


Mitchel Field
To the Editor:
With regard to the article on a proposed project for the elderly on Mitchel Field on your Long Island page on May 19  [ "Affordable Co-ops for Nassau's Elderly" ] , I must question why every last piece of available land "must be developed." East Meadow is rapidly becoming more and more dense with continuous commercial and residential building.
Why can't this one open parcel be left just that way?
While I agree there is a need for affordable housing, perhaps a second look should be given to locating it in areas that are not as dumped upon as the East Meadow area.
This small town is rapidly beginning to look like Manhattan with office towers and overpopulation.


The Philharmonic Crosses a Bridge With History in Hand
If there was any question about being carried away by the New York Philharmonic, orchestra members quashed it on Tuesday.
They took a promenade in the morning heat to transport bits of history: bound volumes of Philharmonic programs, dating to the orchestra's inception in 1842.
Joining board members and others with past and present ties to the Philharmonic, the musicians, led by Zubin Mehta on his last day as music director, walked from Avery Fisher Hall across the bridge to Lincoln Center's new Samuel B. and David Rose Building, where they deposited the books on shelves and lifted glasses of champagne.


Coming Home


WINDSOR KNOT
Prince Charles may well grow carrots, tomatoes and even the less "common" (in England) zucchini in his walled, lamp-lighted garden, but don't you think the Welsh leek and a couple of spuds might be more fitting to adorn his crown?
DIANA M. ORENSTEIN
Palisades, N.Y.


Quotas: Despised by Many, but Just What Are They?
Far more than any other issue, quotas -- the "Q word," as President Bush called it the other day -- has dominated the debate about the civil rights bill.
But the sloganeering, campaign advertisements and fervent speeches on whether the legislation will force companies to adopt quotas point out that there is little consensus on the legality of quotas or, indeed, just what they are.
The confusion surrounding job quotas has been compounded by the dearth of clear definitions of the practice in Federal law and by the unwillingness, until recently, of either supporters or opponents of the civil rights bill to say just what they believe quotas to be.


The Region; New York's City Workers: Freeloaders or Scapegoats?
WHEN Mayor David N. Dinkins outlined his worse-case solution to the city's $3.5 billion budget deficit, he said he was looking to three sources to help ease the crisis: the state, the Municipal Assistance Corporation and the city's labor unions.
With the state's budget more or less in hand and the assistance corporation back on the sidelines, rebuffed by rating agencies when it tried to help, the focus is on the unions.
But many people inside and out of the government worry that the unions feel such a deep sense of entitlement that they will be unwilling to contribute in the way that the Mayor clearly hopes.


Travel Advisory; Lighthouse Beds at $8 a Night
The youth hostel at Tibbetts Point Lighthouse on Lake Ontario in St.
Vincent, N.Y., has been expanded from 9 to 26 beds.
Hostelers stay in the former keeper's quarters of this historic -- and still functioning -- 67-foot lighthouse, which has been guiding ships between the St.
Lawrence River and Lake Ontario since 1827.
The hostel is a short ferry ride from Kingston, Ontario.
It operates between May 15 and Sept. 15, offering dormitory-style lodging for $8 a person a night for members of the American Youth Hostels ($11 for nonmembers).
Linen rental is $2.
A kitchen is available for use by guests.
American Youth Hostels says the hostel is suitable for groups, including those needing meeting space, as well as for individual travelers.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Joe Morgan, manager, to a one-year contract extension through the 1992 season.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Camille Paglia's comment that "Elvis Presley . . . broke down racial barriers in the music industry" cannot go unchallenged.
Presley was one of a long line (albeit the most successful) of white musicians who copied the Afro-American cultural heritage and made a fortune off the backs of black musicians.
To say that because of his cultural thievery "my generation was flooded by the power, passion and emotional truth of African-American experience" is like saying that the white person who steals chickens from a black-owned henhouse is doing his victim a favor by advertising the quality of the birds.
ALAN STONE  Portland, Ore.


Headliners; Grand Finale
For weeks the New York Philharmonic has been saying goodbye to Zubin Mehta.
In May, the orchestra's board presented the departing music director with a page from the original score of Mahler's Ninth Symphony, which was composed while Mahler directed the Philharmonic.
Mr.
Mehta was also given a replica of the baton used at the first concert of the symphony in 1842, and a silver tray on which was inscribed a tribute to his "immeasurable charm." And there were the farewell dinners at the Metropolitan Museum and Le Cirque.
But last Tuesday night was really it.
During an intermission tribute at Avery Fisher Hall, Mayor David N. Dinkins mourned the city's "great loss." A telegram was read from President Bush.
But Mr.
Mehta seemed impatient to get on with the show.
"I cannot tell you what this means to me," he said after the cermonies.
"Now I really want to continue this concert." He ended the evening and his 13th and final season with Schoenberg's cantata "Gurrelieder."


Acura Creates a Couple of New Legends
It seems hard to believe, but Acura has been around for five years now, and the Honda division that started Japan's major push into megabuck luxury cars has put more than half a million Legends and Integras on the road.
For the last four of those five years, the division has led the widely touted J. D. Power survey of customer satisfaction with its products and dealer service, and it is easy to see why.
The cars have been well thought out, well marketed and superbly executed.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Foreclosure Stalls East Lyme Project
THE Bride Brook Nursing &amp; Rehabilitation Center, under construction on two acres at Rocky Neck Corporate Park in East Lyme, is the only sign of life on the stalled 38-acre development.
Abandoned construction trailers with outdated building permits in the windows, and weeds bending to the wind, dot the landscape.
But the $5 million, 62,000-square-foot health facility continues to rise at a brisk pace, headed for a fall opening.


Paying for 'Eternal Vigilance'
To the Editor:
I would like to add a comment to Prof.
Seymour Melman's article ("When the Pentagon Walks Away," Forum, April 21, ) suggesting a conversion process rather than a total shutdown of outmoded military bases.


Sir Angus Wilson, Who Satirized British Middle Class, Dies at 77
Sir Angus Wilson, who once said he never intended to become a writer and yet ultimately did so to great popular and critical acclaim, died Friday in Bury St.
Edmunds in southeast England.
He was 77 years old and died after suffering a stroke in a nursing home where he had lived for several years, according to Malcolm Bradbury, a friend and colleague.


Variations on a Couple
THEO AND MATILDA
By Rachel Billington. 346 pp. New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $21.95.


Horsing Around


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Camille Paglia, in "Sexual Personae," asserted that women are deficient in "genius." Unfortunately, in your pages, as in that book, she has gone a long way toward proving her point by her own example.
It is especially unfortunate that Ms.
Paglia calls Michel Foucault a "ninny." For it was Foucault, more than anyone else, who taught us to see "discourse" as a social phenomenon, in which the right to speak and be heard in a certain way is controlled by institutions.
Ms.
Paglia praises breadth and depth of learning, especially her own.
For breadth and depth of learning, and for the sheer libidinal energy of his thought and writing, Foucault is well beyond Ms.
Paglia's range and will safely remain so.
ROBERT SCHOLES  Barrington, R.I.


Foreign Affairs; Idea Gunslingers . . .
Bush Administration bureaucrats are not enthusiastic about grand plans for big Western bucks to aid Soviet reforms.
They say they need more details.
There's a surprise.
The bureaucrats -- diplomats, political appointees or civil servants -- are pessimistic about the Soviet capacity to reform.
Aren't we all?


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SEA MUSIC FESTIVAL
Mystic Seaport's annual Sea Music Festival runs from Thursday through next Sunday, featuring more than 40 performers from around the world.
The festival is also the opening event in a summerlong celebration of the 150th anniversary of the original launching of the Charles W. Morgan, a wooden whaling vessel now berthed at the seaport.
Gordon Bok, a sea-music performer, will appear at 7:30 P.M. on Thursday, along with Forebitter, the Seaport's chanteymen.
Tickets are $10.
A concert at 8 P.M. on Friday will feature Louis Killen, specialist on the English concertina; Wickford Express; Cliff Haslam, and Stan Hugill, a Welshman who was a sailor during the 1920's and 30's.
Admission is $9.


Hierarchical Management Is Still Around
To the Editor:
In "Grace Pastiak's 'Web of Influence' " (May 5), you suggest that hierarchical management styles are in decline, perhaps because more women are replacing authoritarian males as executives, or because Japanese-style "participative management" has influenced us.
There are reasons to suggest the opposite:


Miniatures in Black and White
CRIMES OF CONSCIENCE
By Nadine Gordimer. 121 pp. Portsmouth, N.H.: Heinemann. Paper, $8.95.


Dr. Effron Weds Dr. Mark Gurland
Dr.
Frances Renee Effron, a senior resident in psychiatry at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, and Dr.
Mark Alan Gurland, a hand surgeon in Bergen County, were married last evening at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Rabbi Ronald Mass officiated.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Adelphi University and received an M.D. degree from the Downstate Medical Center.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert A. Effron of Manhasset Hills, L.I.
Her father is a special-education guidance counselor, and her mother, Lily Effron, is a special-education teacher, both in the New York City school system.


Miss Ingram Wed to Eric Schaefer
Suzanne Allison Ingram, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
W.
H.
Ingram of Dallas, was married there yesterday to Eric Albert Schaefer, the son of the late Mrs.
Samuel H. McIver and the late Dr.
J.
Albert Schaefer. the Rev.
John Drake performed the Episcopal ceremony at st.
Michael's and All Angels Churh.
Mrs.
Schaefer, 27 years old, is an associate program manager in Norwalk, Conn., with MBI Inc., a retailer of consumer products.
She graduated from Yale University and recevied an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is a physician in Dallas.


Postings: Newtown Bee; Printing Plant That Fits In
Not many modern industrial plants are clad in cedar shingles.
But then again, there are not many enterprises like the Bee Publishing Company of Newtown, Conn..
It is the family-run business responsible for The Newtown Bee, a weekly newspaper, as well as Antiques and the Arts Weekly, the Weekly Star and Town Times.
The 114-year-old Bee has been in the hands of the Smith family -- R. Scudder Smith is the current editor and publisher -- since the 1880's.
Bee Publishing's new quarters are to be in a 28,000-square-foot building on Main Street and Route 302.
"Our main focus is to get more press room," Mr.
Smith said.
About a third of the building will be occupied by the presses.
The curving structure, designed by Roger P. Ferris of Southport, Conn., has a fieldstone base and shingle walls and roof.


Mixed-Race Legislators Joining With de Klerk
For the National Party of South Africa's President, F. W. de Klerk, its decision last year to open its ranks to all races is reaping an almost embarrassing political dividend.
In the last week and a half, 32 of the 85 members of the House of Representatives, a Parliament chamber designated for South Africans of mixed race, have left their old parties and joined the Nationalists, now that the governing party has set out to dismantle the apartheid system.
In South Africa, there is a white chamber of Parliament and two smaller chambers, one for mixed-race legislators and another for ethnic Indians.
Blacks, the majority in this country, have no representatives there.
The change-over by the mixed-race legislators to the National Party, which devised apartheid, bolsters the nonracial image Mr. de Klerk is cultivating.
The National Party has promised the 33 new members equal participation with its 103 whites.
"I have no doubt that these historical events are merely the beginning of a process," Mr. de Klerk said last week.
"In fact, more admissions to membership of the National Party may be expected in the coming weeks."
But that has antagonized the Rev.
Allan Hendrickse, leader of the mixed-race Labor Party, which has long dominated the House of Representatives.
He said he felt "betrayed and double-crossed" by the National Party, which he accused of raiding his ranks.
Some Leverage Remains
Before Parliament adjourns in three weeks, Mr.
Hendrickse could retaliate by challenging Mr. de Klerk's promised repeal of the last major apartheid laws on the ground that the changes do not go far enough.
So many Labor Party politicians have crossed over that the National Party has found itself the official opposition in the House of Representatives and may end up controlling the chamber within days, as it has done for 41 years in the white House of Assembly.
Some legislators in the House of Delegates, the Indian chamber, are now curious about joining the National Party, too.
Such alliances were unforeseen when the current Constitution was adopted eight years ago.
To the existing white chamber of Parliament, it added the two smaller chambers.
This change was structured so that the mixed-race and Indian lawmakers would be outnumbered by whites, though the new chambers were given veto rights over legislation in some circumstances.
Mr. de Klerk says the black majority will be enfranchised in a new constitution awaiting negotiation.
"For students of the constitutionally bizarre, it's a collector's item," David Welsh, a political scientist at the University of Cape Town, said of the nation's legislative system.
Scant Voter Enthusiasm
Most South Africans of mixed race and Indian descent dismiss their chambers as devices for perpetuating apartheid.
Barely one in five eligible nonwhite voters bothered to cast ballots in the last elections in September 1989.
Not one of the mixed-race legislators who crossed over to the National Party has expressed misgivings about its history as the architect of legalized racial discrimination.
"We must try to forget the past of the National Party," said Patrick McKenzie, a Labor Party legislator who, after denouncing earlier defectors, became the latest to join Mr. de Klerk's ranks.
"If people do not forget and forgive the past, we will never be able to build a new South Africa," Mr.
McKenzie said.
For President de Klerk, whose strategy increasingly appears one of seeking alliances across racial lines, the defections have opened a door to South Africans of mixed race, who number three million of nearly 38 million people.
"I have no doubt," the President said, "that the National Party will eventually become the political home of all moderate South Africans who wish to insure that the new South Africa will be a true democracy offering peace and prosperity to all its people and to every minority."


Miss Dyckman Weds Peter G. Benziger
Katharine Stuart Dyckman, a daughter of Mrs.
Francis Hamilton Dyckman Jr. of Skillman, N.J., and the late Mr.
Dyckman, was married in Lawrenceville, N.J., yesterday to Peter Gerard Benziger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Joseph Benziger of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Patrick Connor, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Leslie C. Smith, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in Edith Memorial Chapel at the Lawrenceville School.
Mrs.
Benziger, 29 years old, is a buyer in New York for Asprey, the London jeweler.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father was the alumni director for the Lawrenceville School.


WINDSOR KNOT
As an American, I have no great interest in the British royal succession.
As a feminist, however, I am outraged by speculation that Queen Elizabeth should abdicate to make way for the restless Prince Charles.
Can you imagine anyone suggesting that a male sovereign in perfectly good health retire at the age of 65?
Perhaps there is a fear that Charles might fall prey to the fate Edward VII did, while waiting for his mother, Queen Victoria, to die.
Surely, this says more about the character of British manhood than about the legitimate right of the Queen to live out her reign as any other sovereign would.
SUSAN KAUFMAN
Great Barrington, Mass.


Worthy Puts Friendship Aside for Run at Title
James Worthy and Michael Jordan have been close friends for years.
This week, they will hardly speak to each other.
Los Angeles Lakers assistant coach Randy Pfund grew up in Chicago and was a Bulls fan.
He won't be this week.


Mia Dyson Weds Kevin Gallagher
Mia Quinta Dyson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Freeman John Dyson of Princeton, N.J., was married in Topsham, Me., yesterday to Kevin Francis Gallagher, a son of Edward James Gallagher of New York and Elizabeth Anne Colodny of Weston, Conn.
The Rev.
Sarah Foulger officiated at the Mid-Coast Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Gallagher, 27 years old, is a nurse at Community Health and Nursing Services in Brunswick, Me., and is studying for a master's degree in divinity at the Bangor (Me.) Theological Seminary.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received a bachelor's degree in nursing from Columbia University.
Her father is an author and a professor of physics at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.


Travel Advisory; 16-Lane Approach To La Guardia Due by July 4
Drivers bound for La Guardia Airport in New York are about to get relief from one traffic headache: the three automobile lanes that barely inch past the upper departure level at the main building are to become six lanes by July 4.
The manager of the airport, George L. Peirce, said that on bad days, traffic has moved as slowly as six vehicles a minute in this drop-off area.
One limousine with a rear fender sticking out can cause everything to stop, as anyone who has tried to get to the curb knows.
Mr.
Peirce said that with six lanes and two covered sidewalks for drop-offs, the figure might become 20 vehicles a minute.


FASTBALLS FROM THE EDGE
WHEN ROGER CLEMENS TOES the mound, you can't take your eyes off him.
Standing erect, he exhales deeply as his empty right hand falls politely to his side.
Like a chubby-cheeked choirboy lifting an open hymnal, he raises the black Wilson mitt on his left hand to a resting place in front of his solemn game face.
After a gentle rock backward, he reaches into his glove, as if to remove a bookmark, grasps the ball and, with a grimace and a grunt, commences the same windup that he had rehearsed before a full-length mirror after every Little League game.
Clemens is a 6-foot-4-inch time machine, a throwback to an era when uniforms were baggy and throwing hard was everything, when the guy hurtling thunderbolts down from the mound was Cy Young or Walter Johnson or Bob Feller.
His high hard ones rip across the ages, punching holes in fancy hitting theories and computerized strategies.
In 1986, he struck out 20 batters in a single game, a major-league record.
Grab a bat and feel the heat.
Crowd the plate and he'll brush you back easy as spit.
If the opposing pitcher plunks one of his mates, Clemens'll nail the next batter he faces.
He even has a good old-fashioned monicker: the Rocket.


Lynx Makes Its Home In Syracuse Suburbs
A lynx that decided to get away from it all has made a home behind a church in the suburbs of Syracuse.
The sleek cat with long fur and tufted ears was part of an attempt to introduce the Canadian animals to the high peaks of the Adirondacks two years ago.
But it wandered far from home and has been sighted in Onondaga County for several weeks.


Pun-Filled Pizza Operation Branches Out
SINCE its 1989 opening, Sunrise Pizza Cafe in East Norwalk has expanded its successful pizza operation to two neighboring towns.
Judging by the steady flow of traffic we observed at both, success has bred success.
In appearance, the two are no clones of their Norwalk parent.
The brand-new Sunrise Pizza Cafe in New Canaan, down an attractive, flower-lined walkway (transformed from an alley), is in an area that is becoming a restaurant row.
Inside, diners can sit at one of three tables facing the pizza-making operation.
A relatively larger upstairs room is cozy and decidedly informal.


'Mosaic Approach' in a Display of Good Design
WHAT does a wooden rocking chair have in common with an immense bronze bell, a fish-shaped basket, a glass plate and a tapestry depicting icebergs?
Nothing.
Yet, despite this broad diversity of media, techniques and styles in the New Jersey Designer Craftsmen's exhibition, "Hands at Work," there are no clashes.
A serene harmony pervades the entrance lobby of the Schering-Plough Corporation headquarters, where the work is on display.


Business Diary/May 26-31
COMPANIES Akers Rattles a Few Cages at Buttoned-Down I.B.M.


Michele DeMusis, Intern, Is Married
Dr.
Michele Rose DeMusis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles C. DeMusis of New Haven, was married there yesterday to Dr.
John Timothy Campbell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles D. Campbell of Kensington, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert G. Heffernan performed the ceremony at St.
Francis of Assisi Roman Catholic Church.
Dr.
DeMusis, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an intern in internal medicine at the hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, where her husband is an intern in orthopedic surgery.
Both graduated from Penn's medical school.
The bride is a cum laude graduate of Yale University.
Her father, who is retired, headed DeMusis Brothers Inc., a heating and cooling business in New Haven.


Fireworks
Here is a sampling of fireworks scheduled this summer in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
June 23-29
SHEA STADIUM, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Corona, Queens.
The Mets will be on the road on July 4, so their Fourth of July fireworks will light up the sky on June 29 after a game with the Philadelphia Phillies.
Tickets to the game are $6.50 and $11.
Information: (718) 507-8499.
June 30 to July 6
SOUTH STREET SEAPORT, Piers 16 and 17 at the East River, Manhattan.
July 3 at 9:30 P.M.
The best view is along the waterfront south of the Brooklyn Bridge.
Some fireworks enthusiasts get a thrill from being aboard boats cruising the river.
The schooner Pioneer will board passengers at 9 P.M. and leave for a two-hour sail in lower Manhattan after the fireworks; admission is $30 a person.
Information: (212) 669-9416.
The Seaport Line, which departs from Pier 16 at the Seaport, also offers a fireworks cruise on July 3.
Boats leave at 7:30 and 8 P.M. and feature a live band and a bar.
Tickets $25 to $35.
Reservations: (212) 233-4800.
QUEENS SYMPHONY, Astoria Park, between 19th Street and Shore Boulevard, south of Ditmars Boulevard, Astoria, Queens.
A musical performance with fireworks, July 3 at 7:30 P.M.
Information: (718) 275-5000.
"A CHEER FOR AMERICA," East River from 23d to 42d Street, Manhattan.
Macy's annual Fourth of July fireworks display.
July 4 at 9:20 P.M.
The fireworks will be set off from barges in the East River.
In Manhattan, the best viewing will be along the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, which will be closed between Houston and 96th Streets from 7:30 to 10 P.M.
Pedestrians may walk onto the roadway at 23d, 34th, 38th and 41st Streets.
In Brooklyn and Queens, try for the area between the Queensboro and Williamsburg Bridges.
The show lasts a half-hour.
Information: (212) 560-4495.
July 14-20
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC CONCERTS WITH FIREWORKS, Great Lawn, Central Park.
July 15 at 8 P.M.
Samuel Wong, conductor; program includes excerpts from Prokofiev's "Romeo and Juliet" and Tchaikovsky's Symphony No. 5.
Same program at Juniper Valley Park, between Dry Harbor Road and Lutheran Avenue, north of Juniper Boulevard South, Middle Village, Queens, on July 18 at 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 875-5709.
July 21-27
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC CONCERTS WITH FIREWORKS, Van Cortlandt Park, the Bronx.
July 23 at 8 P.M.
Program includes Mozart's Symphony No. 38 and Mahler's Symphony No. 1.
Same program at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, on July 24 at 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 875-5709.
July 28 to Aug. 3
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC CONCERTS WITH FIREWORKS, Clove Lakes Park, Staten Island.
July 30 at 8 P.M.
Program includes Vivaldi's Concerto for Two Trumpets, Brahms's Symphony No. 3, Respighi's "Fountains of Rome" and three dances from Copland's "Rodeo." Information: (212) 875-5709.


Campus Life: Dartmouth; Policy Requires Undergraduates To Own Computers
Dartmouth has become the first Ivy League college and one of a handful in the nation to require all undergraduates to own a personal computer.
While almost 90 percent of Dartmouth's 4,200 undergraduates already have personal computers, making computers mandatory will mean Federal student aid can cover their purchase.


Red Sox Give Morgan a One-Year Extension
The Boston Red Sox yesterday gave Manager JOE MORGAN a one-year extension on his contract, taking the pact through the 1992 season.
Hired to succeed JOHN McNAMARA in July 1988, Morgan is the 37th manager in club history but is already 10th in career victories with a record of 243-205.
Morgan led the Red Sox to the playoffs in 1988 and last year.
When he took over in 1988, the Red Sox were tied for fourth place with a 43-42 record, nine games behind Detroit.
He led them to a 46-31 mark the rest of the way en route to the Eastern Division title. (AP)


Sounds of the Tropics
When the summer heat arrives, tropical music is in season.
The steamy syncopation zone that stretches from Memphis to Rio de Janiero and from Andalusa to Cape Town - with Brooklyn and Paris as honorary Caribbean and African outposts - generates music that sounds its best when the temperature rises.
As long as you're already sweating, you might as well dance.
For the last few years, New York's best place for musical hot fun in the summertime has been the Summerstage series at Rumsey Playfield behind the Band Shell in Central Park at 70th Street - free outdoor concerts by some of the world's most exuberant bands, drawing some of the city's most variegated crowds to a place where there's plenty of room to stand up and shimmy under the stars (or streetlights).
There's also a benefit concert ($15 in advance, $17 on the day of the show) by the New Orleans rhythm masters the Neville Brothers on June 26; information: Ticketmaster (212) 307-7171.
Dancers who prefer a little air conditioning can follow tropical syncopations indoors.
In downtown Manhattan, Sounds of Brazil, 204 Varick Street, (212) 243-4940, presents Brazilian, Caribbean, African and New York bands - everything from reggae to Zairean soukous to Haitian compas to rap -in intimate, sometimes cramped quarters for a crowd that mixes tourists and afficionados; better-known bands often play on weekdays rather than weekends.
Kilimanjaro, 531 West 19th Street, (212) 627-2333, presents Caribbean, African and New York bands on one floor, with different dance music upstairs, and has a bigger dance floor and a higher stage (for better visibility) than Sounds of Brazil, although its show times are less reliable.
No alcohol is served.
Club Broadway, 2551 Broadway, at 96th Street, (212) 864-7600, is a center for salsa - rumbas, mambos, guarachas, cha-chas and the rest of the Cuban- Puerto Rican-New York rhythmic constellation.
A primarily Latin crowd dresses in its spiffiest outfits - formal gowns for the women, suits or other finery for the men - to dance into the wee hours with double and triple bills of the top performers on the salsa circuit; mirrored walls double the glamour.
Studio 84, 3534 Broadway at 14th Street, (212) 926-2424, with its long tables and mirrored balls hanging from the ceiling, is the Dominican equivalent of Club Broadway, with the galloping rhythms of up to four different merengue bands through the night.
Neither club is cheap; along with admission prices that may be as high as $30 a person, groups are expected to buy a bottle of liquor at a considerable markup.
Sneakers and blue jeans are frowned upon by the doorkeepers.
But these are places in Manhattan where tropical rhythms find the dancers they were made for.


Accolades for 3 Of Varying Stripes
Senator Claiborne Pell was honored Thursday at the 33d annual ball of the United Nations Association at the Plaza Hotel.
The Rhode Island Democrat, who is chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, received the Congressional Award for commitment to the principles of the United Nations Charter.
The award recognizes contributions by members of Congress.
On Wednesday, Aileen Mehle, the society columnist known as Suzy, was honored by Marymount Manhattan College at a dinner-dance at the Metropolitan Club.
She received the President's Medal.
The evening raised money for the Aileen Mehle Scholarship Fund for Women in Journalism.


ON AND IN THE STREET
ON PARADE This Week SALUTE TO ISRAEL DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue, from 57th to 79th Street, Manhattan.
Sponsored by the American Zionist Youth Fund.
Today, noon.
BRONX WEEK UNITY PARADE, Grand Concourse, from Kingsbridge Road South to 153d Street.
Today, 12:30 P.M.
Next Week NEW YORK PUERTO RICAN DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue from 44th to 86th Street, Manhattan.
Next Sunday, 11 A.M.
VICTORY PARADE, to welcome home troops from the Persian Gulf war, Broadway from the Battery to Worth Street, Manhattan.
June 10, 11:30 A.M.
June 16-22 ANNUAL MERMAID PARADE, Coney Island Boardwalk at Steeplechase Park, Brooklyn.
June 22, 1 P.M.
June 25 KOREAN VETERANS PARADE, Broadway, between Wall and State Streets and Battery Park, Manhattan.
June 25, 11:30 A.M.
June 30 to July 6 GAY PRIDE AND HERITAGE PARADE, Columbus Circle to Fifth Avenue, south to Washington Square and west to Christopher Street, Manhattan.
June 30, 10:30 A.M.
INTERNATIONAL IMMIGRANTS' PARADE, Madison Avenuye, from 56th to 37th Streets, Manhattan, July 4, 1 P.M.
INDEPENDENCE DAY PARADE, 75th Street Adn Third Avenue to 101st Street and Fourth Avenue, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
July 4, 9:30 A.M.
FOURTH OF JULY PARADE, Victory Boulevard and Melvin Avenue to Glen Street and Cannon Avenue, Travis, S.I.
July 4, noon.
Aug. 11-17 DOMINICAN DAY PARADE, Madison Avenue, from 56th to 39th Street, Manhattan.
Aug. 11, 12:30 P.M.
ECUDORIAN INDEPENDENCE PARADE, 37th Avenue from 69th to 93d Street, Jackson Heights, Queens.
Aug. 11, noon.
Aug. 18-24 INDIA DAY PARADE, Lexington Avenue from 47th to 26th Street, Manhattan.
Aug. 18, noon.
Aug. 25-31 PAKISTAN DAY PARADE, Lexington Avenue from 47th to 26th Street, Manhattan.
Aug. 25, 1 P.M.
Sept. 1-7 LABOR DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue from 44th to 72d Street, Manhattan.
Sept. 2, 11 A.M.
WEST INDIAN DAY PARADE, Eastern Parkway from Utica to Washington Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
Sept. 2, 10 A.M.
In the Streets
This list of free street fairs is based on information from the Community Assistance Unit at City Hall, which keeps track of permits issued.
Dates and times are subject to change.
This Week EAST 12th STREET FAIR, from University Place to Broadway, Manhattan, today, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
PARK AVEUNE SOUTH SPRINGFEST, from 14th to 23d Street, Manhattan, today, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
CHELSEA--EIGHTH AVENUE STREET FAIR, Eighth Avenue, between 14th and 23d Streets, today, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
VILLAGE ART SHOW, Greenwich Village, Manhattan, University Place from 13th Street to Waverly Place, Washington Square East to Third Street, La Guardia Place to Houston Steet, and Fifth Avenue from 10th Street to Eighth Street, More than 300 artists will display their works.
Today from noon to sundown.
Next Sunday to June 15 IRVING PLACE STREET FAIR, Irving Place between 14th and 20th Streets, Manhattan.
Next Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
LOWER EAST SIDE JEWISH FESTIVAL, East Broadway between Montgomery and Rutgers Streets, Manhattan.
Next Sunday, 8 A.M. to 9 P.M.
WELCOME BACK TO BROOKLYN FAIR, Grand Army Plaza, Eastern Parkway between Washington and Flatbush Avenues, Brooklyn.
Next Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
BROADWAY MALL STREET FAIR, Broadway from 86th to 96th Street, Manhattan.
June 15, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
ATLANTIC ANTIQUE AND FOOD FAIR, Atlantic Avenue, from Fourth Avenue to Hicks Street, Cobbie Hill Brooklyn Heights, Brooklyn.
June 15, noon to 5 P.M.
June 16-22 PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE STREET FAIR, 45th Street between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of th eAmericas.
June 16, 8:30 A.M. to 8 P.M.
SECOND AVENUE STREET FAIR, Second Avenue from 68th to 96th Street, Manhattan.
June 16, 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.
June 30-July 6 AVENUE OF THE AMERICAS FESTIVAL, Avenue of the Americas from 35th to 50th Street, Manhattan.
June 30, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
CANARSIE STREET FAIR, Avenue L, between Rockaway Parkway and East 91st Street, Brooklyn.
June 30, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
GAY CHRISTOPHER STREET FESTIVAL, Christopher Street between Hudson and West Streets, Manhattan.
June 30, 11 A.M. to 10:30 P.M.
July 11 FEAST OF MT.
CARMEL, East 187th Street, between Cambreleng and Arthur Avenues, Belmont, the Bronx.
July 11 to July 15, 8 to 11 P.M.
July 18 OUR LADY OF POMPEII FEAST, Carmine and Bleecker Streets between Varick and Cornelia Streets and Avenue of the Americas, Greenwich Village, Manhattan.
July 18 to 27, 11 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
OUR LADY OF MT.
CARMEL FEAST, Pleasant Avenue and 115th Street, Manhattan.
July 18 to 28, 6 to 11 P.M.
July 21-27 SUMMERFEST THIRD AVENUE, Third Avenue from 42d to 57th Street, Manhattan.
July 21, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
SEVENTH AVENUE STREET FAIR, Seventh Avenue between Prospect Avenue and Ninth Streets, Windsor Terrace, Brooklyn.
July 27, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.
QUEENS IRISH STREET FAIR, Old Rockaway Beach Boulevard, Far Rockaway, Queens.
July 27 and 28, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Aug. 4-10 HARLEM WEEK BLOCK PARTY, 139th Street between Lenox and Fifth Avenues.
Aug. 9, noon to 11:30 P.M.
Aug. 7-10 FEAST OF ST.
ANTHONY, Villa Avenue and Van Cortland Avenue, between 204th and 205th Streets, Bedford Park, the Bronx.
Aug. 7 to 18, 3 to 11:30 P.M.
HARLEM WEEK PARTIES.
Block party, Aug. 9, noon to 11:30 P.M., 139th Street between Lenox and Fifth Avenues.
Fashion block party, Aug. 10, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M., 126th Street, between Lenox Avenue and Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard.
Aug. 11-17 HARLEM WEEK: Uptown Goes Downtown, City Hall Plaza, between Broadway and Park Place, lower Manhattan.
Aug. 13, 11 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Jazz Festival, 139th Street, between Fifth Avenue and Malcolm X Boulevard, Manhattan.
Aug. 16, 6 to 10 P.M.
Harlem Week Harmony Street Fair, East 109th Street, between Second and Third Avenues, Manhattan.
Aug. 17, noon to 6 P.M.
Uptown Saturday Night, 125th Street, between Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard and Lenox Avenue, Manhattan.
Aug. 17, 11 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
Aug. 18-24 HARLEM DAY, 135th Street, between Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard and Fifth Avenue, Manhattan.
Aug. 18, 8 A.M. to 10 P.M.
HARLEM WEEK INTERNATIONAL CARNIVAL, 125th Street, between Malcolm X Boulevard and Frederick Douglass Boulevard, Manhattan, Aug. 18, 8 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Aug. 25-31 GRAMERCY PARK--STUYVESANT STREET FAIR, Irving Place, between 14th and 20th Streets, Manhattan.
Aug. 25, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Pursuing Al Sikes's Grand Agenda
By any measure, Alfred C. Sikes has a bold blueprint, and he is in a hurry to put it in place.
As chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, he sees a world in which people could use satellites and high-speed fiber-optic communication lines to take college courses at home, have television sets double as multimedia computer work stations, use communication networks to transmit the contents of an entire library in seconds and track down a person anywhere on the globe to deliver the data.


Vote in a 'Melting Pot' of Los Angeles May Mirror the Future of California
The ethnic politics of the future are germinating here in a race for a State Assembly seat from a crowded immigrant neighborhood that some politicians call the new Ellis Island.
Fifteen candidates, some representing tiny immigrant constituencies, are maneuvering for votes in the 46th District in central Los Angeles, but as in the state at large, the heavily registered white voters are expected to determine the outcome.


The $500,000 Computer?
To the Editor:
In "Bush Takes On Third-World Pirates" (Forum, May 19), Arup Banerji suggests that the reason people are stealing software in poor countries is its relatively high cost compared to average incomes there.
He asks: "What would a middle-class American do if a simple word-processing program cost $50,000 . . . ?" Well, I wouldn't own a half-million-dollar computer, now would I?
SHAUN BREIDBART  New York, May 20


Margot D. Johnston Is Married to Gregory S. Arent
Margot Drake Johnston, a project manager in the health-care division of the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency in New York, and Gregory Stephen Arent, a computer technician at the GTE Corporation in Stamford, Conn., were married yesterday at Christ's Episcopal Church in Rye, N.Y.
K.
Stuart Wetmore, a retired Suffragan Bishop of New York, performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Nancy Hanna.
Mrs.
Arent, 23 years old, graduated from St.
Mark's School in Southborough, Mass., and Connecticut College.
She is a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Edward Johnston of Rye.
Her father is the rector of Christ's Church.
Her mother, Sally Johnston, is a legal assistant at the firm of Frank T. D'Onofrio in Hartsdale, N.Y.


Medical Waste Law Draws Criticism
A TWO-YEAR-OLD state law that strictly regulates the handling, disposal and tracking of the medical waste generated by thousands of hospitals, laboratories, doctors and others is being widely criticized.
State environmental officials say enforcement of the law has been hampered by insufficient funds and staff.
Hospitals say the law is in conflict with a Federal statute, adding to the morass of costly regulations that the hospitals are already required to comply with.


RESTAURANTS: ROOMS WITH A VIEW -- NEW YORK CITY
Barolo
398 West Broadway, between Spring and Broome Streets (212) 226-1102


Headliners; Singing the Blues
Many reasons have been given for I.B.M.'s disappointing financial performance.
Some have blamed the company for being too slow in adapting to a new world in which giant mainframes are being replaced by smaller desktop computers; others have said its bureaucracy is simply too top heavy.
John F. Akers, chairman and chief executive of International Business Machines, says he is tired of excuses.
Last month he dressed down a group of managers, complaining that there are too many sales people "popping out for coffee with their customer and calling it a call." Notes of the meeting were distributed through the company on an electronic message system and reported in the news last week.
"The tension level is not high enough in the business -- everyone is too damn comfortable at a time when the business is in crisis," he was quoted as saying.
Peter Thonis, an I.B.M. spokesman, said: "This is not the first time I've heard this message. This has been the tone in the company for the last six months or so."


Sports Briefings; Difficult Draw For U.S. Team
The United States will play Argentina, China and Italy in the first round of the world under-17 soccer championship, according to the draw conducted on Friday.
The United States team will play in Group A, which will be based in Montecatini, during the tournament.
The Americans will play Italy on Aug. 16 at Montecatini, Argentina on Aug. 20 at Viareggio and China on Aug. 22 at Viareggio.


Work Clothes 101: Suits Are Still Best
It's job interview season, when college graduates exchange caps and gowns for the ceremonial garb of the working world.
For serious job seekers, it's no time to squander what's left after tuition payments on a quirky choice.
Suits, for women and men, are still recommended for making a good first impression in most professional settings.
Women may choose other tailored looks, like coatdresses.
Brooks Brothers has set out to capture the job hunters, by updating its approach and merchandise and by conducting a pilot program to teach graduating students what to wear to interviews.


A Pair of Post-Modernists Look to Their Roots
Modern dance is so often associated with dissent that it is easy to forget that it can also be an art of affirmation.
Even when modern dancers are wildly innovative and idiosyncratic, they may still be upholding venerable choreographic principles.
Phoebe Neville and Meredith Monk eloquently acknowledged some of these roots this spring in Manhattan: Ms.
Neville in a solo evening last month at the Warren Street Performance Loft in TriBeCa, Ms.
Monk with "Facing North," her premiere at St.
Mark's Church in April.


Making a Difference; Mr. Munk Finds His Metier: Big-Time Gold Mining
After bouncing from stereo equipment to Egyptian resorts to oil in his business career, Peter Munk turned to gold in 1983.
Now, just eight years later, he is on the verge of creating what could soon be the world's second-largest producer.
Mr.
Munk, head of the American Barrick Resources Corporation, is trying to acquire the largest gold producer in North America, the Newmont Mining Corporation, it was disclosed last week.
A combination would enable American Barrick to continue the pattern of sharp growth it has maintained since Mr.
Munk established the Toronto-based company in 1983.


SUSPECT IN MURDER IS ON BAIL IN RAPE
The suspect in the hostage-taking that left an Edison, N.J., woman dead and her 20-year-old daughter critically wounded was out on bail awaiting trial on rape charges in Connecticut when the standoff with the police started on Thursday afternoon, Connecticut officials said yesterday.
A friend of the wounded woman said her friend had told her several months ago that she had been assaulted by the suspect, John J. Arias, 22, of Branford, Conn., and that Mr.
Arias had threatened her entire family.
For several months last summer, the wounded woman, Linda Galbo, lived with Mr.
Arias and another woman, Tracey Cioffero, at a condominium in Branford.
Mr.
Arias pursued Miss Galbo after she broke off the relationship, the friend said.


The Class of 'Thirtysomething'
With a title like "Thirtysomething," the end was fate.
At some point the characters would have to hit the big Four-Oh and the ABC series would have to end or be renamed.
Maybe, like college, four years is enough already: the end is something of a relief.
But for those who found themselves, embarrassingly enough, talking about Hope and Michael, Gary and Melissa, as if they were real people, The New York Times asked the actors who played them how their characters will fare after they graduate from the series.
Here are their scenarios.


Ana M. Wagner to Marry
Mrs.
Beatriz M. Wagner of Englishtown, N.J., has announced August wedding plans for her daughter, Ana Maria Wagner, and Robert Harris Hoffman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot Lee Hoffman of New York.
Miss Wagner, 25 years old, graduated from Vassar College; Mr.
Hoffman, 26, from Georgetown University.
Both have master's degrees in journalism from Syracuse University.
She is an assistant editor at Caribbean Travel and Life Publications in Silver Spring, Md.; he is a freelance sports writer in Washington.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Long Beach, Calif.; A Cambodian Centerpiece
AN office-retail building with a roof designed to suggest a Cambodian temple is the centerpiece of efforts by Asian immigrants and this city's officials to revitalize a depressed commercial district.
Susan Shick, the city's Director of Community Development, said the $2 million, 22,000-square-foot UCC Plaza will be a "catalyst" for the redevelopment of the Anaheim Street area, a watershed of several immigrant neighborhoods.


HIGHBROW: THEATER
International Festival
Here is a sampling of events that are part of the 1991 New York International Festival of the Arts, which runs from June 8 to 23.
Dates and times are subject to change.
BERGMAN ON STAGE, Brooklyn Academy of Music, Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene.
Ingmar Bergman directs the Royal Dramatic Theater of Sweden in three classic dramas: August Strindberg's "Miss Julie," with Lena Olin and Peter Stormare, June 10 at 7 P.M. and June 11 and 12 at 8 P.M.; Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey Into Night," with Bibi Andersson, June 14 and 15 at 8 P.M. and June 16 at 2 P.M., and Henrik Ibsen's "Doll's House," with Pernilla Ostergren and Erland Josephson, June 18 to 20 at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $35.
Information: (718) 636-4100.


Wall Street; Protecting Limited Partners . . .
Limited partners are the Rodney Dangerfields of the investor community.
They get less information on properties they own than shareholders of most public companies.
They rarely have annual meetings and thus have few opportunities to compare notes.
And their interests are rarely protected by a board of directors.
"Limited partnership is just another name for a totalitarian state," said Barry Vinocur, editor of Stanger's Partnership Watch, in Shrewsbury, N.J.
"There is no such thing as shareholder democracy in limited partnerships."


Corrections
A picture caption on May 19 about a program that matches volunteer workers with disabled and chronically ill children misidentified the woman shown at the right.
She was Dorothy Leyendecker, a volunteer.


Reviewer's Review
To the Editor:
As a freelance writer who reviewed Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith's "Jackson Pollock: An American Saga" for The Los Angeles Daily News and found the book to be seriously flawed on many counts, including errors, faulty prose, engagement with peripheral matters and the product -- albeit six years' worth -- of casually undertaken research, I was delighted to read your article.
I congratulate Dr.
O'Connor for a scrupulously prepared and thoroughly professional critique, for daring to protest an ill-advised award and for his sense of responsibility toward setting the record straight.
MERLE SCHIPPER  Santa Monica, Calif.


The Womacks' New 'Family Spirit'
Linda and Cecil Womack probably don't think of themselves as pillars of the outsider-pop community.
But that's what they are after seven years of crafting extraordinary love songs with singular grooves.
Womack and Womack seem to be a lingering example of the venerable soul-couple tradition that stretches from the adolescent fantasies of Shirley and Lee to the suave sparring of Ashford and Simpson.
Yet as the Womacks' new "Family Spirit" (RCA 3072-2-R; all three formats) confirms, they're not a retrograde act.
The rhetoric, tone and structure of their tunes show generous touches of elemental blues and gospel without trying to recreate the sound of Stax, Motown or Philly Soul.
In an era when pop musicians define themselves by rhythm, Womack and Womack's commitment to vivid pulse in every track is quite contemporary, but their spare, sinuous beats owe little to hip-hop or disco.


Seeking the Reality That Lurks In the Shadows
After a decade in which ironic, media-based images have dominated the photography scene, inevitable signs of change are in the air.
Artists like Cindy Sherman, Richard Prince, Sherry Levine and Laurie Simmons, who came to prominence in the early 80's with cool quotations of the imagery of advertising and television, continue to produce significant work.
Other artists, though, have begun to suggest new directions for the continuing dialogue about the nature and uses of photography.
Whereas the so-called appropriationists focused on the stereotypes of mass media, these new artists are exploring other ways of using photography in art -- whether to pose philosophical questions about the nature of pictures and perception, to make formally engaging pictures, or simply as a reaction against a long-dominant style.


Midwest Fish
To the Editor: Regina Schrambling tells us about eating walleye in Detroit.
Her account was mouth watering.
However, she did not mention the one name that Detroiters have come to associate with seafood -- Joe Muer.
Mr.
Muer founded his establishment at 2000 Gratiot in 1929; Joe Muer's Oyster House is still housed in the same building and is operated by his grandson, Joe 3d, and great-grandson, Joe 4th.
Joe Muer's pickerel, as walleye is called in southeastern Michigan, is oven broiled; the filets are washed, dried, coated lightly with salad oil and put into a hot broiler for 10 to 12 minutes.
Fresh paprika is sprinkled over the fish as it leaves the oven.
It is accompanied by potatoes, stewed tomatoes or creamed spinach.
The prices are $11.50 for lunch, $18.75 for dinner.
BENJAMIN C. STANCZYK Detroit


This Time, Yankees Fail In the 9th
Another game produced another comeback yesterday at the Stadium.
But this time, the Yankees did not pull it out.
They scored three times in the ninth inning, had the tying run on deck and brought the afternoon to a climactic moment with two outs and a runner on second base.
And then Randy Velarde struck out, sending the Yankees to a 6-3 loss to the Milwaukee Brewers.


Housing Policy
To the Editor:
Your article on April 14 headed "Way Cleared for Long-Delayed Housing" captured the major shift in the direction of city housing policy under Mayor David N. Dinkins and Commissioner Felice L. Michetti of the Department of Housing Preservation and Development.
Having been involved in both policy debates and project implementation over several generations of city housing officials, I can confirm that there is indeed, a difference in "attitude and in policy" at H.P.D.


Corrections
An article on May 12 about a tennis camp in Massachusetts misstated the location of Northampton.
It is in the Connecticut River Valley, not in the Berkshires.


Boy, 3, Killed by Train on Reopened Amtrak Line
A 3-year-old boy was struck and killed by a train yesterday afternoon when he ran through a broken fence and onto the recently reopened Amtrak tracks running along Riverside Park in upper Manhattan.
The boy, Justin James Rodriguez of 247 Wadsworth Avenue in Manhattan, had wandered away from a picnic with his mother and ventured onto the tracks when Amtrak Train 284, the Niagara Rainbow from Albany, rounded a bend.
He was struck at 4:35 P.M. as he tried to beat the train across the tracks, witnesses said.


Tweedledum And Tweedledee
To the Editor:
John J. O'Connor may think that the "basic thrusts" of the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation, which pressures TV networks to eliminate unfavorable images of homosexuals and provide politically correct gay images, and the Rev.
Donald Wildmon's American Family Association, which pressures networks to " [ continue ]  and indeed even  [ strengthen ]  the old practices of concealment," are "diametrically opposed." But to viewers who want to see good shows rather than preshrunk propaganda, the thrusts of these pressure groups seem drearily similar.
FELICIA ACKERMAN Providence, R.I.
The writer is an associate professor of philosophy at Brown University.


Breadwinner


Mutual Funds; Good Numbers, Uneasy Feelings
The mood was jovial as mutual fund executives gathered in record numbers at their annual convention, sponsored by the Investment Company Institute, at the end of May.
Last year, fund assets exceeded $1 trillion for the first time.
But the merrymaking in Washington was punctuated by a few sour notes.
The industry must watch its step or it could fall from grace as profoundly as the once-fat savings-and-loan industry, warned James S. Riepe, managing director of T. Rowe Price Associates Inc. and the new chairman of the I.C.I.
"The biggest challenge to any successful business is complacency," he told the 1,400 conferencegoers.


Data Bank/June 2, 1991
Index of Leading Indicators
April
March
Feb.
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.7
1.2
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
1.8
--2.9
--0.6
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
--0.1
1.1
0.8
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.1
0.4
0.2
New-Home Sales
Monthly percent change
1.2
1.0
18.1
Corporate Profits
I Q'91
IV Q'90
III Q'90
Percent change
--0.3
--3.9
--1.9
Corporate Profits (after taxes)
Percent change
--5.6
--1.0
8.0
Cash Wheat Price
May 31
May 24
May 17
No. 1 K.C., per bushel
$3.00
$3.06
$3.04


Using Lessons of Xerox to Run Education Dept.
David T. Kearns, lately chairman of Xerox, now Deputy Secretary of Education, is shuttling these days between his Government-issue office and the no-frills Holiday Inn across the street.
Gone are his corporate jet, $1.3 million salary and undisputed authority as head of one of the country's largest corporations.
But Mr.
Kearns's biggest challenge will not be learning to live with diminished perquisites and power and a tenth of his former salary.
He faces the formidable task of proving that a businessman using business practices can marshal a Government bureaucracy to help American schools.


Beauty; Thigh Anxiety
It's Summer, and cosmetics companies are coming down hard again on the American female bottom.
Tedious as it is, the subject -- that nasty C-word -- has become inescapable: there's a whole new litany of product titles out there, tidy names like Cellulite Relief Gel, Cellulite Toning Gel and Cellulite Control Gel.
Cellulite, Euro-spa-speak for fat, didn't hit the popular lexicon until 1973, when a Frenchwoman, Nicole Ronsard, sold 200,000 hard-cover copies of a book entitled "Cellulite: Those Lumps, Bumps and Bulges You Couldn't Lose Before." The word itself appears in no medical dictionary, at least not in this country.
But a nice working definition comes from the novelist Anne Lamott, who, in a recent Mademoiselle article, dubbed the stuff "Brooklyns," which is certainly a cozier rubric than "cellulite" and perhaps more site-specific.
"It stems from the geographic shape of those triangular pooches of fat that are just kind of glued onto your butt the way Brooklyn is glued onto Manhattan," she explains.
"Gack!"


For Women, Polygamy's Just a Rotten Deal; Solves Surplus Problem
To the Editor:
At last, someone else -- Elizabeth Joseph (Op-Ed, May 23) -- has put into words what I have been silently thinking for some time: Polygamy makes good sense.


Youth Served


Ruth Davidon, Student, Is Wed
Ruth Anna Davidon, a daughter of William Cooper Davidon of Haverford, Pa., and Ann Morrissett Davidon of Prague, was married in Lexington, Mass., yesterday to Eric David Beinhocker, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gilbert Beinhocker of Belmont, Mass.
The Rev.
Helen Lutton Cohen, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the First Parish Church.
Ms.
Davidon, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, is a graduate student in molecular biology at Harvard University.
She graduated cum laude from Amherst College.
Her father is a professor of mathematics at Haverford College.
Her mother, a Peace Corps volunteer, teaches English at Charles University in Prague.


Ms. Taylor Plans October Wedding
The engagement of Laura Anne Taylor to Andrew John Swain, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter John Swain of Stockport, Cheshire, England, has been announced by the prospective bride's mother, Madeline V. Taylor of Brooklyn.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Taylor, 32 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.
She graduated and received a law degree from Harvard University, where she was a member of the Hasty Pudding Society-Institute of 1770 and managing editor of The Harvard Law Record.
Her father, Justus E. Taylor of Athens, N.Y., is a retired lawyer.
Her mother, a medical librarian, is the director of the George F. Smith Library and assistant university librarian at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark.


Unwarranted Assumption?
To the Editor:
In "Gay Images: TV's Mixed Signals," John J. O'Connor discusses the lack of homosexual characters and says that the few gay male characters we see are molded to fit stereotypes.


American Ideal Near, Pace Graduates Told
The struggle toward realization of the American ideal is this century's greatest achievement, New York City's Cultural Commissioner said yesterday in a commencement speech to Pace University students.
"We are closer than we have ever been to the ideal of an open, pluralistic democracy," said the Commissioner, Dr.
Mary Schmidt Campbell, to the 1,782 degree recipients at Radio City Music Hall.
This spring, 3,600 degrees are expected to be given to Pace students; last Tuesday, 885 graduated from the Pleasantville/Briarcliff campus, and 690 are expected to earn degrees from the School of Law at White Plains on June 9.
An honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters was awarded to Dr.
Campbell.
Also honored were Brig.
Gen.
Clara Adams-Enders of the Army Nurse Corps; Ken Burns, the documentary filmmaker who created the Civil War television series, and Edward W. Stack, a Pace alumnus and president of the National Baseball Hall of Fame.


Eleni F. Daskalakis Weds
Eleni Fani Daskalakis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elias Daskalakis of Philadelphia, was married there yesterday to Peter Frederick Henkel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Oliver C. Henkel Jr. of Cleveland Heights, Ohio.
The Rev.
Dimitri Katerlis performed the Greek Orthodox ceremony at St.
George's Cathedral.
Mrs.
Henkel, 27 years old, is an associate in corporate finance at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University.
Mr.
Henkel, also 27, is an associate in real estate at Morgan Stanley in New York.
He graduated from Yale University.


Jaime K. Kelly Is Married to James A. Fairbrother
Jaime Kathleen Kelly, the education marketing director for Scholastic Inc., and James Alan Fairbrother, the president of Smart Advertising, both in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Kinderhook, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edward J. Fiebke performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Fairbrother, 32 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is the daughter of Maggi Kelly Mercer of Chatham, N.J., a retired child psychologist, and the late Thomas L. Kelly, a senior vice president of R. H. Macy &amp; Company in New York.


Legislation Sought to Curb Some Referrals
Congress and several states are considering new measures to prevent doctors from sending patients to health-care businesses in which the doctors have invested.
The proposals, vehemently opposed by physician investors as an infringement on their rights, are inspired by a desire to save money, prevent conflict of interest and protect the welfare of patients.
The proposed restrictions would send a tremor through the medical world, since thousands of doctors might have to sell their interests in such businesses as diagnostic imaging centers and medical equipment suppliers.


Top Ethiopia Rebel Talks of Democracy
The guerrilla leader who heads the new interim government here returned to Ethiopia today and promised to work for democracy and free enterprise.
The official, Meles Zenawi, arrived before dawn aboard a charter flight from London.
His arrival was without public ceremony, and foreign diplomats who had contacts with the rebels said Mr.
Meles had chosen the low-key entrance because he realized that his forces from Tigre Province, in the north, were widely distrusted by the ethnic Amhara group that dominates Addis Ababa.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Anger is one of my favorite emotions, and I welcome its expression in academia.
But when anger keeps people from reading and connecting with the passionate writings that surround them, it is merely destructive.
Camille Paglia has apparently stopped reading and connecting, if not in general then certainly with writings of other female intellectuals.
Ms.
Paglia decries feminism's failure to explore pleasures inherent in the mass media.
But in fact this has been a major topic of discussion among female writers.
There are many different voices within feminism; it is not a monolithic movement.
MAUD LAVIN  New York


Subway Stabbings Viewed as Serial Attacks
The police are searching for a man who is thought to have attacked three women with a screwdriver or a similar sharp object as they left subway stations in Greenwich Village and SoHo.
The latest victim was stabbed in the face, ears and back yesterday morning as she walked up the stairs of the Broadway-Lafayette station on the F line in Greenwich Village.


Kaori Oi Marries William L. Segal
Kaori Oi, the daughter of Nobuko Oi of Usuda, Japan, was married last night to William Lawrence Segal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Segal of New York.
A Federal District Court judge, Gerard L. Goettel of White Plains, performed the ceremony at the Pierre.
Ms.
Oi, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, is the editor of a market report at Nikko Securities in New York.
She graduated from Tsuda College in Tokyo.
Her mother is an elementary school teacher in Usuda.


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
The Boy Who Felt No Pain By Robert Marion Addison-Wesley. 224 pages. $17.95.
College students sometimes turn to an elective course in psychology in the search for solutions to problems bearing down on them.
Robert Marion has similarly turned to writing, on weekends and at night, to ease the pain and shake off the cloak of gloom that often threatens to fall around him.
Dr.
Marion is a pediatric geneticist and director of the Center for Congenital Disorders at Montefiore Hospital in the Bronx.
He is also head of genetics at the Blythedale Children's Hospital in Valhalla.
The idea for "The Boy Who Felt No Pain," Dr.
Marion's third book, came during a meeting with his editor "just after a very gut-wrenching session with a patient I had just met that afternoon, a baby who had no face."


Headliners; Request Counsel
New York City Council members earn $55,000 for an essentially part-time job.
However, with assorted perks and office-expense allocations, the most restrained of them controls almost $250,000 a year.
Last year Councilman Robert J. Dryfoos established a separate and unusual fund, raising $170,000, some of which he spent on shirts, overseas and weekend trips and health-club and synagogue dues, possibly in violation of the City Charter.
Mr.
Dryfoos, who represents the Upper East Side, stepped aside under pressure last week as chairman of the Committee on State and Federal Legislation and the Land Use Committee's subcommitte on planning, zoning and landmarks, losing a $17,500 annual stipend.
An investigation of Mr.
Dryfoos has been referred to the city's Conflicts of Interest Board.
Last month, according to his accountant's records, he had not filed 1988 or 1989 Federal or state and local tax returns.
Federal investigators are also investigating.


COUNT YOUR LOSSES
Thanks to Daphne Merkin for her perceptive essay on loss (Hers: "Count Your Losses," May 5).
As a fellow chaser after lost possessions much less valuable than the time I spend chasing, I was moved by her recognition that sometimes we need to chase for reasons far more compelling than logic.
MARCIA KAPLAN, M.D.
Cincinnati


5 Are Killed in South Africa in Protest and Black Clashes
Five people were killed overnight in 30 incidents of black factional fighting and anti-apartheid protests in South African townships, the police said today.
Policemen and soldiers patrolling the Johannesburg township of Katlehong shot and killed a man armed with an AK-47 automatic rifle.
Three other blacks were killed in the Natal township of Tongaat and in Soweto.


Doctor Links Implants to Cancer Agent in Breast Milk
A cancer-causing chemical has been found in the milk of a nursing mother who has breast implants covered with polyurethane foam, a scientist said yesterday.
The amount of the carcinogen, toluene diamene or TDA, found in the woman was extremely small and was not likely to pose a health threat to her infant, said the scientist, Dr.
David Black of Vanderbilt University, who was hired by the manufacturer of the implant to look for traces of TDA in the body.
Although traces of TDA have been found in only one case of breast milk, Dr.
Black said he believed it was likely that other women with implants might also have the chemical in their milk.
But he emphasized that any hazard to infants from TDA was minor, saying nursing mothers exposed to secondhand cigarette smoke passed on a greater amount of carcinogens to their breast-fed babies.
Issue for Women
The real issue for women, he said, may be the emotional stress that comes from knowing a potentially harmful chemcial may be passing from them to their baby.
"TDA contaminates a natural process," he said.
The manufacturer, the Surgitek Corporation, a subsidiary of Bristol-Myers Squibb, immediately disputed Dr.
Black's findings, saying that his method of analyzing the milk created the TDA artificially and that the implants posed no hazard to nursing mothers or their babies.
"We disagree with his testing procedure," said Jonathan Weisberg, a company spokesman.
"We have submitted data about this to the F.D.A. and we remain confident in the safety of polyurethane foam covered breast implants."
Dr.
Black, a toxicologist who is also president of the Aegis Analytical Corporation, a drug testing company in Nashville, Tenn., said Bristol-Myers had no evidence to support its criticism of his methods.
The chemical has been linked to cancer in laboratory animals, but eating it is not thought to pose as much of a risk as having it implanted directly into the body, Dr.
Black said.
Dr.
Elizabeth Jacobson, deputy director of the Food and Drug Administration Center for Devices and Radiological Health, said the agency would look very carefully at the new finding.
"TDA should not be there," she said.
"If Dr. Black is right, it's just one more indication that the foam really does break down into TDA."
About 200,000 of the two million American women who have had breast implants have implants covered with the polyurethane foam.
It is not known how many of them have breast-fed their babies but many are of childbearing age.
Surgitek voluntarily withdrew its products, known as the Meme, Optimene and Replicon implants, from the market in April after questions about TDA were raised in the news media.
As part of its effort to submit safety data to the F.D.A.
Surgitek hired Dr.
Black in 1988 to develop a method to look for TDA in urine and milk.
The finding about breast milk began to circulate among critics of polyurethane foam implants late last week.
"The word was out," said Sibyl Goldrich, founder of Command Trust Network, a group devoted to the problems of implant patients.
"We kept waiting for the F.D.A. to announce something, but they never did."
Reached by telephone and asked to confirm the finding, Dr.
Black agreed to describe the experiment.
It is important to be "truthful and honest", he said.
The F.D.A. and Surgitek have known about TDA in breast milk for several weeks, he said, and "women with implants deserve to know."
Because most of his research on implants has been carried out under contract to Surgitek, Dr.
Black said he could not comment fully on his results.
He did say he has tested the urine of "a small population" of women immediately before and after implant surgery to look for TDA.
"We have seen some short term presence of TDA in urine which we felt was from residues" on the foam, Dr.
Black said, and not from the foam breaking up in the body. .
The breast milk sample was not analyzed as part of his contracts with Surgitek, Dr.
Black said.
The work was requested by a local plastic surgeon who wanted to assure his patient that it was safe to nurse her baby with foam implants inside her body, Dr.
Black said.
The woman has had her implants for two years and apparently has not had any problems with them, he said.
The test revealed that the woman's milk had three to four parts of TDA per billion, Dr.
Black said.
The test also found traces of of TDA in her urine.
Dr.
Black said that he was very surprised to find the TDA in milk.
But, he said, it is logical given that the implant is in the same place where milk is produced.
The finding "would suggest that the foam is degrading," he said.
Dr.
Black's colleague at his drug testing company, Mark Faulkner said, "when we got the results off the machine, my spine chilled." The test was done to reassure the mother, he said, but it did not work out that way.
The finding needs to be verified in other women, Dr.
Black said.
But the fact that TDA turned up in the first lactating woman tested, he said, suggests the problem might be common.
Canadian doctors recently reported that they found TDA in the urine of a woman who had had Meme implants for seven months and published their results in a scientific journal.


Salute Berries in Ways Plain and Fancy
THE berry season has arrived.
Strawberries to purchase at farm stands or to gather at farms that permit pickers are the first of a succession of locally grown berries that ripen through the fall.
After the strawberries come raspberries and blueberries, then blackberries, then raspberries again.
Finally, some areas will have locally grown cranberries.


With Indian Art, the Exhibit Could Be in Court
To judge by the recent problems facing dealers and collectors, owning American Indian art has become a legal mine field.
Laws have been passed by state legislatures and Congress calling for the repatriation of certain cultural and burial objects.
A well-publicized 1989 case of a Hopi mask owned by Connecticut collectors, which was seized by the Federal Bureau of Investigation from a New York antiques show and taken to Phoenix, has not yet been heard in court.
And the auction last month by Sotheby's in New York of three ceremonial masks -- two Hopi and one probably Navajo -- sparked protests by Indians.
The protest did not stop the seller and Sotheby's from proceeding with the sale on May 14.
However, it spurred Elizabeth Sackler, president of the Arthur M. Sackler Foundation in New York, to buy the masks for $39,050.
She said later she would return the masks to the Indians.


Making a Difference; Going to Bat For Aerospace
As the owner of a small military subcontractor scrambling to win new business at a time of declining Pentagon spending, Ronald L. Cedillos is angry about how California's elected officials are responding to the challenges facing the state's huge aerospace industry.
Last week, Mr.
Cedillos, who runs the Cedillos Testing Company of Long Beach, took a big step in organizing what he thinks could be a blistering political response.
Mr.
Cedillos, a major contributor to the Republican Party, helped set up a meeting between Gov.
Pete Wilson, a Republican, and the heads of most of the state's major contractors, including Kent Kresa of Northrop and Daniel M. Tellep of Lockheed.


Postings: City Hall Forum; The Co-op/Condo Troubles
Eighteen months after serious financial problems began to emerge in recently converted New York City co-ops and condominiums, the fallout has spread across all five of the city's boroughs.
Accordingly, the five borough presidents are for the first time sponsoring a public forum on what they call "The Co-op/Condo Financial Crisis" at City Hall.
It is scheduled for Wednesday evening, from 6:30 to 9 P.M., in the Board of Estimate chamber.
Among the speakers will be Frederick K. Mehlman, the assistant attorney general in charge of New York state's Real Estate Finance Bureau, which regulates co-op and condominium conversions, and Stuart Saft, a Manhattan real estate lawyer who has respresented several co-op boards seeking to work out problems with their sponsors and avoid foreclosure on their buildings by lenders.
Borough Presidents Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan, Claire Shulman of Queens and Howard Golden of Brooklyn have promised to attend, while Fernando Ferrer of the Bronx and Guy V. Molinari of Staten Island will either attend or send representatives, according to a spokesman for Ms.
Schulman, who first proposed the joint forum.


The World; Is Iran's Urge to Prosper Overtaking Its Islamic Zeal?
IT was the Persian version of George Bush's new world order, a crystallizing moment that set forth a guiding postwar vision of the world as seen through the eyes of Iran's leadership.
Last week, when 250 Western, Asian and Arab oil officials met in the ancient imperial city of Isfahan, they heard a clear message of Iran's pragmatic approach to its neighbors: When it comes to the economy, the revolution is over.
If there had been any doubt that economics, not revolutionary fervor, is now the driving force behind Iran's domestic and foreign policy, it was dispelled when Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati bluntly told the group that "a new order" is emerging in the world in which "economic considerations overshadow political priorities." If the conference participants had closed their eyes, they might have thought they were listening to the late Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi.


Where Muir Slept Indoors
John Muir, America's pre-eminent nature lover and preservationist, once remarked that he wished he could become "more sequoial." His biographer, Stephen Fox, records that comment in "John Muir and His Legacy: The American Conservation Movement" (1981).
Perhaps to that end, Muir once climbed a tall tree during a windstorm and "clung with muscles firm braced, like a bobolink on a reed."
When he recalled the experience, in "The Mountains of California," Muir described the symphonic sounds of the Sierra Nevada storm and the "delicious fragrance that was streaming past." The various species of plant life he could identify from his treetop perch "seemed strong and comfortable, as if really enjoying the storm." And so, it seems, did he.


Music Man


Charles M. Powell, 57, Executive With the Motion Picture Academy
Charles M. Powell, an executive of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and a longtime marketing executive in the film industry, died Friday at his office in Los Angeles.
He was 57 years old.
Mr. Powell died of a heart attack, said a business partner, Buddy Young.


Dykstra's Absence
To the Sports Editor:
Len Dykstra thinks it's "scary to think of what could have happened" after he crashed his vehicle while intoxicated.
"I could have been killed," he said.
Dykstra failed to realize that had he been killed, it was he who chose to drive while inebriated.
Had he died, it would have been a needless death, though not necessarily a tragic one.
The real tragedy would have been for Dykstra to have killed somebody else in the process.
If the fog ever lifts from his head, Dykstra may realize that every year there are hundreds of fatalities caused by drunken drivers in this country.
The fact that he hurt his team because he won't be able to play and help them win for a couple of months is inconsequential.
FRANCISCO L. CANALES Brookline, Mass.


Report Questions Aspin's Relationship With Female Steel Executive
Representative Les Aspin, who led an effort to buy and upgrade M-1 tanks that the Pentagon did not request, is dating an executive of a steel company that had more than $6 million in contracts on that type of tank, a newspaper has reported.
In its Sunday issue, The Wisconsin State Journal said Mr.
Aspin, a Wisconsin Democrat who is the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, led the effort that added to a spending bill the $375 million to buy and upgrade the tanks.


Style Makers; Janet Schwartz and Giorgio Giacobone, Clothing Designers
Janet Schwartz, a native of New Rochelle, N.Y., who originally went to Mexico on a Fulbright scholarship in pre-Columbian studies, and her husband, Giorgio Giacobone, a jewelery designer from Argentina, are among a handful of entrepreneurs in Latin America who use traditional fabrics and designs to create stylish clothing.
At their main store in San Cristobal de las Casas, in the southern highlands of Mexico, Ms.
Schwartz, 37 years old, designs men's, women's and children's clothing and accessories that are made by seamstresses in the town while Mr.
Giacobone, 40, supervises the weaving of cotton with Mayan motifs on three looms in the courtyard.


Clash Of '91; Higher Education Feels the Heat
IN laying out his plan to propel American schools into the 21st century, President Bush barely mentioned colleges or universities.
But that doesn't mean everything is all right on the nation's campuses.
In the absence of any strategy for coupling an improvement in higher education with the reform of elementary and secondary schools, there is plenty of evidence, much of it provided by the Administration itself, that there is a fundamental rethinking about what colleges do and how they ought to do it.
The splendid seclusion of the university has been shattered by a barrage of criticism, both from within and outside.
Nothing seems settled anymore -- not the tradition of learning, nor the system of admissions on merit.


Quiet Authors Hone Schmoozers' Art
Party after lavish party ushered in the annual American Booksellers Association convention, a three-day spree of festivities, browsing and occasional deal-making that opened yesterday at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center on Manhattan's West Side.
More than 100 parties are being thrown by publishers to "celebrate" authors during the convention, attended by 1,600 publishers and about 6,000 booksellers.
Nobody is exactly sure what purpose the parties serve, but they are seen as an essential lubricant to a business that runs on gossip and word of mouth.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 2,


A Rogue Cyclist Can't Stop Kenyan
As the fleetest of Kenyan men built an enduring tradition of excellence in long-distance running over the last few decades, comparable performances by Kenyan women became more conspicuously absent.
In fact, there was nothing at all mysterious to the vacuum.
In Kenyan society, men had far more opportunities than women in general, so it was highly unlikely that sports authorities would feel inclined to arrange for women the kind of training programs available for years to men.


Corrections
A report today in the Travel Advisory column, on page 3 of the Travel section, misstates the date for completion of the monorail system at Newark Airport.
It is the end of 1994, not this year.


Battling Poison Ivy Requires a Strategy
POISON ivy is problably one of the worst plants around.
It seems to be everywhere.
Those who would like to go out and pull a few weeds in the garden are often hesitant because of the presence of this most unwanted plant.
It is in full leaf now, and those who do not know what it looks like, should.
If you are not positive about its identification, seek help from someone who knows the plant, because knowing the enemy is the first defense in this case.


Style Makers; Judi and Erin Boisson, Quilt Dealers and Designers
For the last 20 years or so, Judi Boisson has been involved with quilts, always aided to some extent by her daughter Erin, who is now 26 years old.
At first she was a collector, making her finds as she traveled around the country selling ready-to-wear sportswear by Cacharel, Kenzo and Kanzai.


On School District Report Cards
The recent article about New Jersey's school district report cards ("Florio's Report Cards Rankle School Officials") gave ample scope to school administrators unhappy with the data provided by the report cards, but no room for a response by the sponsors, the Public Education Institute, the Business Roundtable and the State Department of Education.
In fact, most of the problems cited by superintendents in the article are the results of their own misunderstandings and misreadings of the report cards.
Two examples:


Equal Education Depends on Washington
To the Editor:
With respect to the constitutionality of public financing for schools in the United States ("No Tax Dollars to Support Parochial Schools," letter, May 10), since the founding of this country support of public education has been reserved to the states by the 10th Amendment to the Constitution.
Even though Chief Justice John Marshall believed that the Federal Government did have the right to intervene in such areas, it was not really until 1941 that Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone and a unanimous Supreme Court declared in United States vs.
Darby that the 10th Amendment did not mean the Federal Government was limited by the reserved powers of the states.


On the Edge


New Jersey, With Tears
To the Editor:
Oh, no.
You've done it again.
First Vanilla Ice, then Madonna and now the merely photogenic, weeps-on-demand Demi Moore  [ "Demi Moore, Overnight Star, at Long Last," May 12 ] .
If you had the critical integrity to examine the hype surrounding such self-promoting pop mediocrities, I would applaud you.
But you've been buying wholesale into Hollywood press agentry, complete with glamour shots and undeserved superlatives.
The only fitting superlative is that Moore had the greatest luck in getting a better script and role this time around.
The depth of her acting ability, however, is noticeably limited to approximating a New Jersey regionalism -- and those tears predictably welling up in her eyes.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-25
Details of a conventional arms treaty in Europe have been resolved by the United States and the Soviet Union, clearing the way for an early summit meeting between President Bush and President Gorbachev.
Page 1


IN SHORT: FICTION
RED LOVE  By David Evanier. Scribners, $19.95.


Sunday Outing; On L.I., a Town Made for Romance
If someone says "June" and you think "bride," a Sunday in Stony Brook may be perfect for you.
In this North Shore village, weddings are in the air, on the green, by the mill pond and even in an exhibit at the local museum.
The exhibit, "To Love and to Cherish: The Great American Wedding," is at the Margaret Melville Blackwell History Museum, one of the Museums at Stony Brook.
It runs through July 21.


Campus Life: Ohio State; An Alternative To Operating On Well Animals
The Ohio State University College of Veterinary Medicine will offer alternative surgery classes in the fall for students who have a moral objection to using healthy animals to practice surgical techniques.
The animals are killed after the work is finished.
The decision comes against the backdrop of a pending lawsuit filed by a student who was facing expulsion because she had objected on moral grounds to performing surgery on healthy animals.


Suspect Leads Police on Wild Queens Chase
In a wild 40-minute chase that began in a Queens subway station yesterday, a rape suspect trying to elude two transit officers ran into a tunnel, jumped onto a stalled train and briefly rode atop it, the transit police said.
The suspect, Michael Dempsey, jumped off the train after traveling a short distance and ran several blocks before he was chased down by officers from the city and transit police departments, said Albert W. O'Leary, a spokesman for the transit police.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Entertaining/Magazine Part 2


Rookies Show Up at Giants Stadium and See New Faces
The Giants rookies today got their first lesson in how quickly things change on National Football League teams.
Since the first time the 38 players were at Giants Stadium, for a minicamp April 27-28, the Giants have restructured their coaching staff and have a new head coach.


Public &amp; Private; The Barter System
Stand before a mirror and say this sentence: "The project does not consider abortion an appropriate method of family planning." Perhaps it is the word "appropriate" that has the effect; whatever it is, the lips purse and the tone is either prim or recriminatory.
Imagine saying it to a 15-year-old girl who is not entirely sure what appropriate means.
Or a woman who has a toddler running up and down the halls and a baby wailing in the crook of her arm.
Try to say it without having something in your voice that is holier than thou.
This is what we now call counseling for pregnant women in family planning clinics that receive Federal funds.
It may conform to some letter of the law, as determined by five members of the Supreme Court.
But the only spirit it reflects is a mean one.


On Language; Name That Disease
AN IRISH PHYSICIAN named Robert James Graves, poking around various glands in 1835, may not have been the first to describe the exophthalmic goiter, but he gave the most accurate early account of what we now call a hyperthyroid condition; as a result, the imbalance of secretion from which President Bush has been suffering, and which led to his heart fibrillation, is called
Graves' disease
.
I think the grammatical diagnosis is wrong. A second opinion: punctuate it
Graves's disease
, with an apostrophe followed by an
s
.
No matter what it says in Merriam-Webster's Medical Desk Dictionary or in Webster's New World Dictionary, the possessive of a proper name ending in
s
should be formed by adding an apostrophe and another
s
. Maintain standards, as they say at the Court of St. James's. (Lowercase the
d
in
disease
; the lexicographers have that right.)


Battling Poison Ivy Requires a Strategy
POISON ivy is problably one of the worst plants around.
It seems to be everywhere.
Those who would like to go out and pull a few weeds in the garden are often hesitant because of the presence of this most unwanted plant.
It is in full leaf now, and those who do not know what it looks like, should.
If you are not positive about its identification, seek help from someone who knows the plant, because knowing the enemy is the first defense in this case.


A Still Life of Summer, in Words
ON a subway platform it becomes summer sooner.
An afternoon in late April; a long delay.
No trains on either side of the station; no breeze as an express goes through.
The white tiles on the wall at the far end of the tunnel are uninformed by the first exciting seconds of the lights of the local you hope for.
You are annoyed but not late.
What you anticipate is air-conditioning.
In New York it is summer well before the banner is raised.
A humid-harsh two or three days in mid-May, and then in early June a week or so posing as calendar-spring does injury to the loopy notion that this time things might stay pretty much as they are forever.


Designs With Art As Their Inspiration
Whether fashion is art has never truly been decided, but there is no question that art influences fashion.
Interpretations of Mondrian's color blocks, Matisse's cutouts and Monet's flowers have become almost as familiar on clothing as on canvases.
So when the Friends of Lenox Hill Hospital were planning a fund-raising event to appeal to men and women alike, they decided to have a cocktail party in a SoHo gallery where art-inspired fashions would be displayed and auctioned off.
Nicole Miller, Eric Javits and Christian Francis Roth are among the designers who donated clothing and accessories for the event, called "Art Is Fashion Is Art."


COUNT YOUR LOSSES
I, too, mourn everything that I have lost.
But, on the positive side, I like to think that each item I have loved and lost has been found by someone else, who is now treasuring it.
It is a kind of accidental charity.
M.
B.
KIRKHAM
Manhattan, Kan.


Ms. Bandanza Marries A. I. Crawford
Deborah Claire Bandanza, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Santo Bandanza of Hyde Park, Mass., was married yesterday to Alexander Iselin Crawford, a son of Anne Weld Collins of New York and Bridgehampton, L.I., and George Crawford of New York and Southampton, L.I.
The Rev.
John Culloty, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Houghton Memorial Chapel at Wellesley College.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is 24 years old.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
In September she is to begin studies for a Ph.D. in romance languages at the University of Pennsylvania as a Benjamin Franklin Fellow.
Her father is in the repair and sales department at the Carl Heinrich Company, a surveying instruments dealer in Cambridge, Mass.


ALUMNAE GIVING
Barbara O. Taylor's thoughts concerning the generosity of alumnae to their alma maters were well taken, but when she called $100 a "small donation," my hackles rose. (Letters, May 12, in response to "Alma Maters Court Their Daughters" by Anne Matthews, April 7).
I am 67 years old and graduated from college in 1945.
I had a full-tuition scholarship, very fortunately, since my parents could not afford to send me to college.
I have tried, as I have been able, to contribute to my alma mater.


Resolution Is Sought In Release of Raccoons
A WILDLIFE rehabilitator from Peekskill continued negotiating with the state for his own freedom last week, after transporting and releasing 37 young raccoons into the wild in Tioga County.
His action had prompted state conservation officials, concerned about recent cases of rabid raccoons, to issue a warrant for his arrest.
Barry A. Rothfuss, who had operated a private nonprofit wildlife refuge center from his home until April 16, when he went into hiding with the raccoons, met last week with lawyers for the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
Insisting that he had done nothing wrong, Mr.
Rothfuss said he had acted after receiving "a verbal directive" from a regional conservation officer "to euthanize" his raccoons.
State officials denied giving such an order.


An Italian Table With Many Partisans
CAN more than 1,000 Long Island restaurantgoers be wrong?
The recent Zagat Suburban New York City Restaurant Survey tabulating diners' responses ranks Navona in Great Neck as the Island's No. 1 Italian restaurant.
Recent visits confirm that much of its food is scrumptious.
But there were also enough duds on the menu, including a few overly dry, dull entrees, to question the lofty rating.
Navona does, however, make my Italian Top-5 list.


Making a Difference; Organizing the Boomers
Karen Meredith says she has enormous respect for the American Association of Retired Persons, the 32 million-member group that represents the interests of those over 50.
So much so that when she decided to start a similar group for the postwar baby boom generation, she modeled it on the A.A.R.P.
Now Ms.
Meredith's two-year-old, 10,000-member organization, the American Association of Boomers (annual membership fee: $10), plans to meet the A.A.R.P. on its own favorite battleground: Capitol Hill.
The Irving, Tex.-based A.A.B., which generally avoids partisan issues in favor of providing information on auto rental discounts and financial questions, plans to begin a lobbying effort to cut Social Security and Medicare benefits to upper-income retirees.


A Proposal to Buy N. J. Transit
There was a recent article ("Florio Plan to Sell Roads Is Criticized") on the New Jersey budget proposal to use turnpike funds to purchase roadways in the state.
In discussing this proposal and alternatives, the article did not present the alternative I offered to the Governor: use turnpike funds to purchase N. J. Transit.
This proposal offers these advantages:


The Executive Life; At Graduation, Reality and a Lot of Banality
On a breezy Sunday three weeks ago, Ted Turner, chairman and chief executive of Turner Broadcasting Systems, stood in cap and gown before the student body of Tufts University in Medford, Mass.
"In the last couple of years," he intoned, "we've seen a lot of people go to jail for cheating in the business world. There are a lot of temptations to take a shortcut. But when you cheat in any form, all you're doing is cheating yourself. So keep your ethics at a very, very high level. That's very important if you're going to have a happy life."


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Who does Camille Paglia think she is, the Kitty Kelley of academia?
BETTIE W. ROBERTS  Houston


Eva Dillon Plans A Wedding in July
Mrs.
Paul Leo Dillon of Vienna, Va., has announced July wedding plans for her daughter, Eva A. Dillon, and William Kemmis Adler, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel Harvey Adler of Weston, Conn.
Ms.
Dillon, 34 years old, is an advertising manager for TV Guide magazine in New York.
A graduate of the Virginia Commonwealth University's School of Performing Arts, she is a director of the Dessoff Choirs in New York and also sings with the group.
Her late father was a Foreign Service officer who served as first secretary in the American Embassy in New Delhi in the mid-1970's.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Camille Paglia, the self-styled Morton Downey Jr. of American academia, manages in just a few careering pages of prose to toss off some of the most reckless, irresponsible and contradictory statements I have ever seen.
But for all of this to be delivered in the form of an attack on "ignorant" and "narrow" professors who lack "breadth and depth of learning," on thinkers who see "no meaning or order in history" and use "pompous bombast" to advance their delusions "about life, art and thought" -- this can only be read as reaching a level of self-irony so dazzling even the most post-modern among us must applaud.
MARK BREITENBERG  Swarthmore, Pa.


David Ruffin, 50, An Original Singer In the Temptations
David Ruffin, an original member of the Temptations whose Gospel-charged baritone was featured on hits like "My Girl" and "Ain't Too Proud to Beg," died today of what appeared to be a drug overdose, the police said.
He was 50.
Detective Joan Duffy said a limousine pulled up to the University of Pennsylvania Hospital emergency room shortly before 3 A.M.


Miss Washburn to Marry in September
Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Langhorne Washburn of Middleburg, Va., have announced the engagement of Mr.
Washburn's daughter, Pamela Melhado Washburn, to Andrew Arnold Brooks, a son of George G. Brooks of Seabrook, L.I. and Joanne Brooks of Mattituck, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Washburn, 30 years old, is an assistant marketing manager for Sports Illustrated in New York.
She graduated from Bowdoin College.
She is also the daughter of the late Paula Melhado Gilpatric, who was a senior vice president of Brown Harris Stevens in New York.
Her father was an Assistant Secretary of Commerce during the Nixon and Ford Administrations.


Crowd Pleasers
Here is a sampling of summer pleasures in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
This Week  MADISON SQUARE GARDEN SUMMER CONCERTS.
Jose Luis Rodriguez, a Venezuelan pop star; the tiniest swivel of his hips sends crowds into a frenzy, today, 4 P.M.
Elvis Costello with the Replacements, June 22, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $35.
Information: (212) 465-6741.


Ms. Gallagher, Lawyer, Is Wed
Maryann Gallagher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Gallagher of Bergenfield, N.J., was married in Bergenfield yesterday to John Franklin Blackburn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Blackburn of Savannah, Ga.
The Rev.
Thomas Pinnel officiated at the South Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Blackburn, 31 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Coudert Brothers.
She graduated summa cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from Rutgers University.
Her father is the national accounts manager in Woodcliff Lake, N.J., for the Hedwin Corporation, a plastics manufacturer in Baltimore.


Miss Riegel Wed To Roger Harper
Heather Knorr Riegel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence M. Riegel of New York, was married yesterday to Roger Conant Harper, the son of Dr.
Richard D. Harper of South Salem, N.Y., and Wende C. Harper of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Frances Mercer performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Harper, 29 years old, graduated from Sweet Briar College.
She was a member of the Junior Assembly in 1979.
Her father is an executive vice president of Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, a New York advertising agency.


Lisa Reed Is Married
Lisa Claire Reed and John Martin Seabrook Jr., freelance magazine writers in New York, were married yesterday by the Rev.
Rick Shaw at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Albany.
Ms.
Reed, 31 years old and a graduate of Wheaton College, is a daughter of Rosalie C. Reed of Albany and the late Howard V. Reed, who was a vice president in the Cleveland advertising firm of Griswold Eshleman.


Clarification Sought On Visas for Performers
Organizers and producers who bring foreign artists to the United States for performances have learned to their dismay that an immigration measure passed by Congress without debate last fall could sharply restrict their activities.
But the Administration and Congress are expected to act shortly to ease their concerns.
One of the major concerns about the new law, which goes into effect on Oct. 1, is the cap of 25,000 that it will place on the number of foreign performers who may receive visas to enter the United States each year.
It cannot be calculated if that number is greater or smaller than the number of visas allowed under present law.
The reason, said Richard L. Kenney, a spokesman for the Immigration and Naturalization Service, is that performers have been part of a larger category - with a maximum of 78,000 visas - that included "doctors, lawyers, skilled craftsmen, journalists; anybody recognized in a field or as a professional." No records have been kept to show how many were in the arts.
A key Senate aide involved with the new bill agreed with Mr.
Kenney's assessment.
Jerry M. Tinker, principal subcommittee staff officer to Senator Edward M. Kennedy, chairman of the Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration and Refugee Affairs, said th bill would be changed.
"The artificial cap of 25,000 came out of the blue," Mr.
Tinker said.
Since the 25,000 figure is in the statute, he added, changing it would require a Congressional bill known as a technical correction.
Another section of the new law that would be changed by administrative process or in the technical correction, he said, is a prohibition against applying for a visa more tha 90 days before the scheduled trip.
Presenters of operas and ballets have complained that such performances have to scheduled years in advance and that the performers need to apply early so they can be sure they will be admitted.
Lobbying for Change
Representatives of arts organizations remain concerned.
One group, the League of American Theaters and Producers, is lobbying to change some of the provisions, particularly the 90-day limit on applying for visas.
George Wachtel, the league's research director, said, "They went about this without consulting the industry affected."
That charge was disputed by Bruce A. Morrison, a former Representative from Connecticut who, as chairman of the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, Refugees and International Law, led the House's work in drafting the new law.
"This provision was drafted after extensive consultation with workers as well as owners," he said.
"The legitimate interest of U.S. workers were protected without denying entry to a full range of foreign artists."
Mr.
Morrison said the number of performers who could be admitted under the new law was almost certainly larger than before.
Recognized or Unique
Mr.
Kenney of the immigration service said the rules establish the criteria under which up to 25,000 visas may be issued each year to entertainers and athletes.
Applicants will have to demonstrate that they are "internationally recognized," performing under a reciprocal arrangement, or participating in a culturally unique area.
Performers who do not meet those criteria will be able to apply in a separate category for people of "extraordinary ability."
Mr.
Morrison said he thought most performers would be admitted under one category or another.
Mr.
Tinker said the measure was approved in the rush to adjourn Congress last October and that Senate negotiators would not have agreed to the changes had they known of the difficulties the measure would cause.
"We were led to believe it was housecleaning," Mr.
Tinker said.
"There's a broad consensus on what ought to be done."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 2, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
SECRETS OF THE MORNING, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.95.) A young music student is haunted by the ghosts of her lovers, present and past.
2
2
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.
3
1
ONCE A PRINCESS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.95.) A woman working in Mississippi is visited by the European prince to whom she was affianced when a child.
4
5
MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.99.) A woman journalist's coming of age in the 1960's and 70's.
5 *
33
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
6
12
RED DRAGON, by Thomas Harris. (Dell, $5.95.) A retired F.B.I. agent returns to service to track down a serial killer.
7
2
"G" IS FOR GUMSHOE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.95.) On her 33d birthday, the private eye Kinsey Millhone finds herself on a hit list.
8
6
AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick Dunne. (Bantam, $5.99.) Manners, morals and murder in Los Angeles's high society.
9
4
THE CAT WHO LIVED HIGH, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.50.) A reporter and his two cats probe a mysterious death.
10
6
THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Doomsday brings horrors to America.
11
1
HAMMERHEADS, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.95.) A Coast Guard unit wages war against the South American drug cartel.
12
1
RENEGADE, by Gene Deweese. (Pocket, $4.95.) "Star Trek" 's Captain Kirk moves to stop a new plot that threatens the Federation.
13 *
5
FAMILY PICTURES, by Sue Miller. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.95.) The good and bad times of a large Chicago clan during the past 40 years.
14
5
MASQUERADE, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $5.95.) A New Orleans heiress encounters a masked man during a carnival in Nice.
15
25
DANCES WITH WOLVES, by Michael Blake. (Fawcett, $4.95.) A Civil War veteran adopts the ways of the Indians and fights for their principles.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
11
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
2
80
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
3
2
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
4
395
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
5
6
MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff describes the craft of the game.
6
42
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) The Arab-Israeli conflict as observed by a New York Times correspondent over the past decade.
7 *
2
BY WAY OF DECEPTION, by Victor Ostrovsky and Claire Hoy. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An account of the operations of Mossad, the Israeli spy service.
8
35
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
9
1
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
10
46
NO ONE HERE GETS OUT ALIVE, by Jerry Hopkins and Danny Sugerman. (Warner, $5.95.) The life of Jim Morrison, the lead singer of the Doors.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
11
THE REVENGE OF THE BABY-SAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
44
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
1
LIGHT HIS FIRE, by Ellen Kreidman. (Dell, $4.95.) Ways by which women can excite men romantically.
4 *
24
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
5
27
ALL I NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED FROM MY CAT, by Suzy Becker. (Workman, $5.95.) Precepts of a wise cat, in words and pictures.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


For Really Kicks Off Belmont's Blockbuster Week in Style
Belmont Park rang up the curtain on a blockbuster week of racing yesterday with a sizzling sprint, the Roseben Handicap, which was won by the 4-year-old colt For Really in 1:08 1/5.
The time tied the record for the six-furlong stakes, set 42 years ago, and was only two-fifths of a second off the track record for the distance.
Recent rains and subsequent drying had turned the track from a slow and tiring surface into a hard and exceptionally fast one, and For Really made the most of the change.
With Chris Antley driving him hard through the final yards, he overtook Mr.
Nasty in the last sixteenth of a mile and beat him under the wire by a neck, with Hadif nearly two lengths back in third place.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
CHANGES
Written and illustrated by Anthony Browne.
Unpaged.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Kurri Move Sets Off the Fast Pace of Trades to Come
The National Hockey League made a brief and quirky return to a major American television network last week, five days after the conclusion of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
This moment occurred during NBC's telecast of the game between the Los Angeles Lakers and the Portland Trail Blazers on Thursday night.


No Red Flag
Despite a taped message from MARIO ANDRETTI'S pit crew urging him to create a caution period to aid his son MICHAEL, a spokesman for the United States Auto Club said the club had no plans to take action against Mario for stopping his car during the Indianapolis 500 last Sunday.
"Michael needs a yellow. . . . Stop Mario. . . . Create a yellow," says the voice on the tape recorded by EVANS RUST, a fan from Scottsdale, Ariz., who was sitting in the southeast stands and taped communications betweeen drivers and their crews he picked up on a scanner.


Miss Sonnenblick Weds in Darien
Charlotte Sonnenblick, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edmund H. Sonnenblick of New York and Darien, Conn., was married last evening to Adam Van Doren, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Van Doren of New York and Evanston, Ill.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony at the Sonnenblick home in Darien.
The bride, the assistant director of acquisitions for Bravo Cable Network in Woodbury, L.I., graduated from Wesleyan University.
Her father is the chief of cardiology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
She is a granddaughter of Mrs.
Chester Bland of West Hartford, Conn., and the late Mr.
Bland, who was president of Colt Firearms in Hartford.


Ruth and Gehrig: Forced Smiles
When Lou Gehrig died 50 years ago today, on June 2, 1941, 17 days before his 38th birthday, he had already won his place among baseball's demigods.
But one question lingers today among his legion of admirers, which includes a surprising number of young people searching for heroes.
These fans are eager to learn what Gehrig's true relationship was with his Yankee brother-in-arms, Babe Ruth.
For after all, these two sluggers formed the marrow of the Yankees' omnipotent ball club from 1925, when Gehrig became a regular, through 1934, when Ruth's Yankee career ended, as complementary as ham and eggs.


Today's Threat to Peace Is the Guy Down the Street
SOON after word reached Washington that Rajiv Gandhi had been assassinated in India, President Bush remarked: "I just don't know what the world is coming to." That was a startling comment, coming from a man who only weeks earlier was proclaiming the birth of a new world order in the wake of the gulf war.
In a way, though, there was no contradiction.
The world is coming to a new order, but it is not the one that President Bush envisaged -- or one that he will have much ability to shape.
The main principle President Bush invoked to justify his opposition to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait was that unless international boundaries between sovereign nation states are respected, the alternative is chaos.
But the sort of threat posed by Saddam Hussein -- one nation state simply devouring its neighbor -- is increasingly obsolete in world politics today.


Salute Berries in Ways Plain and Fancy
THE berry season has arrived.
Strawberries to purchase at farm stands or to gather at farms that permit pickers are the first of a succession of locally grown berries that ripen through the fall.
After the strawberries come raspberries and blueberries, then blackberries, then raspberries again.
Finally, some areas will have locally grown cranberries.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE DAY GONE BY  An Autobiography. By Richard Adams. Knopf, $25.


Knights Set Out to Erase Monarchs and Memories
Had they been hopelessly blown out in two previous World League of American Football League games against the London Monarchs, the New York/New Jersey Knights would harbor no hopes of victory in their semifinal playoff game against the Monarchs at Giants Stadium on Sunday afternoon at 1 P.M.
But the Knights (5-5) are haunted by the way that they lost the two games to London (9-1).
A victory over London, in what has turned out to be the most important of the three meetings between the two teams, would go a long way toward easing some of the mental and physical pain of the previous losses.


CLASSICAL BRIEFS
Canteloube: Songs of the Auvergne
Netania Davrath, soprano; orchestra conducted by Pierre de la Roche.
Vanguard Classics OVC-8001/2; two CD's.


In Philadelphia, a Victorian Extravaganza Lives
It is precisely the kind of building that everyone used to hate, and that it is now nearly impossible not to love: a Victorian monster, its deep, flaming rust brick and terra-cotta arches and gables and towers and crenellations and dormers piled into a mass that is at once hysterical and serene.
The Furness Library, finished in 1891 as the main library of the University of Pennsylvania and now brilliantly restored in honor of its centennial, is enough to put to rest forever any talk of Victorian primness; this is one of the most sensuous buildings I have ever encountered.
It is architecture to wallow in, architecture that is capable of sending the emotions to a fever pitch, even as it fully satisfies the intellect.
This remarkable structure is one of the few remaining works by Philadelphia's great master of Victorian Gothic Mannerism, Frank Furness.
Furness's architecture was intensely powerful, and sometimes almost deliberately perverse, full of unexpected juxtapositions of the gentle and the tough, the big and the small, the refined and the raw.
These elements come together as a complex, energetic whole, and it is no exaggeration to speak of Furness's buildings as embracing the whole scope of 19th-century American culture.
It seems right and natural that Furness's father's close friends were Ralph Waldo Emerson and Walt Whitman: honesty and passion are the themes of his architecture, as much as space and light.


Soviet Kurds Face Loss of Their Identity
To the Editor:
Your coverage of the latest plight of the Iraqi Kurds, in mountain camps on Iraq's border with Turkey, has been compelling.
Little has been said, however, of the fate of 300,000 to 500,000 Kurds in the Soviet Union.


Miss Tepperman, Student, Marries
Tracey Beth Tepperman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred L. Tepperman of New York and New Rochelle, N.Y., was married last night to Jeffrey Bruce Greenfield, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Greenfield of Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Amiel Wohl officiated at the Brae Burn Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Greenfield, 25 years old, graduated from Northwestern University, as did her husband.
She is studying for an M.B.A. degree at New York University.
Her father is the executive vice president and chief financial officer of MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Holdings in New York, a holding company for Revlon Inc. and other concerns.


North Korean Asks Confederation With South
A North Korean diplomat has suggested a "loose confederation" that would somehow accommodate South Korea's booming market economy and North Korea's faltering Marxist system as a possible first step toward a complete unification of the two countries.
"The United States began as a confederation," said Han Si Hae, Deputy Chairman for Unification in the Pyongyang Government.
"The 13 colonies merged, but kept their own interests. The Federal government became powerful only gradually. There is no reason why Korea could not do the same."


Talking: Refinancing; Shopping For a Deal For a Co-op
A GROWING number of New York City co-ops are scrambling to refinance their underlying mortgages and many are encountering unexpected -- but not insurmountable -- roadblocks.
Sagging real estate values and difficulties with financially troubled sponsors are making lenders more conservative about the amount they will provide and the buildings they deem acceptable.
As a result, boards are being forced to learn how to cope with new realities to get what they need.


Catherine Dryer and Fabio Rosati Wed
Catherine Ann Dryer, a certified public accountant and law student, and Fabio Rosati, a management consultant, were married yesterday at Most Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in East Hampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Richard Galligan officiated.
Mrs.
Rosati and her husband are both 26 years old.
She and her husband graduated from Georgetown University in 1987, she cum laude.
She expects to receive a J.D. degree next year from New York University, where she is a Ford Foundation fellow.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Dryer of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her father teaches mathematics at New Rochelle (N.Y.) High School, and her mother, Nora Dryer, is an instructor at the Cochran School of Nursing at St.
John's Riverside Hospital in Yonkers.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I live in a very old apartment, and the three walls that surround my bathtub were long ago covered with a type of wallboard that has an imitation tile pattern on the surface.
This has been painted over many times, and now the paint is starting to flake off on the lower 18 inches around all three sides.
Can you tell me how to eliminate this flaking condition and make the paint to adhere after I repaint?
A.
This type of hardboard originally had a very slick glossy finish on it, and paint does not usually adhere well to it if the surface is not properly prepared.
The reason most of the flaking is on the lower part is probably because the moisture tends to creep up from the edges of the tub.
To solve the problem, you should scrape and sand off all the loose or flaking paint.
Then sand the exposed tile board with a medium-grit No. 80 paper.
Dust thoroughly.
Apply one coat of a shellac-based primer like BIN or Enamelac.
Then apply two coats of alkyd enamel, sanding lightly between coats.


Kerry LeBlanc To Marry in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard W. LeBlanc of Brookfield, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kerry Ann LeBlanc to Jeffrey Lee Strong, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger L. Strong of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
LeBlanc, 27 years old, is an account executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Colgate University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the senior director of instrument engineering at the Perkin-Elmer Corporation in Norwalk, Conn.


Wesleyan Shows Span Styles and Eras
YOU would not know from their shows -- or their buildings -- that the Ezra and Cecile Zilkha Gallery and the Davison Art Center belonged to the same world, let alone the same university, Wesleyan, in Middletown.
Housed in a Bauhaus-pure structure with large windows, the Zilkha is bare, beautiful and monastic with walls and high ceilings made of smooth gray concrete and a carpet that turns the color of champagne in sunlight.
The ideal art for this space would be the black Rothko paintings that hang in the chapel named for him in Houston, but the shows now in residence are almost as ascetic.


Sarah Lindgren, Student, Is Wed
Sarah Howard Lindgren, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Hugo Lindgren of New York and Shelter Island, L.I., was married yesterday to Neil Evan Nussbaum, a son of Theodore Nussbaum and Ruthellen Claman, both of New York.
The Rev.
Francis B. Creamer, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi David Greenberg performed the ceremony at the Shelter Island home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Nussbaum, 25 years old, graduated from Swarthmore College and is studying law at Duke University.
Her father is a managing director of Scarborough &amp; Company, a New York investment banking concern.
Her mother, Anne Howard Lindgren, is a vice president of Michaels Development, a real-estate company in Marlton, N.J.


Blacks in a Long Gray Line
The military's role as "the greatest equal opportunity employer around," as President Bush put it yesterday, did not come easily or quickly at the nation's oldest military academy.
The figures tell a dramatic story.
Although West Point graduated both its 1,000th black cadet and its 1,000th female cadet yesterday, blacks have been members of the Corps of Cadets since the 1870's, while women have been coming only since 1976.


Sticking With the Intermediates
One rule of thumb of investing is that the greater the risk, the bigger the return.
And interest-rate risk increases over time.
So investors who tie up their money in long-term bond funds should get returns that are markedly better than the returns of shorter-term funds.
That, however, has not happened in high-quality corporate bond funds.
For the last five years, there has been virtually no difference in the returns of the long-term A-rated corporate bond funds and intermediate bond funds, the bulk of whose holdings are comparable in quality to the A-rated funds'.
After 7 and 10 years, the spread widens somewhat, but it is still less than one percentage point.


Cosmic Permutations
To the Editor:
Because of the timing of your article "Gay Images: TV's Mixed Signals"  [ May 19 ] , you were unable to mention the "Star Trek: The Next Generation" episode of the night before, which was a subtle and sympathetic exploration of homosexuality.


On the Street; The Panama Hat's Icumen In
The unwilting dash of the Panama straw hat has a crisp look that defies even 90-degree heat and unbearable humidity.
The youngster (center) in his Dick Tracy snap-brim achieved a sophistication beyond his years.
Harrison J. Goldin (bottom, far right), the former New York City comptroller, wore a similar style without the dented crown.
Each Panama hat wearer achieved individuality with a flip of the brim.
The man eating a popsicle (below) had his brim turned rakishly up.
The man reading on a park bench had his turned down.
And the traveler carrying a bag didn't let his T-shirt and shorts stop him from donning a flat-brimmed hat.
The man in white (upper right) was the epitome of tried and true summer elegance as a Fifth Avenue shop window caught his attention.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Freehold 158,400 43 Windham Way 4-bedroom, 3-bath, 2 1/2-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $3,516.
Lakewood 55,000 106 Tudor Court 2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 20-year-old condominium town house; c/a, w/w carpeting; monthly charges $90; taxes $1,257.
Maplewood 150,000 182 Garfield Place 4-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, den, screened porch; taxes $4,634.
Mount Arlington 83,000 106 McGregor Avenue 1-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old lakeview ranch; fenced yard, lake rights; taxes $2,213.
South Orange 218,000 306 Highland Road 4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 46-year-old colonial; eat-in-kitchen, porch, den, 2-car garage; taxes $6,119.
Springfield 299,000 977 Chimney Ridge Road 4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old colonial; c/a, 2-car garage, deck, full basement; taxes $7,108.OTHER AREASScarsdale, N.Y. 646,500 35 Springdale Road 5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, Jacuzzi; taxes $14,621.
Middletown, Conn. 105,000 62 Julia Terrace 2-bedroom, 1-bath, 17-year-old ranch; formal dining room, unfinished basement, move-in condition;taxes $1,275.
North Bellmore, L.I. 161,000 2167 Sanders Place 6 bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,500.


Children; A Wealth of Things to Do And Learn
Here is a sampling of children's activities, compiled by Dulcie Leimbach, scheduled this summer in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
ALL AGES
June
THE BIG APPLE CIRCUS, with a "golden age of circus" theme, featuring ballerinas on horseback, strong men, aerialists, clowns, and dancing pigs and elephants.
Today through Tuesday at the Macombs Dam Park, 161st Street at Jerome Avenue, the Bronx.
Tickets, $6 to $10.
Information on performance times: (212) 268-0055.
Thursday to June 16 (evening shows Friday and June 12 are sold out), at the Tilles Center for the Performing Arts, Long Island University, C. W. Post Campus, Route 25A, Greenvale, L.I.
Tickets, $12 to $20.
Information on performance times: (516) 888-9000.
BARNYARD BARBECUING, an evening of barbecuing, country-and-western music and hayrides at sunset.
At the Queens County Farm Museum, 73-50 Little Neck Parkway, Floral Park.
Today from 4 to 8 P.M.
Tickets, $15 for adults and $7.50 for children.
Information: (718) 347-3276.
"DANCE AFRICA BAZAAR," the culmination of the Dance Africa festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The bazaar will feature Caribbean and African-American foods, crafts, fashion and jewelry.
At the Brooklyn Academy of Music's parking lot, Lafayette Street and Ashland Place, Fort Greene section.
Today from noon to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 636-4129.
"BABES IN THE WOODS," a stroll with children age 4 and under, through the grounds of Wave Hill led by Margaret Hoeffel, a gardener and mother.
Tuesday and July 10 at 10 A.M.
Meet at the Learning Center, Wave Hill, 675 West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Free.
Information: (212) 549-3200.
"ZOO FAMILIES," a class in which human families can meet their animal counterparts, focusing on animals born at the Central Park Zoo; a tour to meet the newest babies is included.
June 15 and 16, from 11 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. from 2 to 2:30 P.M., at the zoo, 64th Street and Fifth Avenue, Manhattan.
Fee: $2.50 a person, including zoo admission.
Registration required.
Information: (212) 439-6538.
STRAWBERRY THANKSGIVING, a celebration of an American Indian holiday.
Families may create strawberry wreaths on June 22 and plant strawberries and watch the Pretty Flower Dancers on June 23.
On both days, berries will be sampled.
At Wave Hill, Learning Center, 675 West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx.
The celebration is from 1 to 4:30 P.M. both days.
Admission to Wave Hill is $2 for adults and free for members and children under 6; the celebration costs an additional $3 per family.
Information: (212) 549-3200.
July
INDEPENDENCE DAY CELEBRATION AND ICE-CREAM SOCIAL with a demonstration of 19th-century ice-cream-making techniques and old-time competitions.
July 4 at 2 P.M. at Richmondtown Restoration, 441 Clarke Avenue, Richmondtown, S.I., 2 P.M.
Admission: $4 for adults and $2 for children.
Information: (718) 351-1611.
"FRIDAY FAMILY NIGHT," where families may sit in a rooftop amphitheater and listen to concerts, watch African dancers and magicians, or participate in sing-alongs.
Every Friday at 6:30 P.M. from July 5 to Aug. 23, and 7:30 P.M. on Aug. 30.
Brooklyn Children's Museum, 145 Brooklyn Avenue, Crown Heights.
Free.
Information: (718) 735-4400.
August
BIG NAZO PUPPETS, featuring the Big Nazo Bowling Alley Band, a rhythm-and-blues puppet group, with audience participation; part of the Lincoln Center Out-of-Doors festival.
On Aug. 2 at 10:30 A.M. and Aug. 3 at 5:30 P.M., on the plaza at Lincoln Center.
Free.
Information: (212) 875-5000.
SUMMER FESTIVAL, with puppet shows, games, roller-skating competitions and guest speakers from the Sierra and Audubon Clubs focusing on a nature theme.
Aug. 17 and 18 from noon to 5 P.M. at Kissena Park, Rose Avenue, off Kissena Boulevard, Flushing, Queens.
Free.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
RICHMOND COUNTY FAIR, an annual country-style fair with entertainment, flower and vegetable contests, a foot race, a pet show, exhibits, rides and food.
Aug. 31 from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. (rain date Sept. 1) at Richmondtown Restoration, 441 Clarke Avenue, Richmondtown, S.I.
Admission: $5 for adults and $2 for children 6 and up.
Information: (718) 351-1611.
AGES 3 AND UP
June
"ARTY FACTS," a drop-in workshop where parents and children, ages 4 to 7, create art objects and go on a gallery tour, all led by a museum teacher, who chooses the themes.
Every Saturday and Sunday at 11 A.M., at the Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights.
Participants meet in the Grand Lobby, first floor.
Admission: $4 for adults and free for children under 12 accompanied by an adult.
Information: (718) 638-5000, extension 236.
"ALICE IN WONDERLAND," an adaptation with marionettes with original songs, produced by the Puppetworks.
At the Puppetworks Theater, 338 Sixth Avenue, at Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Saturdays and Sundays from today to July 28 at 12:30 P.M.
Saturdays from Aug. 4 to 24 at 12:30 P.M.
Tickets, $5 for adults and $4 for children.
Reservations: (718) 965-3391.
MAPAPA ACROBATS, Kenyan tumblers who perform to live pop music from East Africa.
Part of the New York International Festival of the Arts.
Saturday and next Sunday at 3:30 and 5:30 P.M.; June 10 and 11 at 10 A.M. and noon; June 15 at 7:30 P.M., and June 16 at 3:30 P.M.
At the Triplex, 199 Chambers Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $6 for weekday performances, $8 for Saturdays and Sundays.
Information: (212) 618-1980 or (212) 307-7171 (Ticketmaster).
"ANIMAL ABC'S" and "STORYBOOK ANIMALS." In "Animal ABC's" (offered June 22, July 10 and 27, and Aug. 7) children will meet and touch animals and play games.
In "Storybook Animals" (next Sunday and June 12 and July 14 and 23), children will hear classic tales and meet the animals that have inspired the authors.
Both are for children ages 3 and 4 at the Central Park Zoo, 64th Street and Fifth Avenue, Manhattan.
Admission for each: $14 for members and $16 for nonmembers, $9 for each additional person.
Registration and class times: (212) 439-6538.
July
"READ-TO-ME," a reading club for toddlers, ages 3 to 5, and their parents to encourage reading aloud.
July 1 to Aug. 31, with prizes awarded at the end.
At the Queens Library, 89-11 Merrick Boulevard, Jamaica.
Free.
Information: (718) 990-0700.
CLYDE BEATTY-COLE BROTHERS CIRCUS, a three-ring circus from Florida, with live animals, high-wire acts, acrobats and clowns.
Daily from July 8 to 11 at 4:30 and 8 P.M., with an additional show on July 10 at 11A.M.
At the Forest Park Band Shell, Forest Park, Woodhaven Boulevard and Forest Park Drive West, Woodhaven, Queens.
On July 25 through July 28, the circus will be at Shea Stadium in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Parking Lot A; performances at 4:30 and 8 P.M.
Thursdays and Fridays and 1:30, 4:30 and 8 P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays.
The circus will also perform daily from Aug. 5 to 8 at 4:30 and 8 P.M., Father Capodanno and Lincoln Boulevards, Midland Beach, S.I.
Tickets: $9 for adults, $4 for children ($11 for reserved seats; $6 for children.) Information: (718) 520-5911.
BABOON RESERVE, a new permanent exhibit that re-creates the Ethiopian highlands habitat of the gelada baboon, opening on July 10 at 11 A.M. at the Bronx Zoo, Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road.
The zoo is open daily from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. (until 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays).
Zoo admission: Fridays through Mondays, $4.75 for adults and $2 for children ages 2 to 12; Tuesdays through Thursdays, by donation.
Parking, $4 a day.
"WONDERFUL SKY," a sky show at which children ages 3 to 6 sing along with members of the Muppets from "Sesame Street" while learning about rainbows, moon phases, sunsets and stars.
On July 13 and Aug. 3 at 10:30 A.M., at the Hayden Planetarium, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West and 81st Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $5 for adults and $2.50 for children.
Registration and information: (212) 769-5900.
"SCENTS OF SUMMER," a workshop for children ages 3 to 9 to explore the scents of summer flowers by visiting the gardens and making potpourri.
At the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, Crown Heights, July 17 from 2:30 to 3:30 P.M.
Children under age 5 must be accompanied by an adult.
Fee, $5 for members, $6 for nonmembers.
Registration and information: (718) 622-4433.
August
BLACK WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP RODEO, a black rodeo team from Texas and Oklahoma performing such stunts as barrel racing, bulldogging, calf-roping, steer-wrestling and bareback bronco riding.Aug. 17 at 3 P.M. at Public School 14, Stapleton Park, Tompkins Avenue and Broad Street, Stapleton, S.I.
Admission: $10 for adults and $8 for children.
Information: (212) 675-0085.
AGES 5 TO 12
June
"HEAD A TETE," a Canadian play, inspired by children's playground games and fables, about a friendship that crosses cultural and language barriers.
Sponsored by the New York International Festival of the Arts.
Saturday and next Sunday at 10 A.M. and noon.
At the Triplex, 199 Chambers Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $8.
Information: (212) 618-1980 or (212) 307-7171 (Ticketmaster).
BAG WEAVING, a workshop in which participants will make and take home a small hand sack, as they learn about this Colonial-era craft.
At the Pieter Claesen Wyckoff House Museum, Clarendon Road at Ralph Avenue, Canarsie, Brooklyn.
Next Sunday at 12:30 P.M.
Fee, $5.
Advance registration: (718) 629-5400.
"CHOCOLATE CHIP COOKIE CHALLENGE," in which cookies baked by Staten Island chefs will be judged by a children's panel; participants will also get to take home cookie dough.
June 22 at 11 A.M. at the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Randall Manor.
Admission: $2 a child plus the museum admission of $2 for visitors 2 years old and up.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
July
SUMMER READING CLUB, in which participants from ages 5 to 11 read at least seven books on ecology and the environment between July 1 and Aug. 31.
Prizes will be awarded at the end.
At the Queens Borough Public Library, 89-11 Merrick Boulevard, Jamaica.
Free.
Information: (718) 990-0700.
INDONESIAN STORYTELLING, a program with masks and homemade instruments, followed by a music-and-dance workshop focusing on Indonesia.
At the Museum of Metropolitan Art, Uris Center for Education, tiered seating area.
July 10, 3 to 4 P.M.
Admission: $6 for adults; free for children under 12.
Information: (212) 570-3932.
August
"THE YOUNG MAGICIANS' CONVENTION," where children will be taught sleight-of-hand tricks and close-up magic, with entertainment by amateur and professional magicians.
Aug. 4 from noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: some events free with museum admission of $2 for adults and children age 2 and up; $1 to $2 fees for some workshops and performances.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
AGES 8 TO 12
June
"IT'S NEWS TO ME," a permanent interactive exhibit about news and the media.
A re-created television studio encourages aspiring journalists to practice the five W's: who, what, when, where and why.
At the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
The museum is open Wednesdays through Fridays from 1 to 5 P.M., Saturdays and Sundays from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2 for visitors 2 years old and older.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
"THE ADVENTURES OF SUPERMAN," a "Re-Creating Radio" workshop in which children enact the radio program by using microphones, a script and sound effects.
June 15 from 10 to 11:30 A.M. at the Museum of Television and Radio, 1 East 53d Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $5 for children and adults.
Information: (212) 752-4690.
July
"CLASS CLOWN," a new musical about a bright boy who, through antics and clowning, hides his illiteracy.
Produced by Theaterworks/USA from July 1 to July 28.
Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 11 A.M. and 1 P.M.
Saturdays and Sundays at 11 A.M.
Tickets are sold the day of performance on a first-come-first-served basis at the Promenade Theater box office, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 677-5959.
FINE-ART CLASSES, with slides and films when appropriate, followed by a workshop in drawing, painting, collage, sculpture or printmaking for children ages 9 to 13.
July 10 to Aug. 21, Wednesdays only, from 1:30 to 3 P.M., on a first-come-first-served drop-in basis.
Admission: $2 a class or $3 for the class and museum admission.
At the Queens Museum, New York City Building (near the Unisphere), Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
Information: (718) 592-9700.
August
PAINTING WORKSHOP, a two-part course that uses watercolor, acrylic and tempera paints, with materials supplied.
On Aug. 3 and 10 from 2 to 4 P.M. at the Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street, Manhattan.
Fee: $5 for one workshop; $10 for both.
Reservations: (212) 864-4500.
"DUCK DUCK GOOSE," a program that teaches children about the beaks, feet and feathers of ducks, taught by Prospect Park's Urban Park Rangers.
Aug. 25, 2 P.M.
At the Boathouse, Lincoln Road entrance, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEARNING ABOUT RABIES
A program on rabies -- a disease that has been spreading through Westchester and can be transmitted by raccoons -- will take place Tuesday from 7 to 9 P.M. at the Cornell Cooperative Extension Headquarters at 214 Central Avenue in White Plains.
Christine Falco, animal and vector-control specialist with the County Health Department is one of three speakers.
"A vector is an animal or organism that spreads a disease, such as a tick spreading Lyme disease or raccoons carrying rabies," she said.
She will be joined by Dr.
Mary Padilla, an Armonk veterinarian, and Greg Quinn, a licensed independent nuisance-wildlife control agent in Verplanck.


New York State Budget: The Legislature's Version
This year New York State's budget negotiations seem to have been conducted in slow motion, almost as if the participants were moving under water.
On Friday, two months after the legal deadline, the Legislature finally began to approve parts of the budget, including appropriations for state agencies, the judiciary and debt service.
But other parts of the $51.9 billion budget, including aid to local governments and new taxes, were still being drafted today and passage was not expected until Sunday or Monday.


Growing Produce and Community Pride
LAND preservation is Louis McCagg's chief concern.
Two years ago he founded the nonprofit Westchester Land Trust, based in Bedford, which has worked successfully to protect large open tracts from development.
But another thing the group has done is help communities transform small empty sites into community gardens.
"The concept of the community garden fits right in with our goal of preserving open land in the county," said Mr.
McCagg, suggesting that empty lots in dense urban areas represented even more valuable land.


Extra Care to Install Outdoors Outlets
HAVING an outdoor electrical outlet is convenient.
Most newer homes feature at least one.
If your home does not or if you would like to add more, the job is usually fairly easy.
An outdoor outlet requires a special receptacle with a device that protects against electric shock in damp conditions.
The device is called a ground-fault circuit interrupter.


New York City to Resume Listing Health Violations by Restaurants
New York City's listing of restaurants with health hazards and other sanitary-code violations -- a program suspended three years ago when a bribery-extortion scandal engulfed half the inspection force -- is being resumed with a virtually new staff of inspectors and an array of safeguards against corruption.
The new listings, dubbed "The Good, the Bad and the Ugly," will be issued by the Health Department for publication every two weeks and will include three categories of restaurants: those that have passed recent inspections, those ordered closed for operating without a valid permit and those closed for serious health hazards.


I.R.A. Says It Planted Truck Bomb That Killed 3
Three soldiers were killed and 10 were wounded late Friday night when the outlawed Irish Republican Army rolled a truck loaded with more than 2,000 pounds of explosives down a hillside into a small Ulster Defense Regiment base here.
Four civilians in the tiny Protestant crossroads village farther down the hill from the base in the southern part of the County of Armagh were also wounded in the tremendous blast at 11:30 P.M. that was heard 30 miles away in Dundalk, in the Irish Republic.


Kohl Opposed on Troops Outside NATO Area
The opposition Social Democratic Party has voted overwhelmingly to refuse to allow the stationing of German forces outside the NATO area, except as part of United Nations peacekeeping forces, in effect dealing a blow to Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
Mr.
Kohl had pledged to lift the curbs, which limited German involvement in the Persian Gulf war.
But to do so, the Chancellor requires a two-thirds vote in Parliament, and thus Social Democratic support.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
I am bearing the pain of a basketball-damaged right thumb to respond to Camille Paglia's essay "Ninnies, Pedants, Tyrants and Other Academics" (May 5).
These types of articles, of which there are many in the press -- so many, in fact, that a recent piece in a chic academic rag spoke of an "anti-deconstruction conspiracy" at The New York Times -- raise my ire.


President Slice-And-Dice
They've been chortling lately in the White House about what President Bush is doing to the dazed Democrats.
Methodical as a logger, he has seized on issue after issue to saw away at the opposition's arms, legs, head and heart.
It's a demonstration of virtuoso politics.
And of destructive leadership.
Yesterday at West Point, for instance, the President began by hailing the academy's thousandth black graduate and thousandth female graduate.
But then he went on in scornful terms, denouncing the new Democratic civil rights bill as a "quota bill" even though it would ban hiring quotas: "Regardless of how its authors dress it up, you can't put a sign on a pig and say it's a horse."


WINDSOR KNOT
Gossip about the royal family follows a tradition that goes back to the founding of the modern constitutional monarchy in 1688, but your repetition of the "statistics" regarding the wealth of the royal family must be challenged ("Windsor Knot," by Christopher Hitchens, May 12).
The sovereign's real personal wealth is no more than what she would be permitted to retain as her own property if the Monarchy were replaced.
The figure of $10 billion is mostly composed of inalienable fixed assets and works of art, of which the sovereign is merely the temporary custodian and which can never be sold.
The high valuation of the landed estates has fallen victim to a collapsing real-estate market.
The value of the royal art and stamp collection is based on very approximate assessments of groups of individual works.
The cumulative value of the art, as estimated, is already more than five times that of the world art market in those areas and, since it could not possibly be absorbed at such prices, it must be considerably discounted.


Ellen Diehl Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond T. Diehl of Morris Plains, N.J., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter, Ellen Ann Diehl, and Mark Robert Serruto, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy Serruto of Short Hills, N.J.
Miss Diehl, 27 years old, is a corporate-relations coordinator at Fair Oaks Hospital in Summit, N.J.
She graduated from Kean College of New Jersey and received a master's degree in counseling from Montclair State College.
Mr.
Serruto, 33, is a senior vice president of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, investment bankers in New York.
He is a graduate of the University of Virginia.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
When Camille Paglia waxes lyrical -- "sliding in the mud at Woodstock" (collecting, no doubt, handfuls of her favorite weapon) -- I, in turn, want to cry out: "Give us a break!"  ROBERT HARVEY Stony Brook, L.I.


Sports of The Times; Another Player in the Game
Those dreadful, awful, horrid Mets have been mean to Gregg Jefferies.
How do we know?
It was on the air.
It was in the papers.
Yet in the very same papers and stations that carried every nasty little detail of the Jefferies affair, there was criticism of the Mets for gossiping and backbiting.
Can we have it both ways?
I don't think so.
After all, when giant trees come crashing down in the Mets' forest, they do not exactly fall unheard.
In fact, an entire brigade of tape recorders and notebooks is always on hand to holler


Pirates Know How to Pitch, Too
With a history of dominant hitters in their lineup -- the legacy the past three decades alone has gone from Roberto Clemente to Willie Stargell to Dave Parker to Bobby Bonilla and Barry Bonds -- the Pittsburgh Pirates have found it easy to overlook their pitchers.
Playing in the same division, the Mets have made it easy for others to overlook the Pirates' pitchers.


Suzanne Augresani Is Wed
Suzanne Nicole Augresani and Mark Steven Katz, officers at the Chemical Bank in New York, were married yesterday at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club by the Rev.
Vincent Sica, a Unitarian minister, and Cantor William Walton.
Mrs.
Katz, 25 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Augresani of Oakwood Heights, S.I.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and is a manager in the bank's consumer division.
Mr.
Katz, 29, is the son of Mrs.
David Traub of Mamaroneck and the late Milton Katz.
He graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received master's degrees from Columbia University and the University of Chicago.
He is an operations analyst.


From Strength to Strength: A Collector's Gift to the Met
For the Metropolitan Museum of Art -- and for New York City, where good news has lately been in short supply -- the announcement in March that Walter H. Annenberg intended to donate his collection of French Impressionist and Post-Impressionist art was a big event.
Not for more than half a century, since the donation of the H. O. Havemeyer collection, had such a large and important assortment of such works been promised to the museum.
The gift, by the publisher, philanthropist and former United States Ambassador to Britain, which is to be made at his death, reinforces an already outstanding department at the Metropolitan.
Mr.
Annenberg's decision disappointed officials at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and the National Gallery in Washington.


RECORD BRIEF
Marty Ehrlich and the Dark Woods Ensemble: 'Emergency Peace'
New World 80409-2/4; CD and cassette.


Traffic Alert
Israel Day Parade: Fifth Avenue will be closed today from 57th to 79th Street from 11:30 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Chelsea Eighth Avenue Street Fair: Eighth Avenue will be closed today from 14th to 23d Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Outings; Where to Find Quiet Places Out of the City
NO doubt about it: New York City was, is and always will be the big magnet that draws in the crowds.
In spring, fall and winter, there's that unmistakable pull toward the in-town concert halls, theaters and art galleries.
Summer is the time to reverse the field, to venture out from the city, to get away from the middle-of-the-night car alarms and crack-of-dawn garbage trucks, to wander through big old houses that don't need round-the-clock air-conditioning, to savor slower-paced goings-on.
These are some of my favorite daylong outings within a couple of hours of the city.
A Lazy Afternoon
Washington crossed the Delaware in 1776.
I got around to it a couple of centuries later.


Review/Dance; A Reality Piece in Two Parts and Places
There were cheers when David Rousseve and his Reality company took their bows at the end of "Telling You My Dreams From a Cloud Sailin' By" on Thursday night at the Danspace Project at St.
Mark's Church.
And that wasn't surprising, given the ambitions and tone of this continuing theater-and-dance piece.
The first part of the sprawling sixth segment, which has its final performance today, has been presented at Performance Space 122.
The second part is performed at St.
Mark's.
The piece makes use of a huge variety of musical styles, including gospel music sung on stage by B. J. Crosby and the Lavendar Light choir.
And it winds the long, vivid life of the late Thelma Arceneaux, Mr.
Rousseve's Creole grandmother and his inspiration, into an inseparable whole with the choreographer's very different life.


Winds in Mauritania Kill 4
Violent winds left at least 4 people dead and 300 injured in this Mauritanian capital and another city, hospital officials said today.
The winds, which ripped through the cities Friday night and destroyed many homes, left three women dead in Nouakchott and killed a child in Boutilinit, east of the capital, the officials said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Travel Advisory column on May 19 about the London river bus rendered three prices in dollars incorrectly.
The fare from Chelsea Harbor to City Airport is $12.40 and from Charing Cross to City Airport $10.30.
The children's fare from either point is $1.30.


Jennifer Petite Wed to A. A. Sirianni 3d
Jennifer Kristin Petite, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael James Petite of Bethesda, Md., was married in Middleburg, Va., yesterday to Anthony A. Sirianni 3d, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony A. Sirianni 2d of Todt Hill, S.I.
The Rev.
James Miles English performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at a farm owned by the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Sirianni, 24 years old, is an assistant fashion designer in New York for Finity Sportswear.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is a psychiatrist in Washington, where her mother, Ann Sirianni, is an art consultant.


Offbeat
Here is a list of quirky treats available this summer in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today-Saturday RODEO IN THE BRONX, Crotona Community Baseball Field, 180th Street between Mapes and Prospect Avenues, Fordham, the Bronx.
The wild, wild East: Bronco busting, calf roping, steer wrestling, with professional cowpokes.
Today at 2 P.M.
Information: (212) 293-5882.
The 92d Street Y in Manhattan is chartering a bus, leaving the Y (at Lexington Avenue) at noon.
Fee: $30.
Bus reservations: (212) 996-1100.


The Region; In Albany Fiscal Crisis Is a Matter Of Routine
THE tortuous budget negotiations this spring in the New York State Legislature were frequently likened to a marathon, but the analogy -- while capturing the grueling nature of the process -- seemed flawed in one important respect.
A marathon has a set finish line.
In Albany, the official deadline of April 1, when a budget is required by statute, has been treated by lawmakers and lobbyists as something of a bad joke in recent years.
New York has not had an on-time budget since 1984.


Good Sport Is Good Sport
To the Sports Editor:
Thanks to Robert Lipsyte ("Gay Bias Moves Off the Sidelines," The Times, May 24) for calling attention to the discrimination based on sexual preference that is being dished out in professional and collegiate athletics these days.


T. C. Gosnell Wed To Ms. Macridis
Silvia de Montserrat Ortiz Macridis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Emilio M. Ortiz of Coral Gables, Fla., and San Juan, P.R., was married in Boston yesterday to Thomas Craig Gosnell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Hale Gosnell of Rochester.
The Rev.
Michael Kuhn officiated at Emmanuel Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Gosnell, 29 years old, is an associate with the Boston law firm of Palmer &amp; Dodge.
She graduated magna cum laude and received a J.D. from Yale University.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is a financial entrepreneur in Florida and the Caribbean.


Wall Street; Protecting Limited Partners . . . Against Too-Slim Returns
Of all the properties managed these days by VMS Realty Partners, a troubled Chicago real estate syndicator, and its affiliates, the Boca Raton Hotel and Resort is thought to be the healthiest.
That is why limited partners like Eggert Dagson do not want to see it go on the block in a soft market just to help VMS, as the general partner, settle some debts.
By his calculations, the property might fetch $230 million from a sale.
VMS would then extract $63.6 million in upfront fees, while the limited partners would receive a mere $32.4 million of their original $50 million investment, after debts are repaid.
What is more, the limited partners would need to use some of their proceeds to pay taxes triggered by the sale.


The Great Dark Way: Slowly, The Lights Are Dimming On Broadway
How does one begin to dramatize the alarm that is spreading over the Broadway community as it stuffs itself into evening clothes to present the Tony Awards tonight?
Well, for starters, consider the fact that the nominees, who will be honored on CBS starting at 9 P.M., do not represent the
best
of the 1990-91 season -- they represent
all
of the 1990-91 season.
Nearly every production seen on Broadway since this time last year has been nominated for something.
The question raised by this award ceremony is not "How good do you have to be to get a nomination?" but "How bad do you have to be
not
to get a nomination?"
The answer to that question for musicals is: hit rock bottom, and keep going.
Every musical of the season, from a bus-and-truck "Peter Pan" to "Shogun: The Musical" to "Oh, Kay!" is in contention somewhere on the ballot.
Among the season's plays, only "Zoya's Apartment," "Stand-Up Tragedy," "The Big Love," "Taking Steps" and "Mule Bone" failed to be cited for so much as best sound design. (Actually, best sound design is not a category, but it should be, if only to encourage producers to make their shows audible rather than merely loud.)


The Nation; The Canon Has Changed, The Keg Is Ever the Same
FIFTEEN minutes into the first day of Political Science 203, "The Press and Public Policy," the visiting professor mentioned Adlai Stevenson's crack about how newspapers separate the wheat from the chaff and print the chaff.
There was not a glimmer of recognition.
"Does anyone know who Adlai Stevenson was?" he asked the class.
No one did.
That was the middle-aged reporter's introduction to college students in the spring of 1991.
Twenty-six years after he last set foot in a classroom, he was imported from Washington to teach for a term at Colorado College, a fine, small liberal arts school in the shadow of Pike's Peak.


Travel Advisory; In Europe, Trains Are Gaining On Airplanes
The differences between train and plane travel in Europe are continuing to narrow.
When total travel time is considered, going by high-speed train is becoming as fast as by plane in many places, especially when the train journey is less than five hours.
However, when an airport is linked to downtown by a rail line -- as in Brussels, Frankfurt and Zurich -- the plane has an extra edge on speed.
Here are some comparisons of travel time and ticket prices, which are substantially lower for round-trip excursions with restrictions than for unrestricted one-way travel.
In addition to actual flight time, airline passengers usually have to allow at least an hour each way to get to and from the airport and another half-hour to check in.


Winfield Hits 9th Grand Slam As Angels Defeat the Blue Jays
Dave Winfield hit the ninth grand slam home run of his career and drove in five runs today as the California Angels took a six-run lead and hung on for an 11-8 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays.
Luis Polonia had his second five-hit game of the season as the Angels sent the Blue Jays to their fifth loss in seven games.


House Approves Money for Particle Accelerator
The House of Representatives has voted to begin financing a $177.8 million accessory for the world's most powerful particle accelerator in the hope of finding an elusive subnuclear particle called the "top quark." The top quark could provide scientists with vital clues as to why matter has mass.
The proposed upgrading of the Tevatron accelerator at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill., appeared to face indefinite postponement two weeks ago when a House subcommittee voted to eliminate money for the project.
But in a vote by consensus, the House on Wednesday provided an initial $10 million for the project and gave it a formal category, or made it a "line item" in budget parlance, thereby improving its chance of winning future Federal support.


Shuttle Crew Will Try Again


CLASSICAL BRIEFS
Haydn: 'The Creation'
Soloists; Sudfunk Chorus; Stuttgart Radio Symphony conducted by Neville Marriner (in German).
EMI/Angel CDCB 54038; two CD's.
Soloists; City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra and Chorus conducted by Simon Rattle (in English).
EMI/Angel CDCB 54159; two CD's.


New Yorkers, etc.
The world is full of tacky people.
We all know some, rich and poor, biggies and nobodies.
But there's a difference between tacky people and isolated tacky actions.
The difference is that tacky actions frequently emanate from the nicest people.
When this happens, we're usually surprised and sometimes shocked, although goodness knows why.
Most of us consider ourselves nice people and yet, being perfectly honest, most of us aren't above occasional tacky actions.
We know as we're doing them that they're in poor taste, that they lack elegance, but we do them, silencing the inner voice that says "don't" with ridiculous rationales.


The Old (All Right, Middle-Aged) Ball Game
THE second baseman for the Stamford Athletics takes a throw from the shortstop as he crosses second base and, displaying a slick pivot move, throws to first base to complete the double play.
The ball does bounce once on its way to first.
But then the second baseman, Phil Linz, a former big-league infielder, is 51 years old and has not played baseball in 23 years.
Fortunately for Mr.
Linz, the base runner for the New Haven Yankees is no Rickey Henderson, but a 35-year-old whose legs have seen faster days.
Welcome to the Connecticut Senior Men's Baseball League, for players aged 30 and older, which began its third season in April.
Since its founding, the amateur league has grown from 6 teams to 24.


Ms. Knowlton Plans to Wed in August
Hugh Knowlton Jr. of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., and Monique Knowlton of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Emily Knowlton, to John Quincy Hunsicker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Quincy Hunsicker of Zurich.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Knowlton, 26 years old, graduated from Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was the chairman of Smith, Barney &amp; Company and later the chairman of the Moet-Hennessy U.S.
Corporation, both in New York.


For Women, Polygamy's Just a Rotten Deal; On the Other Hand
To the Editor:
I am lucky to be married to a wonderful woman who juggles with exceptional success her lives as wife, mother and businesswoman.
After reading Elizabeth Joseph's fascinating article about the advantages of polygamy ("My Husband's Nine Wives," Op-Ed, May 23), my first thought was to send it to my wife, together with a note suggesting how much easier her life would be if she permitted me to marry several additional women.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
WAS MOZART POISONED?
Medical Investigations Into the Lives of the Great Composers.
By John O'Shea.
St.
Martin's, $18.95.


Space Shuttle Launching Delayed by Navigational Equipment Flaw
The space agency called off the launching of the shuttle Columbia this morning after problems were discovered in a navigation device.
The flight, which had already been delayed 10 days by other technical problems, cannot go up until at least Wednesday because of the time it will take to replace the navigation equipment and get the winged spaceplane ready for another attempt, said officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.


Salute Berries in Ways Plain and Fancy
THE berry season has arrived.
Strawberries to purchase at farm stands or to gather at farms that permit pickers are the first of a succession of locally grown berries that ripen through the fall.
After the strawberries come raspberries and blueberries, then blackberries, then raspberries again.
Finally, some areas will have locally grown cranberries.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I live in a very old apartment, and the three walls that surround my bathtub were long ago covered with a type of wallboard that has an imitation tile pattern on the surface.
This has been painted over many times, and now the paint is starting to flake off on the lower 18 inches around all three sides.
Can you tell me how to eliminate this flaking condition and make the paint to adhere after I repaint?
A.
This type of hardboard originally had a very slick glossy finish on it, and paint does not usually adhere well to it if the surface is not properly prepared.
The reason most of the flaking is on the lower part is probably because the moisture tends to creep up from the edges of the tub.
To solve the problem, you should scrape and sand off all the loose or flaking paint.
Then sand the exposed tile board with a medium-grit No. 80 paper.
Dust thoroughly.
Apply one coat of a shellac-based primer like BIN or Enamelac.
Then apply two coats of alkyd enamel, sanding lightly between coats.


2 Break Course Mark at Sleepy Hollow
Ideal conditions and receptive greens helped Don Bies and Charles Coody break the Sleepy Hollow course record minutes apart this afternoon with eight-under-par 62's in the second round of the $400,000 Nynex Commemorative tournament.
Bies broke the course record of 63, which was shared by Bob Charles and Dick Rhyan, with eight birdies, while Coody did it with seven birdies, an eagle and a bogey on the 6,545-yard course.


Q and A
Dingy Public Areas
Question: I live in a 20-unit, rent-stabilized apartment house.
The condition of the hallways and lobby is horrendous.
To my knowledge these areas have not been painted in 12 years.
Is there a rule that requires owners to maintain the public areas as well as the apartments? . . .
Roberta Lipman, Manhattan  Answer: Yes.
The housing maintenance code, Article 2 d, Sec. 26-12.01, a (2), requires that public areas be maintained.
Maintenance, the code says, includes repair and repainting when necessary.
But since the code does not set a specfic timetable, it would be up to the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, which administers the code, to determine if the public areas in a particular building are due for a paint job.
Thomas R. Viola, a spokesman for the State Division of Housing and Community Renewal, said that an owner could face rent reductions if an order from H.P.D. to paint and repair public areas was ignored.
For an inspection, call the H.P.D.
Central Complaint Bureau at 960-4800.
A Problem With Pests Question: I moved into a rent-regulated apartment recently and since then I have had a problem with roaches and mice.
I had neither in my old apartment, where an exterminator came in once a month.
Is a landlord legally required to have the building exterminated on a regular basis? . . .
Terry O'Niell, Manhattan.
Answer: No.
But the housing maintenance code does require that owners keep their property free of infestation of rodents, insects or other pests.
"If the only way that pests like roaches can be controlled," said Roz Abrams, a spokesman for the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, "is through some kind of scheduled extermination, then the landlord would have to arrange for it."
If notifying the owner or his representative of the roach and mouse problem produces no results, you can contact H.P.D.
The department will send an inspector to your building.
If evidence of infestation is found the owner will be issued a violation.
To remove the complaint, the owner would have to show that the infestation had been cured.
Call 960-4800 for an inspection.
Damage Claim in a Co-op  Question: My co-op, which I use as a pied-a-terre, was flooded because of faulty plumbing.
The ceiling, walls and some of the furniture suffered water or mildew damage.
For weeks at a time my wife and I could not use the apartment.
After more than a year the management company completed the repairs to the apartment, but it never turned my claim for the damage to clothing and furnishings over to the building's insurance company.
I withheld maintenance payments of about $3,000 for the cost to us of extra cleaning services, to pay for the replacement of corroded wiring and telephone lines and for reimbursement of time I needed to spend in New York but had to book a hotel room.
I feel my claim is reasonable, but my lawyer and the managing company tell me that what I have done is not acceptable.
Do I have a case? . . .
John D. Rich, Stamford, Conn.
Answer: Probably not.
According to John Calagna, a spokesman for the New York State Department of Insurance, insurance policies carried by co-op corporations cover losses pertaining to their structures but do not normally cover the personal belongings of the shareholders.
Reimbursement claims for the damage to your furniture and clothing should have been made to your homeowners policy insurer.


The Cultivated Gardener; Clematis: Plant Carefully, Stand Back
Henryi, my mother's clematis, jumped the gun like everything else this spring.
A luxurious climber with white flowers the size of dessert plates, Henryi is supposed to bloom around mid-June.
But early last month, as I pulled into the family farm in Maryland, there he was, rising a good 15 feet into the sky, spiraling about an old post in a column of bloom that, well, maybe three people could have gotten their arms around, had they joined hands in some kind of ceremonial worship of the thing.
That's how the plant makes you feel.
People see it blooming as they drive past.
They venture in the driveway and knock on the kitchen door.
"What is that?" they ask in awe.


New Position in the Order Leaves Magadan Relaxed
The game was long over, the clubhouse largely empty when Dave Magadan emerged from the trainer's room, his tender left shoulder blistered red from the nightly treatment.
Magadan, nearly a week into a trip that still had more than a week to go, looked sore and exhausted.
There was, though, a lingering excitement in his eyes, and so he agreed to one final bit of mental traveling before he headed for the team's hotel.


10 in Florida Charged With Accepting Gifts
Ten current or former Florida legislators have been charged with failing to disclose gifts from lobbyists, including paid trips to Georgia for quail hunts and to the Bahamas.
Among the prominent lawmakers charged are T. K. Wetherell, the House Speaker, Winston (Bud) Gardner, the Senate Appropriations Committee chairman, and Senator Pat Thomas, who was expected to become Senate president in 1992.


Spas
To the Editor: I am responding to the letter of Evelyn S. Ringold regarding Canyon Ranch (Letters on Travel, May 12).
I spent eight days at Canyon Ranch in Lenox, Mass., at the end of February.
The food was nicely prepared and presented.
I never felt hungry or deprived, although I ate the recommended weight-loss menu; it was delicious.
As for the rain, rainwear should be packed.
A walk in a gentle morning or evening rain is refreshing.
KAYE JORDAN Boston


Q and A
Ainu People of Japan
Q.
How can one visit the Ainu Indians of northern Hokkaido and the Kurile Islands of Japan? -- H. R. Carter, Victoria, British Columbia
A.
The Ainu were the original inhabitants of Hokkaido and adjacent islands, including the Kurile Islands.
Over the centuries the Ainu people have mixed with the Japanese, and there are very few full-blooded Ainu people living today.
On Hokkaido there are three re-created Ainu villages that teach visitors about Ainu history, crafts and customs.
During the day, these villages are inhabited mainly by Ainu, but they do not live there full-time.
The biggest such village is Shiraoi Ainu Kotan (kotan means village) in southern Hokkaido on the shore of Lake Poroto.
Once the home of hundreds of Ainu, this village now contains an Ainu museum and re-creations of several thatched, rectangular Ainu houses.
There are demonstrations of Ainu song, dance and crafts.
The village is open daily, except Dec. 30 to Jan. 4, from 8 A.M. to 5 P.M.
April to October and 8 A.M. to 6:30 P.M. the rest of the year.
Admission is $3.70.
Shiraoi is 30 minutes by train from the Noboribetsu hot springs area (an hour and a half from Sapporo, Hokkaido's capital) or 30 minutes by bus from Tomakomai.
At the site, the Shiraoi Dosanko Tanabata Matsuri Festival, with Ainu folk dancing, a parade and fireworks, takes place on the second weekend in August.
The Chikabumi Ainu Kotan, in north central Hokkaido, has 70 Ainu houses where 300 people work, and an Ainu cemetery.
There is no admission fee.
The village is open Tuesday to Saturday from 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. and Sunday from 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.
It is a 20-minute bus ride from the city of Asahigawa.
In the mountains of eastern Hokkaido near Lake Akan is the Lake Akan Ainu Kotan.
The village has a number of shops demonstrating the making of such crafts as carved wooden bears and selling them.
There is a 30-minute folk dance demonstration, admission $4.50, at the Ainu Tourist Center several times a day.
The village is open daily.
A festivalOct. 8 to 10 draws several hundred people of Ainu ancestry.
The village is about a two-hour drive from each of the two main cities in eastern Hokkaido, Abashiri and Kushiro.
The Nifudani Ainu Cultural Museum, in the village of Nifudani along the Sarukawa River, is in an area said to be the cradle of Ainu culture, once containing many Ainu villages.
The museum, telephone (0451) 2 2892, contains more than 1,000 Ainu tools and artifacts.
It is open daily from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., and admission is $2.25.
There was a group of Ainu on the Kurile Islands, but they were removed to Hokkaido when the Japanese were evacuated from the Kuriles after World War II.
Butter Chicken in London
Q.
We became aficionados of butter chicken in India.
We have been told there are restaurants in London that offer butter chicken but have never found any.
Can you help? -- F. E. Wertheimer, New York, N.Y.
A.
Butter chicken, popular in New Delhi, is first cooked in a clay tandoor oven and then cut into pieces and further cooked in tomato puree thickened with cream and butter.
The dish is commonly eaten with the hands along with one of several types of Indian bread.
Butter chicken is offered at many of the Indian restaurants in London, but you might not have found it because it generally has other names.
Among them are murgh makhani, chicken makhani, chicken tikka makhani or chicken tikka masala.
The following restaurants serve butter chicken:
Bombay Brasserie, Courtfield Close, Courtfield Road, Kensington; telephone (071) 370 4040.
Buttered chicken appears on the menu as chicken tikka makhani, $13.65.
Bhatti, 37 Great Queen Street, Holborn; (071) 831 0817.
Buttered chicken is called chicken makhani, $10.45.
Last Days of the Raj, 22 Drury Lane, Covent Garden; (071) 836 5705.
Murgh massalam, a whole baby chicken, is $15.45, and chicken tikka masala, chicken off the bone, is $10.80.
Taste of India, 25 Catherine Street, Covent Garden; (071) 836 2538.
At this restaurant the dish is indeed called butter chicken and costs $12.65.
Red Fort, 77 Dean Street, Soho; (071) 437 2115.
Murgh makhani is $11.80.
A Dutch Flower Festival
Q.
I understand there is a flower festival that occurs in the Netherlands every 10 years or so.
When does it occur next? -- Darlene Kasten, Fanwood, N.J.
A.
The Floriade is a horticultural show that does indeed take place in the Netherlands every 10 years.
The next Floriade will take place from April 10 to Oct. 11, 1992, in Zoetermeer, a town near The Hague.
Work is in progress on a 180-acre site, where there will be a number of halls and greenhouses, outdoor display areas, shops, restaurants, old streetcars, boats, a monorail and a 228-foot observation tower.
The Floriade displays will be grouped into seven themes: production, featuring cultivation methods and displaying a variety of bulbs, flowers, trees, plants and vegetables; consumer, with a variety of garden displays; environment, emphasizing water management; the future, emphasizing new breeding techniques and technology; world, with contributions from 20 countries, and recreation, with leisure activities for adults and children.
After the Floriade, the area will be converted to a new borough of Zoetermeer and will contain 9,200 homes by the year 2000.
Jogging in Paris
Q.
Are there safe areas in Paris frequented by joggers?
Are there health clubs or gyms one can use for a fee? -- Helen Clay Chace, Mount Kisco, N.Y.
A.
Any of the smaller Parisian parks are safe for jogging during daylight: Parc Monceau (8th arrondissement), Parc Monsouris (14th), the Tuileries (1st), Parc des Buttes-Chaumont (19th) and the Luxembourg Garden (6th).
The Bois de Vincennes, off the eastern edge of Paris and the Bois de Boulogne, on the west, are much bigger and largely safe, but during the week they are less frequented by joggers than the others.
If you have any concerns, those two parks are much busier on the weekend.
The path around the lake in the Bois de Boulogne, is especially popular for jogging then.
As for fitness clubs, the Gymnase Club is the largest organization in Paris, with 10 centers around the city.
The central telephone number is 45.74.37.17.
A $45 fee allows one to buy 10 tickets for $100, each good for one use of a club and valid for one year.


World Markets; Why Swiss Bank Shunned Gold
When the Swiss Bank Corporation's private banking group did its projections for financial markets in the second quarter, it predicted that the price of gold would rise to $370 an ounce by the end of June, an increase of 3.6 percent.
This was one of the better returns projected as the group looked at financial markets around the world and forecast outlooks for stocks, bonds and short-term interest rates on cash.
But when it came to allocating clients' money among these numerous markets, the bank did not buy gold.


Jeffrey Bennett Wed To Frances D. Lukens
Frances Day Lukens, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan W. Lukens of Chevy Chase, Md., was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Bennett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donaldson Bennett of Winnetka, Ill.
The Rev.
Stuart Irvin performed the ceremony at All Saints Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Bennett, 26 years old, is a pre-school teacher at the Brick Church School in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in education from George Washington University.
Her father is a retired Foreign Service officer who served as United States Ambassador to the Congo from 1984 to 1987.


Anne Lyons Is Married to Lane Miller
Anne Lyons, an interior designer in Washington, and Lane Franklin Miller, an assistant chief trade counsel at the Small Business Administration, were married yesterday at the National Arts Club in New York.
Justice Martin B. Stecher of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated.
Mrs.
Miller, 34 years old, graduated from North Dakota University and is an associate at the architectural firm of Sasaki Associates.
She is a daughter of Marguerite Keenan Lyons of Fargo, N.D., and Gerald E. Lyons of Fairfax, Va.
Her father is a retired vice president of Silverline Boats of Moorhead, Minn., and a past president of the Boat Manufacturers Association.
Her mother is the executive assistant to the president of Moorhead State University.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE BIG PETS.
Written and illustrated by Lane Smith.
Viking. $14.95. (Ages 3 to 8) The "night children," including the girl who was small and the cat who was big, gather at a mysterious milk pool.
In the jagged illustrations the stars literally hang from the dark sky.


Battling Poison Ivy Requires a Strategy
POISON ivy is problably one of the worst plants around.
It seems to be everywhere.
Those who would like to go out and pull a few weeds in the garden are often hesitant because of the presence of this most unwanted plant.
It is in full leaf now, and those who do not know what it looks like, should.
If you are not positive about its identification, seek help from someone who knows the plant, because knowing the enemy is the first defense in this case.


Lisa McCutcheon, Student, Is Married
Lisa Ann McCutcheon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. McCutcheon of Westfield, N.J., was married in New York yesterday to Gerard Lester Eastman Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Eastman of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
J.
Seymour Flinn performed the ceremony at St.
James's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Eastman, 29 years old, graduated from Smith College and is a student at the Parsons School of Design.
Her father owns and heads McCutcheon Associates, a civil engineering and real-estate firm in Secaucus, N.J.


Israelis Report Killing Arab Trying to Cross From Jordan
Israeli troops clashed with two Arab infiltrators from Jordan today, killing one guerrilla and chasing the second back across the border, the army said.
The military said an Israeli soldier was seriously wounded when he was accidentally shot by other Israelis during searches for the infiltrator who escaped.


Diana Susan Waugh Weds Luke Imperatore
Diana Susan Waugh, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip D. Waugh of Sharon, Conn., was married in Sharon yesterday to Luke Edward Imperatore, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George E. Imperatore of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
Gilbert Larson officiated at Christ Church Episcopal.
Mrs.
Imperatore, 21 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of Boston University.
Her parents own Waugh Real Estate in Sharon.


Lake Oswego Journal; No Stone Unturned in a Battle for a Rock
For class projects, third graders used to make houses out of Popsicle sticks or hopscotch for dollars.
No more.
Today's schoolchildren have pressured tuna companies into saving dolphins and hamburger chains into using less polystyrene.
And now some Oregon students are looking across the country -- at New York -- and demanding that a bit of their natural history be returned.


Why 65,000 Bass a Year Are Killed
John DeBellas's letter  [ April 7 ]  regarding striped-bass fishing contains some errors and a significant omission.
While Mr.
DeBellas, who is a close personal friend and who, at 4 A.M. on Oct. 31, 1970, helped beach my first striped bass, correctly expresses concern over mortality of angler-released fish, his assumptions about numbers are far off.
Mr.
DeBellas assumes that Long Island anglers released one million striped bass in 1990.
Because mortality of released fish is estimated by fishery managers to be about 15 percent, Mr.
DeBellas calculates, based on his assumption, that 150,000 striped bass died as a result of being caught and released by recreational fishermen.


Gadgets Silly Enough for the Season
Hot weather brings out the goofy in everyone.
In summer, the earch for toys becomes a necessity for those of us over age 12 in the face of that desperate crankiness that descends on a June day when the atmosphere is thick and heavy.
Toys have just the vaguest, most tangential connecton to utility.
If a toy does something, its mechanical innards had better be neatly hidden away in a lively form, like a fish, a flower or a rock.
It also helps if the toy is huge, pink and plastic.
Toys are visual candy, meringues for the mind.
They are meant to disarm and distract.
Here is a highly unscientific, totally emotional roundup of summer toys on the shelves of Manhattan stores, ranging from a pink fan in the shap of a flower to a gummy rubber lobster.
The former is remotely useful, the latter just silly.
But both supply a nice, visceral whomp - a kind of wake-up call - to jaded and dusty city souls during this silliest of seasons.


Sacramento
For years the best thing that could be said about Sacramento was that it was centrally situated, a short drive from the ocean, the wine country and interesting places, like San Francisco, Lake Tahoe and Yosemite.
But these days, California's sprawling state capital can consider itself interesting in its own right.
Sacramento's charms are subtle.
It's a pretty enough place, with a nicely restored downtown area, a splendid collection of refurbished Victorian houses and enormous suburbs that extend for miles.
The city is bound by two fish-filled rivers, the American and the Sacramento.
And with more than 120 parks and acres of municipal golf courses, there's an abundance of cool greenery.


Vietnam
To the Editor: I take pleasure in noting that Steven Erlanger found that many of my haunts when I was in in Saigon in 1962 and '63 still deserved mention.
As for hotels, when I arrived in autumn 1962, Mr.
Erlanger's current favorite, the Majestic, was a transient officers' quarters where one spent a few days awaiting a Bachelor Officers Quarters assignment.
In my grade of major and being assigned for duty to Military Assistance Advisory Command, headquartered in Cholon, I went initially to that part of the city, living in the Buis B.O.Q. with mess facilities in the adjacent 5 Oceans.
Within a couple of months, a promotion to lieutenant colonel rated me a transfer uptown to the Rex, which, just as described, had a roof terrace whence I took many a picture.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
There is much to admire in Camille Paglia's latest schizophrenic jeremiad, particularly her intellectual energy and wit.
But Ms.
Paglia ignores the intense hostility of most classical scholarship to popular culture.
The kind of attention that she pays and wishes to see paid to American popular culture is only possible now because of the very theorists and trends she disavows.
ADAM SIMON  Malibu, Calif.


Miss Cahill Weds Mark Tiedemann
Elizabeth Anglin Cahill, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George F. Cahill Jr. of Stoddard, N.H., was married in East Hampton, L.I., yesterday to Mark Brookes Tiedemann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl H. Tiedemann of East Hampton.
The Rev.
Alfred R. Shands 3d performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Tiedemann home.
Mrs.
Tiedemann, 29 years old, is the advertising director at Sportswear International and In Fashion magazines in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is a professor of biological sciences at Dartmouth College.


If Pavarotti Had Lived 75 Years Ago
Any time a critic ventures to write about the human voice, his timid little breast-strokes into this murky sea are swamped by mighty waves of letters and telephone calls.
Sometimes the impassioned respondents agree with what has been written and wish merely to add their own gloss to the commentary.
More often, they take violent exception, calling into question not just the qualities of the singers described but the mental, musical and moral essence of the describer.
Only rock-and-roll fans exhibit a comparable degree of blind (selectively deaf?) intensity, but opera buffs boast bigger vocabularies and write longer letters.
Two recent experiences reminded me of this volatile blend of subjectivity and passion.
One was listening to learned musicologists, critics and performers disagree about the basic attributes of voices they had just heard via recordings at the concurrent Lincoln Center Mozart symposium and annual meeting of the Music Critics Association.
The other was a column I wrote a couple of weeks ago about Luciano Pavarotti and Placido Domingo and their forays into heavier repertory, respectively Otello and Parsifal.


Can Prodigy Be All Things to 15 Million PC Owners?
Judging by the numbers, things couldn't be going better for the Prodigy Services Company.
Backed by big advertising campaigns and the deep pockets of the International Business Machines Corporation and Sears Roebuck &amp; Company, which operate it as a joint venture, Prodigy has become the leader in the burgeoning business of supplying banking, shopping, games and other "on line" services by telephone to personal computer users.
The two-year-old service sends no less than 800 on-line features to 550,000 subscribers for a flat monthly fee of $12.95.
Since going national last fall, it has doubled its membership, to nearly one million.
Membership represents the number of passwords issued to each subscriber, with up to six available at no additional cost.
Prodigy uses membership numbers to set the rates it charges advertisers to run commercials on its service.
It now accounts for 41.4 percent of the industry total, compared with 33.1 percent for the next-biggest company, H &amp; R Block's Compuserve Inc., and 10.8 percent for General Electric Information Services' Genie.


FOR REAL SPORTS
Here is a sampling of participatory sports events scheduled in New York City this summer.
Dates and times are subject to change.
This Week
SRI CHINMOY 10K RACE, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, 111th Street and 45th Avenue, Corona, Queens.
Named for the spiritual teacher whose marathon team favors ever-longer, ever-tougher endurance tests -- transcendental masochism, to a nonathlete.
Today, 8 A.M.
Information: (718) 291-1468.


JAPAN TO ALLOW FOREIGNERS' BIDS
In a sudden reversal to avoid another important trade conflict with the United States, Japan acceded today to American demands that it allow foreign companies to bid on a variety of big construction jobs.
In return, Tokyo wants Washington to abandon sanctions against some of Japan's biggest construction companies.
The turnaround came after Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu intervened, just hours after American officials here said they would begin drawing up regulations to bar Japanese construction firms from receiving any government contracts in the United States.


Fresh Air Fund Gives a Push Toward Wall St.
In a lot of ways, Margarita Ramos seems typical of many of the young lawyers working in Wall Street firms.
Her talent, ambition, education and a brief stint at a Federal agency all but insure that she is capable of meeting the most demanding challenge.
But Ms.
Ramos says she has also benefited from an experience not shared by many of her peers.
For 10 summers, she visited a Fresh Air Fund family -- Robert and Janet DeBolt and their children, Laurie, David and Robert -- in Waterloo, N.Y.
The Fund is an independent, nonprofit organization that has provided free summer vacations to poor children since 1877.


SCIENCE FICTION
With BRAIN CHILD (Morrow, $20), a gripping, disturbing exploration of what it means to be human, the Australian George Turner joins a handful of writers -- names like Stanislaw Lem and J. G. Ballard spring to mind -- whose works transcend national and genre boundaries and deserve to be known by readers who would not ordinarily pick up a book labeled science fiction.
Mr.
Turner's 1988 novel "Drowning Towers" was a grim yet paradoxically heartening vision of survival in a world threatened by global warming.
The theme of "Brain Child" is simply stated: Frankenstein brought up to date.
In the first decade of the 21st century, scientists tinkering with the human genome create three groups of mutant clones whose mental abilities are demonstrably superior to those of normal Homo sapiens; in fact, no one knows exactly what their limits are.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Middletown, Conn. 105,000  62 Julia Terrace  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 17-year-old ranch; formal dining room, basement, move-in condition; taxes $1,275.
Rocky Hill, Conn. 158,000
2708 Main Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old raised ranch; living room with cathedral ceiling, eat-in kitchen, 0.50 acre; taxes $2,630.
Winsted, Conn. 120,000
93 Oakdale Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old Cape Cod; workshop, 2-car attached garage, breakfast bar, 1 acre; taxes $2,143.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 420,000
86 Marcourt Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 36-year-old colonial; parlor, 3 fireplaces, exercise room, sunroom, c/a; taxes $7,294.
Mamaroneck, N.Y. 700,000
430 Claflin Avenue  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 89-year-old colonial; fireplace, library, eat-in kitchen, breakfast room, screened porch, 2-car garage; taxes $13,198.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 646,500
35 Springdale Road 5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, Jacuzzi; taxes $14,621.
OTHER AREAS South Orange, N.J. 218,000
306 Highland Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 46-year-old colonial; eat-in-kitchen, porch, den, 2-car garage; taxes $6,119.
Springfield, N.J. 299,000
977 Chimney Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old colonial; c/a, 2-car garage, deck, full basement; taxes $7,108.
North Bellmore, L.I. 161,000
2167 Sanders Place  6 bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,500.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I live in a very old apartment, and the three walls that surround my bathtub were long ago covered with a type of wallboard that has an imitation tile pattern on the surface.
This has been painted over many times, and now the paint is starting to flake off on the lower 18 inches around all three sides.
Can you tell me how to eliminate this flaking condition and make the paint to adhere after I repaint?
A.
This type of hardboard originally had a very slick glossy finish on it, and paint does not usually adhere well to it if the surface is not properly prepared.
The reason most of the flaking is on the lower part is probably because the moisture tends to creep up from the edges of the tub.
To solve the problem, you should scrape and sand off all the loose or flaking paint.
Then sand the exposed tile board with a medium-grit No. 80 paper.
Dust thoroughly.
Apply one coat of a shellac-based primer like BIN or Enamelac.
Then apply two coats of alkyd enamel, sanding lightly between coats.


Guatemala Defense Patrol: Force in Its Own Right
Diego Perebal Leon lay partly paralyzed on a cot in a house otherwise barren of furniture, his abdomen scarred by the bullets fired into him one morning three months ago.
About 30 miles to the south, in the village of Chunima, the man accused of leading the attack in which Mr.
Perebal was wounded and his father and brother were killed has frightened off all who have arrived with the intention of arresting or prosecuting him.


Social Events
Rockefeller Plaza Party
June 3 -- Twenty-two top chefs from New York, San Francisco and other cities will come to Rockefeller Plaza to prepare food for the seventh annual American chefs' tribute to James Beard.
The event will benefit Citymeals-on-Wheels, which Mr.
Beard helped found to provide free meals for homebound aged people.
The party will occupy the plaza's skating rink and adjacent dining space.
It will begin with a champagne reception at 7:30 P.M., dinner, then dancing at 10.
Black tie or a colorful bow tie of the sort Mr.
Beard wore.
Tickets $350; (212) 577-1758.
52d Street to Lincoln Center


Need a Home Loan? The Boss May Help
LIKE a corporate pied piper leading the way to the land of affordable housing, United Parcel Service announced last month that it was pulling up stakes in Greenwich, Conn., where it has had its headquarters since 1975, and moving to Atlanta.
Company executives said that home prices in Georgia's capital, which are half what they are in Fairfield County, were the main attraction.
Although few companies take such drastic measures to solve their workers' and managers' housing problems, an increasing number in the last few years have been helping out, some picking up the cost of mortgage loan points, others contributing to down payments, still others guaranteeing mortgage loans.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
As a former academic, I know Camille Paglia speaks the damning truth.
JACK B. WILLIAMS  Ithaca, N.Y.


Julia Coyle Wed To Peter Atkins
Julia Andrews Coyle, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles T. Coyle of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Peter Herrick Atkins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald R. Atkins of Bedford, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard Van Wely performed the ceremony at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Atkins, 26 years old and a cum laude graduate of St.
Lawrence University, is studying for a master's degree at the Columbia University School of Social Work.
Her father is director of advertising of The New York Times Magazine.


Sheryl Watkins, Lawyer, Marries
Sheryl Ann Watkins and Patrick Synan Dunleavy, associates at two New York law firms, were married yesterday at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
William Donovan performed the ceremony.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Boston College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is with the firm of Webster &amp; Sheffield.
Her parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald R. Watkins of Darien.
Her father is the president of Newvision Systems in Stamford, Conn.


Sunday Dinner; Good Food (Good for Quiet Chats, Too)
It's just two weeks to Father's Day on June 16.
If you're planning to dine out, make your reservations now.
Here are some Manhattan restaurants that offer fine food, a bit of privacy and noise levels that won't drown out conversation.
Manhattan Ocean Club
57 West 58th Street, (212) 371-7777 -- At this sophisticated midtown seafood house the main dining room, two flights below street level, is handsome and relaxing, done in unaggressive creams and pastels.
Pretty hand-painted ceramics are mounted in the walls behind glass, and a twisting stairway leads to an upstairs room adorned with Picasso prints.


The Most Talked-About Philosopher
OBJECTIVITY, RELATIVISM, AND TRUTH
Philosophical Papers: Volume One.
By Richard Rorty. 226 pp.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cloth, $39.50.
Paper, $12.95.
ESSAYS ON HEIDEGGER AND OTHERS
Philosophical Papers: Volume Two.
By Richard Rorty. 202 pp.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cloth, $39.50.
Paper, $12.95.
Two-volume set: Cloth, $70.
Paper, $22.


Travel Advisory; Euro Disney's Early Tickets
Tickets are now on sale for Euro Disneyland, the theme park near Paris, which will open April 12, 1992.
A commemorative ticket providing unlimited access to its attractions on opening day or any one day anytime after the opening costs $37, $28 for children 3 to 9.
The tickets may be obtained by writing to Ticket Mail Order, Walt Disney World, Post Office Box 10030, Orlando, Fla. 32830-1000, or by calling (407) 824-4321.


Stamps
A recent casual conversation with a longtime friend about high-quality olive oil made on a small farm near Livorno, Italy, led the friend to talk about his cousin, a Polish painter who fled from the anti-Semitism that was building up in Warsaw in the 1930's.
The painter went first to France, joining Polish forces to fight Hitler, then to Britain and service with Polish troops there.
After the war the painter, Aleksander Zyw, finally went to the farm in Italy where he and his wife, Leslie, a Scottish woman he met in Edinburgh in wartime, now make the olive oil.


Ideas &amp; Trends; What God Really Thinks About Who Sleeps With Whom
NO Christian church has escaped the impact of the sexual revolution.
Even the most conservative denominations almost always take a markedly different tone toward sex -- franker and more positive -- than they did before mid-century.
But today some of the major Christian groups are engaged in debates about sexual morality that go far beyond tone, reopening controversies about the basis of Christian teachings, about the interpretation of Scripture and even about the nature of God.
This week the annual General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) will meet in Baltimore and take up the most radical of these re-examinations -- a report calling for major departures from the Christian teaching that limits sexual relations to heterosexual marriage.
In July, the General Convention of the Episcopal Church will confront two opposing proposals for clarifying the church's stand on homosexuality.


Sex, Lies and the Trouble With Videotapes
"Rape is not a serious crime," says Sut Jhally in the narration of his videotape "Dreamworlds: Desire/Sex/Power in Rock Video," "because, after all, she deserved it and she was asking for it. Hell, she must probably have enjoyed it."
Mr.
Jhally, a communications professor at the University of Massachusetts, doesn't mean that.
In fact, his videotape, which his department is selling for classroom use, offers a quiet yet vehement argument against that attitude and against the video images that, he believes, contribute to it.
But I've wrenched his words out of context and given them lurid placement at the top of the column in order to imitate the professor's own methods.
"Dreamworlds" uses the illusory logic of video; it tears images out of context, then proceeds as if juxtaposition equals logical connection.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to Camille Paglia's piece.
It's taken me nearly a week to recover from my revulsion sufficiently to put my thoughts in order.
I am amazed that The Book Review would want to print something so self-serving, so self-promoting, so full of spleen against the French as a people.
Of course, one could say a great deal about the French resistance in response to Ms.
Paglia's reference to France's "lying flat on her face under the Nazi boot." But really, the whole thing is too horrible and too stupid to dwell on.


CELEBRITY COOK: A RUBEN BLADES SPECIAL
RUBEN Blades is a man of rare breadth: an internationally known salsa singer, composer and lyricist; an actor in serious and light films ("The Super," starring the Academy Award winner Joe Pesci, is due out in late summer; "Crazy From the Heart," co-starring Christine Lahti, will air on TNT in August); a celebrity with law degrees from the National University of Panama and Harvard.
Add to this a bicoastal life style, and it is plain this is someone who could eat anywhere -- or anything -- he pleases.
Yet Mr.
Blades's dietary habits reflect a Panama childhood spent watching his grandmother at work in the kitchen.
"Because of my grandmother, I will not eat fish or chicken," he said.
"My grandmother was this lovely, charming lady who would raise the chicken in the backyard and then murder it in the kitchen. . . . I'd look at her with her 12-inch knife; I'd say, 'Thank God she's on my side.' Also, you have chickens in your yard, you see what chickens eat -- it doesn't turn you on to chickens." As for fish: "Panama has two coasts; you'd think I'd love fish. But I'd see my grandmother chopping fish to pieces -- the head, the eyes, the imploring eyes . . ."


Beijing Promotes 3 Officials Who Were Allies of Purged Party Chief
Three former allies of Zhao Ziyang, who was purged as Communist Party leader after the Tiananmen Square crackdown, were given vice ministerial posts, the Government announced today.
The action represented a partial rehabilitation of the officials.
There was no announcement of any comeback for Mr.
Zhao, who has been under virtual house arrest since he opposed using the army to crush the 1989 student-led democracy movement.


THE PHONY FARM
Three cheers -- and a dozen farm-fresh eggs -- for Laura Cunningham.
"The Phony Farm" (Food, May 12) is one of the funniest articles I have ever read.
It took me half an hour to read it out loud to my partner at the breakfast table, because I had to stop frequently to wipe the tears from my face and regain my composure.
PAULA SHIELDS
Tacoma, Wash.


At a School to Prevent Bad Backs, Many Bent Knees
ARE you slouching as you read this?
When you picked up today's newspaper, did you stoop instead of bend your knees?
Do your summer plans include gardening, cleaning closets or carrying a suitcase?
If you answered yes to any of those questions, you may be heading for back trouble.
Backs were not meant to weather the punishment we inflict upon them, said Susan Greenberg, a licensed physical therapist at the Scarsdale Physical Therapy and Sports Rehabilitation Center here.
Eighty-five percent of the population eventually finds this out the hard way, she said, through pain caused by a lifetime of physical errors.


A Festival in Dobbs Ferry Bridges a Concert Gap
BRIDGING the gap between the regular concert season and the summer music programs is the Dobbs Ferry Chamber Festival, which opens its fourth season next Sunday at the Masters School with works by Mozart, Schubert and Villa-Lobos.
"As in previous seasons," said Ruth Glasser Sommers, the cellist who founded the series and is its artistic director, "the programs are very varied, both in style and instrumentality, and we've again mixed in some very interesting lesser-known pieces with such great masterpieces as the Beethoven 'Archduke' Trio and the Brahms Clarinet Quintet."


Political Talk
KWO-Mo, Not KOO-Mo
Along with being known as a governor, Mario M. Cuomo is also known to many people as an insomniac.
And a devoted fan of television news programs.
And an inveterate user of the telephone.


Bars; It's Evening. It's Sultry. It's Time for a Tall One
IT is close to midnight along the Hudson in Battery Park City.
Airplanes are circling like fireflies.
Couples, the sort who have all supposedly fled New York, are swinging their attache cases, holding hands and debating at what point a yacht becomes vulgar.
Teen-agers are searching their souls, as they do when they get near a body of water at that age.
Skaters are out for one last roll.
No one is looking over his shoulder.
New York City, that old hypochondriac, may be dying again, but the angels are not descending quite yet.
Here, night or day, the salt in the air induces a euphoria that makes a New Yorker want to toast the future.
There are enough bars in and near Battery Park City to keep a pub crawler going from noon to midnight.
Each comes into its own at a different hour.
Each offers a different perspective on the Hudson River and New York Harbor.
And each quickly reminds the reluctant New Yorker that he or she, like New York, will more than likely still be here next year.
Edward Moran Bar And Grill
4 World Financial Center, Street Level, 250 Vesey Street, (212) 945-2255.
Edward Moran Bar and Grill comes to a rolling boil at 6 or 7 P.M. on Friday.
No directions are needed.
Follow the roar.
At this hour, Moran's, where families eat hamburgers on Sunday afternoons, turns into Fort Lauderdale at spring break.
The baby bankers of Wall Street are here for one last rally.
Coy hair flips, and posing -- the process known as the perpetuation of the species -- will keep the place going until long after dark.
"I'm supposed to meet a guy who's medium height, dark hair, in his 20's," a panicked woman with very pink nails and a drink to match was heard telling a security guard.
"He's probably here."
He probably is.
Peter Higgins, the owner and manager of the restaurant, says several thousand people show up on a typical Friday, a majority of them medium-height, dark-haired men in their 20's, in limp button-down shirts with collars unfastened.
For the sake of mood, the security guards wear polo shirts, and the bartenders act as if they have worked as traders on the commodities exchange.
"Come on! Talk to me!"
One has to be fast to close a deal here.
The bulls order beer, and lots of it.
The bears seem partial to something red called a Cape Codder.
As evening deepens, the crowd becomes louder.
The sun sets on Moran's in the most flattering way, throwing golden light on everybody until, speech slurred and steps unsure, they weave their way under the palm trees in the Winter Garden and catch subway trains back to their studio apartments.
The Hors d'Oeuvrerie
1 World Trade Center, 107th Floor, (212) 938-1100.
Many New Yorkers are disinclined to visit the Hors d'Oeuvrerie, the 107th-floor bar adjoining Windows on the World, for fear of mingling with tourists.
They should get over it.
"The elevator will be here in four minutes," announced the maitre d'hotel in the lobby.
Pass the oxygen masks.
The Hors d'Oeuvrerie and Windows on the World are decorated in a style that had its moment at the 1964-65 New York World's Fair.
It has now come full circle from high Futurism to even higher camp.
The only really suitable attire here (no sneakers, jeans or shorts allowed) would be early Cardin or Courreges.
Because every bar needs a few asteroids, there is a hall of mirrors lined with huge mineral specimens.
There are also amoeboid leather-lined niches, molded chairs that defy gravity, and a palette out of a Hanna-Barbera cartoon.
Eventually one stops gaping at the decor and actually looks out the window, with amazement.
The Hors d'Oeuvrerie has a view to the south and east, with that unique Dr.
Caligari perspective.
The waiters collect a $3.50 cover charge and let patrons have even one long, slow drink in peace.
For that, one also gets the Judd Woldin Trio -- its motto is "Dance, glance and listen" -- playing standards beneath a mural of an Italian Line ship that hasn't visited New York in decades.
Pipeline
2 World Financial Center, Street Level, 225 Liberty Street, (212) 945-2755.
The staff members at Pipeline, students of the downtown scowl and the occasional shave, perpetually seem to be getting over a long, hard night.
Don't get in their way.
But for a deconstructed beer, this is the place to go, preferably in spandex and on roller blades.
The designer Sam Lopata's decor for this bar and restaurant is Early Refinery: pipes, more pipes and lots of safety yellow paint.
The music is loud, and the concrete and metal surfaces make it louder.
The terrace is much quieter, with a view of the Hudson, the sunset and the yachts that lounge in the North Cove marina.
Do not be put off by the uncomfortable-looking metal chairs.
They may be the most comfortable chairs in any restaurant in the neighborhood.
Do expect to be asked frequently to order the next round.
And do visit the restroom, which is unisex.
Men and women share the chiquest slop sinks in Manhattan.
The Hudson River Club
4 World Financial Center, Bridge Level, 250 Vesey Street, (212) 786-1500.
At most restaurants, the bar is at the front, a catchall for diners awaiting tables.
At the Hudson River Club, it is at the back, a catchall for people lucky enough to know it is there.
It is there, all snug and woody and green, all sailing prints and ship models, and one could easily convince oneself that this is Newport Beach, Calif.
There is a second-floor view across the yachts in North Cove -- Impetuous, Precious Moments, catamarans that look like huge mosquitoes -- all the way downriver to the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island.
Fresh potato chips from the kitchen and other snacks were provided by the bartender, who let patrons linger over a single glass.
A pianist kept the mood fizzy.
The perpetual candlelight here is a pleasant way to extend a late-night stroll on the Esplanade.
Do not, however, arrive dressed too casually; jeans, even worn with an Armani jacket, do not please this maitre d'hotel.
Le Pactole
2 World Financial Center, Bridge Level, 225 Liberty Street, (212) 945-9444.
So much for the America's Cup crowd.
At Le Pactole, the waiters wear black tie, and the windows seem to wear Oscar de la Renta.
Le Pactole is grand, so grand that one may feel silly unless what one has to say lives up to the setting.
The bar is oval, with superb people-viewing possibilities; the huge windows overlooking the Hudson are lined with deep, slouchy tub chairs that Josef Hoffman might have designed, and the windows wear evening dresses made of gauzy white fabric.
But those draperies, usually lowered against the western sun and the glare off the river, do cast an attractive glow over everyone and everything.
Indeed, the best time at Le Pactole is sunset, when an orange fireball drops behind the Colgate clock in Jersey City, making it the most romantic tube of toothpaste in the world.
Steamers Landing
On the Esplanade, between Liberty and Albany Streets, (212) 432-1451.
Late on weekend afternoons, a procession of cruise ships glides down the Hudson.
One cannot get much closer than Steamers Landing: two small sheltered patios attached to a bar and restaurant, the only one on the Esplanade proper.
Here one can raise a glass of Champagne to all those bound for Bermuda.
One can also watch the crowd go by without being part of it.
On a recent Saturday afternoon, couples were here poring over floor plans for condominiums in Battery Park City.
One supposes they were engaged in that rite of spring: wondering where the breakfront might go if they exchanged that Tudor in Bergen County for a crackerbox on the Hudson.
Time a visit to Steamers to coincide with a sailing of the Queen Elizabeth 2, especially one at night.
Even the most jaded New Yorkers hurry to the Esplanade railing to watch nearly 1,000 feet of ship glide downriver in the long, long wake of the Mauretania, the Normandie and the Queen Mary.
Amazon Village
Pier 25, West Side Highway at North Moore Street; (212) 227-2900.
The palm trees swaying on Pier 25 -- a 10-minute walk north of Battery Park City, just south of the prison barge -- belong to a new bar and restaurant called Amazon Village.
They will sway there only until Oct. 15, when they will be dug up, potted and sent to hotel lobbies for the winter.
Club Med, meet Hawaii Kai.
Amazon Village includes a bar called Python, a volleyball court, a beach, a lifeguard, a cage filled with parrots and valet parking.
"We didn't need so much sand," said a modest Shimon Bokovza, the restaurateur who opened the club last weekend with his brother, Koby, and Michael Buchsbaum.
Shimon Bokovza has experience with sand.
He has another Amazon Village in Philadelphia, which is closed this summer while he nearly doubles its size.
This Amazon Village, which he called much more "conceptually developed," is a tribute to the rain forest, which he called "the last frontier, the last place left as God created it."
So there is a Rain Forest Bar.
There is a rain forest mural.
Pennies pitched into the fountain are to be donated to the Rainforest Alliance.
Mr. Bokovza has never been to Brazil. That concept is still being developed.


Headliners; When People Had Scales and Fins
SINCE the first living coelacanth was captured by fishermen in 1938 off the east coast of Africa, biologists have been struck by its startling similarity to the four-legged creatures that roam the land.
The five-foot-long fish has six fins, four of which move in pairs, as though they were rudimentary legs.
Since fossils show that species of the fish lived as far back as the Devonian period, 370 million years ago, it is tempting to imagine an amphibious ancestor of the coelacanth taking the first tentative steps from sea to land.


Night Life With 'Music Coming Out of Every Doorway'
IT used to be that some young New Jerseyans would hang out in Hoboken only if they didn't have the cash to get through the tunnel.
But now all kinds are coming to carouse on Washington Street, the main boulevard.
They can be seen lined up at the bank machines: young women in wobbly white heels, musicians in spray-painted combat boots and college students in sneakers.
They watch where the young men in tasseled penny loafers are going and then bolt in the other direction.


Don't Let White House Order Secret Trials of Political Cases
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis's column criticizing the Bush Administration's proposal to institute secret proceedings to expel foreign nationals accused of "terrorism" ("Do as We Say," May 24) is right on the money.
Unless the new world order means that fair trials need only be provided in Middle East countries, Congress should take a hard look at what the Administration proposes to do.


Campus Life: Antioch; Cross-Cultural Program Looks at 2 Areas in U.S.
John Sims says he be lieves in a hands-on approach to African-American cultures, especially when those cultures are in the United States and readily available to students.
So for last six weeks, Mr.
Sims, assistant to the dean of the faculty at Antioch College in Yellow Springs, Ohio, has led six Antioch students into direct encounters with two distinct black communities in the southeastern United States -- the Gullahs of South Carolina's Sea Islands and the townspeople of Keysville, in rural eastern Georgia.
"If you want to talk about the African-American experience you have to look to the roots of that experience in the Southeast," Mr.
Sims explained on the group's return from the Martin Luther King Center for Nonviolent Social Change in Atlanta, the last leg of the field trip, which ends tomorrow.


Linda Iris Baker Is Married to David B. Skolnick
Linda Iris Baker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin H. Baker of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married last night to David Bruce Skolnick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel H. Skolnick of Kensington, Conn.
Cantor Norman Summers officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Skolnick, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, as did her husband.
She is a home-furnishings buyer in New York for Bloomingdale's.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Epstein Becker &amp; Green in New York.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Concerning Camille Paglia's essay:
Chacun a son degout.
EDWARD J. GALLAGHER Providence, R.I.


Ms. Rainey Marries W. F. Twyman Jr.
Schuyler Noelle Rainey, the daughter of Herbert S. Rainey and Carol Lawrence Rainey, both of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Winkfield Franklin Twyman Jr., the son of Mr.
Twyman of Richmond and the late Lourine Womack Twyman.
Justice Charles B. Lawrence of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court, the bride's great-uncle, performed the ceremony at the Nazarene Congregational United Church of Christ in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Twyman, 24 years old, is a legislative assistant to Representative Major R. Owens, Democrat of Brooklyn.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father, who is retired, was a New York City police officer.
Her mother is an assistant principal of Public School 335 in Brooklyn.


WINDSOR KNOT
The British royal family is not unlike most other families, with, perhaps, more than its share of skeletons in its closets.
This particular family's function leaves it open to public scrutiny like no other in the world.
Let us resolve to leave them to do the work that they do, and do very well, without feeling that the public at large has the need, or indeed the right, to have someone sleeping under each royal bed to find out how the next installment will begin.
DENNIS TAYLOR
Madison, Conn.


No Kisses, Just Great Players In Final
It is doubtful that Magic Johnson and Michael Jordan will meet at center court for a pre-championship-series kiss this afternoon in Chicago.
They surely will smile, likely will shake hands and might even sneak in an embrace and hope no one sees.
This, however, does not appear to be a kissing couple.
This is more of a business relationship, dribbling for dollars.


Review/Theater; Disneyland As Antidote For Poverty
After winning $100 in a lottery, a homeless young California family splurges on a day at Disneyland.
While there, the father (Philip Seymour Hoffman) decides to prolong the experience by staying on in the theme park after closing time.
He and his wife and their daughter camp on Tom Sawyer's Island, and the couple have a romantic interlude in the Swiss Family Robinson treehouse.
As might be expected, the reckless idyll ends disastrously.
But within months the family has become fabled among other homeless people as the ones who lived at Disneyland.
This is the fanciful but grim beginning of Jane Anderson's "Food and Shelter," at the Vineyard Theater.
At the outset Ms.
Anderson sets her polarities: the magical though manufactured kingdom against the dreariness of those whose only residence is a car and whose life is otherwise circumscribed by food stamps and soup kitchens.
If the playwright had been able to sustain the initial feelings aroused by her work, this might have been a disturbing portrait of what it means to be down and falling out in recession-struck America.


Geese Are Multiplying, Thanks to Protection
SEVERAL weeks into the breeding season, tens of thousands of newborn goslings have been added to Long Island's geese population.
Over the next month, before the baby geese learn to fly, they will follow their mothers across golf courses, parks, lawns and other grassy areas abutting ponds.


Bush Assails 'Quota Bill' at West Point Graduation
President Bush said today that he wanted to "destroy the racial mistrust that threatens our national well-being as much as violence or drugs or poverty" and called for support for his civil rights bill, saying it would avert employment quotas.
"We must think of ourselves not as colors or numbers," he said at the 193d commencement of the United States Military Academy here, "but as Americans, as bearers of sacred values."


Old Age, With a Fresh Wrinkle
Forget those cliches about apple-cheeked grannies.
The little old ladies on screen today have more in common with pit bulls.
Maureen O'Hara, her red hair and her temper still flaming, is so selfish, manipulative and possessive of her grown son in "Only the Lonely" that she nearly ruins his life, with behavior that ranges from insulting his Sicilian girlfriend to insisting he eat his usual Danish pastry for breakfast instead of yogurt -- a cruel gesture considering he's played by John Candy and he's trying to lose weight.
The title character in "Tatie Danielle" is like the bad seed grown old.
Auntie Danielle's only joy in life is thinking up new ways to torment and humiliate the kindly relatives who have taken her in.
Faking incontinence is a favorite trick, though now and then she just kicks their dog.
These seriocomic films seem to ask: what to do about dear old Mom?
You can't live with her; you can't throw her from a train.


Extra Care to Install Outdoors Outlets
HAVING an outdoor electrical outlet is convenient.
Most newer homes feature at least one.
If your home does not or if you would like to add more, the job is usually fairly easy.
An outdoor outlet requires a special receptacle with a device that protects against electric shock in damp conditions.
The device is called a ground-fault circuit interrupter.


Patients and Profits/A special report.; When Healers Are Entrepreneurs: A Debate Over Costs and Ethics
In 1984, Atlanta had one magnetic resonance imaging machine.
Now it has at least 30.
Most are owned by doctors, and not just any doctors: they are often the same ones who send their patients for imaging scans, at $600 to $1,000 a visit.
Nobody disputes that magnetic resonance imaging, or M.R.I., is an invaluable diagnostic tool that allows doctors to visualize abnormalities in the brain, spine, knees and other parts of the body.
But the rapid proliferation of doctors' investments in M.R.I. clinics and in clinical laboratories, outpatient surgery centers and other health-care businesses has set off one of the most passionate ethical debates in medicine today.
More Than 10% Are Involved
Critics, who are seeking to outlaw doctor referrals to services in which they have invested, charge that the practice is a blatant conflict of interest that encourages costly overuse of procedures.
Defenders say it serves patients by speeding the availability of new technology.


THE UNFINISHED POLITICIAN
In his letter of May 12 commenting on Robin Toner's article "The Unfinished Politician" (April 14), Elliott Sacks accuses Senator Bob Kerrey of inappropriate behavior for showing up at the Capitol during the budget crisis with Debra Winger "in tow."
Perhaps it has not occurred to Sacks that the Senator and Winger were in love, had difficult schedules to coordinate and had to find time to be together as best they could.
His criticism is spurious unless he can show that Winger's presence negatively affected Kerrey's performance of his duty.
PETER SHIRE
New York, N.Y.


Hot-Weather Remedy


Officer Shuns Promotion, Apparently to Show Support for His Team
Apparently angered by an investigation of his unit, an officer in one of the New York City Police Department's elite tactical narcotics teams took the unusual step of rejecting his promotion to detective investigator at a public ceremony on Friday.
The officer, James P. Murphy, a member of the Brooklyn North tactical narcotics team, was apparently protesting the department's investigation of allegations that members of the team mistreated prisoners and lied about evidence to shore up shaky arrests.
Ten officers have been reassigned, and four of those officers were indicted last month on charges including illegal trespass, falsifying arrest records and perjury, in connection with what prosecutors said was the illegal search of a suspected drug dealer's apartment in 1990.


New &amp; Noteworthy
MAY YOU BE THE MOTHER OF A HUNDRED SONS: A Journey Among the Women of India, by Elisabeth Bumiller. (Fawcett Columbine, $12.) Although the Hindu pantheon includes goddesses like Kali, and the parliament in New Delhi has a greater percentage of women than the United States Congress, the prevalence of female infanticide, bride burning and other practices shows that in India it is still a curse not to be male.
Last year our reviewer, Sara Suleri, said this book is written "with great precision and clarity."
IN A FATHER'S PLACE, by Christopher Tilghman. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) In one of these short stories, an East Coast banker takes an emergency trip to the family spread in Montana, where his widowed mother has just married one of the ranch hands.
This collection is "a wonderful surprise," John Casey said in The Book Review last year.
"I read eagerly, with an eye to what comes next, but two or three times in every story I was surprised by a smooth turn, a reorientation that left me startled with pleasure."


Vietnam
To the Editor: In the box with the article on Vietnam, I was surprised not to see listed among tour sponsors of Southeast Asian trips Wings of the World, 653 Mount Pleasant Road, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4S 2N2.
The members of the group with whom I traveled were truly pleased with the Wings preparation, arrangements, guides in individual cities, the food, the sightseeing, the transportation and the fees -- all very satisfactory.
CORINNE K. FLEMINGS Pittsburgh


Galloping Around Wyoming
AS a kid growing up in England's industrial Midlands, I would come home from school, have my tea, then watch Westerns on television.
While everyone else worried about good guys and bad guys, I studied the terrain, "memorized" the horses and rooted for the Indians.
That, I suppose, was the beginning of a secret longing to "go West," a wish that was finally fulfilled last July when I set out, alone, for Bitterroot Ranch in Dubois, Wyo.
Conestoga wagons did reruns through my mind as I took an air-conditioned taxi to the airport.
No matter where you start from, the road to Bitterroot is long.
The nearest airports are Jackson Hole and Riverton, neither accessible by direct flight from Washington, so I flew via Dallas.


Technology; Separating Plastic Wheat and Chaff
Plastic bottles rush along a conveyor belt here at Rutgers University's Center for Plastic Recycling Research.
They are a diverse mix: clear, green, translucent, opaque; some are intact, some partially crushed.
As they whiz along at 150 to 200 feet per second, they pass between light sources and sensors.
Blasts of compressed air blow the bottles off the line into the appropriate bins.
The line is sorting the containers by chemical type and color, with a goal of producing materials with more value than the mixed varieties used to make things like plastic lumber.


Soviet Jews Would Be Settled In Co-op City, State Plan Says
A year after an attempt to relocate Soviet Jewish emigres at the Starrett City housing complex in Brooklyn collapsed amid accusations of discrimination, a more ambitious plan to settle up to 250 emigre families at Co-op City in the Bronx has been approved by New York State.
The proposal to bring emigre families to Starrett City was doomed, officials said, because the Brooklyn complex has a waiting list of about 8,000 families and its owners could not overcome the implication that white foreigners would be receiving preferential treatment over minority applicants in renting the apartments.


Cologne
To the Editor: Permit me to add a few lines to "What's Doing in Cologne" by John Dornberg (Travel, May 5).
Cologne was the birthplace of Jacques Offenbach, for whom the square in front of the Cologne Opera is named.


Campus Life: Franklin &amp; Marshall; Some Applicants Will Be Permitted To Skip the S.A.T.
Franklin and Marshall College has joined a small number of selective colleges that will no longer require all applicants to take the Scholastic Aptitude Test.
Beginning in the fall of 1992, applicants who rank in the top 10 percent of their senior class and have taken a 4-year college preparatory program may submit two graded writing assignments rather than SAT scores.


T. F. Alter Wed To Miss Gutstein
Gretchen Hope Gutstein, a daughter of Dr.
Donald L. Gutstein of Westport, Conn., and Monica M. May of New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Francis Alter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis M. Alter of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Msgr.
Edward Connors officiated at St.
Thomas More's Roman Catholic Church in New York, assisted by the Rev.
Timothy Keller, a Presbyterian minister.
Mrs.
Alter, 25 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a former personnel officer of Christie's in New York.
Her father is the president of KLG Productivity Associates, a consulting firm in New York, and a chiropractor in New York and Westport.
Her mother, a former actress, is the artistic director of the Children's Acting Academy in New York..


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about church-state relations in Poland on the eve of Pope John Paul II's visit gave an incorrect location in some editions for the country's most important Roman Catholic shrine.
It is in Czestochowa, not Warsaw.


Monica Haggerty Weds Simon Gill
Monica Mavourneen Haggerty, a daughter of John Haggerty of St.
Louis and Margaret Haggerty of Haddonfield, N.J., was married in New York yesterday to Simon Loyd Bostock Gill, a son of Comdr. and Mrs.
Peter Gill of St.
Agnes, Cornwall, England.
Justice Bruce McM.
Wright, an administrative judge of the New York State Supreme Court, performed the ceremony at the Explorers Club.
Mrs.
Gill, who is 29 years old, is an associate at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from Stanford Univerity.
Her father is a vice chairman of Citicorp Mortgage Inc. in St.
Louis.


From the Ashes of a Dynasty India's Newest Heroine Rises
With India in its final days of official mourning for Rajiv Gandhi, the stricken nation has abruptly turned, once again, to the family dynasty and found a heroine.
She is Priyanka Gandhi, 19 years old, the great-granddaughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, the founder of the Nehru dynasty; the grandaughter of former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, and the daughter of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, who was assassinated May 21 in the closing days of an election campaign that seemed likely to return him to power.


Extra Care to Install Outdoors Outlets
HAVING an outdoor electrical outlet is convenient.
Most newer homes feature at least one.
If your home does not or if you would like to add more, the job is usually fairly easy.
An outdoor outlet requires a special receptacle with a device that protects against electric shock in damp conditions.
The device is called a ground-fault circuit interrupter.


Why 'Green Taxes' Won't Work
To the Editor:
Sandra Postel indulges in wishful thinking ("The Greening of America's Taxes," Forum, May 19) when she says that new corporate taxes -- "green taxes" -- on industries that hurt the environment could fight pollution and help the economy at the same time.


China's South Is Finally Getting Some Respect
Ask a northerner about the people here in southern China and he would probably say they are oily, conniving, uneducated and nouveau riche and would do anything for money.
But he might add that he would love to move down here.
This part of southern China used to be scorned as a land of rustic peasants, far from the sophisticated and cultured centers in the north.
But these days, thanks to Guangdong Province's blossoming wealth, it is gaining grudging respect, as people on opposite ends of the Chinese map are re-examining their place on the nation's ladder of status.


No-Tax Vows and the Party Line Put Albany Republicans in a Bind
When Joseph R. Holland ran for State Senate last year, the Rockland County Republican printed brochures declaring, "Joe Holland knows how to say no to new taxes and spending." His radio advertisements boasted that as an Assemblyman he had "voted against over $1 billion in new taxes pushed by the Governor and the legislative bosses."
Now, as a freshman Senator, Mr.
Holland faces the prospect of voting for a $51.9 billion state budget negotiated by his own legislative boss -- Ralph J. Marino, the Senate majority leader -- that includes more than $1.8 billion in new taxes, fees and other revenue measures.


RESTAURANTS: ROOMS WITH A VIEW -- MIAMI
Lucky's
Park Central Hotel 640 Ocean Drive Miami Beach (305) 538-7700


Funny Girls


For Women, Polygamy's Just a Rotten Deal
To the Editor:
I can't wait to translate "My Husband's Nine Wives," Elizabeth Joseph's May 23 Op-Ed article on polygamy, into Urdu and Pashto and send it to some of my girlfriends in Pakistan.
It's sure to bring tears to their eyes -- both of laughter and rage.


All About/Home Improvement; With Much Hand-Holding, Retailers Are Turning Hobbyists Into Builders
Home improvement used to be a compartmentalized industry, dominated by professional builders.
Makers of, say, planking and windows sold only to "to the trade" stores, which dealt only with contractors.
Do-it-yourselfers were shrugged off as dilettantes by everybody, and consigned to the hardware store's meager array of wares.
But these days the $106.7 billion home-improvement industry is undergoing renovations.
Once-antagonistic industry segments -- like insurance companies and contractors, or manufacturers and retail stores -- are cozying up to each other.
And retail stores are courting do-it-yourselfers.
Across the country, they are building 100,000-square-foot megastores and stocking them with user-friendly tools and materials, all to help fledgling hobbyists become fearless builders.


Strong City Council, Strong Smell
Councilman Robert Dryfoos has now stepped aside as chairman of two influential New York City Council committees pending an investigation of his financial affairs.
His troubles suggest two urgent tasks for the Council.
One is to devise ethical safeguards to match the Council's enhanced powers over the budget and real estate development.
An intriguing first step has been taken by Council Speaker Peter Vallone with his proposal to require financial background checks for members being considered to head committees.


LAST KURDISH CAMP IS SHUT IN TURKEY NEAR IRAQI BORDER
The last Kurdish refugee camp in Turkey officially closed today, marking the end of a highly successful humanitarian mission along the Turkey-Iraq border.
As American forces prepared to withdraw from the border region, however, attention began to focus on the plight of hundreds of thousands of Kurds still encamped in Iran.
Helping them to return to their homes is not part of the mission the United States and allied forces have assumed.


GAMBLING WITH THE BIG BOYS
I think that the officials who run state pension funds would be surprised to learn of their bumpkinlike status in Sarah Bartlett's big-time world of investing ("Gambling With the Big Boys," May 5).
"Few state pension funds have highly trained, independent-thinking people at the helm," she writes.
These funds consistently meet or beat the performance of private pension funds.
State pension fund managers are sitting on anywhere from $600 billion to $800 billion in assets.
David Bronner, director of Alabama's pension fund, now acts as his own investment banker.
Joe Perrone's shop, the Texas Teachers' Retirement System, is wired directly into Wall Street.
Both are cutting very sophisticated, very lucrative investment deals for their state pension programs, so much so that their state legislatures are trying to cut back state contributions to the funds.
So who are the big boys?
JONATHAN WALTERS Governing Magazine
Washington


Satellites Don't Give Best Weather Data
To the Editor:
The impression conveyed by "Flawed U.S. Weather Satellite May Be Lofted to Avert Crisis" (front page, May 14) is that satellites are the cornerstone of modern weather forecasting.
Had you consulted a practicing weather forecaster, rather than a National Aeronautics and Space Administration spokesman, you would have published a very different article.


How Women Treat Each Other at Work
HOW and why women betray each other in the workplace is the subject of "Sisterhood Betrayed: Women in the Workplace and the All About Eve Complex," recently published by St.
Martin's Press.
Rita E. Watson, who wrote the book with Jill Barber, is the director of policy and education for the Yale Department of Psychiatry Substance Abuse Treatment Unit.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Free Potpourri
Q.
In recent years, I've purchased packages of potpourri but found them rather expensive.
Since I have a small garden, what can I grow myself for potpourri and how do I make it?
Esther Gordon, Baltimore.


AIDS-Related Call for Help Leads to a Criminal Charge
A woman who called for emergency medical help when her fiance suffered a fatal heart attack faces criminal charges for failing to tell rescuers that he was infected with the AIDS virus.
Police and ambulance attendants coming to the man's aid administered mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and other emergency assistance, said Judge Thomas Moore of Weakly County General Sessions Court.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Atlanta; Sears Center Bought by City
THIS city has bought the Sears Roebuck &amp; Company office and warehouse here and plans to house several departments there.
In a deal that closed last month, it paid $12 million for the two-million-square-foot complex and 23.7 acres on Ponce de Leon Avenue, said Aaron Turpeau, director of administrative services.
The building will house Police, Fire and Parks Departments offices and the central garage and records center.
About 2,000 city employees will work there by the end of 1992.


Men's Tennis More Entertaining
To the Sports Editor:
Yes, women's tennis is entertaining ("In Francs or Pounds, Women Serve Up Equal Entertainment," The Times, May 26), but not nearly as entertaining as men's.
Sports entertainment is not all spectacle.
It also has to do with the level of skill.
In quickness, power, speed and variety of shot, men's tennis is more fun to watch.
Why should women be paid equally?
DAVID B. BALDWIN Oneonta, N.Y.


Looking Ahead
MONDAY: National Association of Purchasing Managers releases its monthly economic survey *
Construction spending for April *
OPEC meeting begins in Vienna *
The Treasury Department reports on three- and six-month bills auction.
TUESDAY: Automobile manufacturers release May auto sales.


SUMMER PLACES -- RESTAURANTS: ROOMS WITH A VIEW
AS summer eases in, urban lungs start pumping like those of a groggily awakened bear.
City parks, marinas and backyard gardens burst to life; convertible tops slap back; barbecue grills roll out, and boulevards become places for lingering, not just locomotion.
Many restaurants, too, assume a lighter, cheerier air.
Those that combine at least a feeling -- if not the fact -- of the outdoors with stylish settings and good food can be splendid locales for summer entertaining.


A Queen's Visit to the West Side Stops Traffic


Head of Army Sees Chance of Female Fliers in Combat
The Secretary of the Army says that if Congress repeals the law barring women from flying combat planes the service will probably open hundreds of pilots' jobs now off limits to women.
The Secretary, Michael P. W. Stone, became the first head of a service to indicate a willingness to take advantage of the proposed change, which is a provision of the military budget bill approved last week by the House of Representatives.


Connecticut Pay Ends in 2 Weeks Without Budget, Comptroller Says
State Comptroller William E. Curry is warning legislative leaders of the "very real possibility" that the state will be unable to pay its workers in the last two weeks of June without a budget agreement.
Mr.
Curry said today that the problem exists because the current budget paid for the last payroll period in June 1990.
As a result, he said, the state's budget for the fiscal year that ends on June 30 will cover only the first two-week payroll period in June, from May 31 to June 13.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended May. 18  MANHATTAN  East Midtown 1.375 million
641 Fifth Avenue (51st St.)  (Olympic Tower)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned-elevator, dining area; common charge $1,253, taxes $16,380 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia-Stribling &amp; Associates)  Gracie Square Area 350,000
535 East 86th Street  (Henderson House)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room; maintenance $855, 38% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty)  Greenwich Village 360,000
165 Perry Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, exposed-brick walls, 12-ft. ceilings; maintenance $749, 53% tax-deductible (Broker: Debra Kameros Co.)  Midtown South Area 805,000
105 East 29th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, 11-ft. ceilings, 4 exposures; maintenance $954, 20% tax-deductible (Broker: Kingman Associates-Hewitt Fox)  Upper East Side 950,000
167 East 61st Street  (Trump Plaza)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 3,800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, fireplace, 3 exposures; maintenance $4,000, 43% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  BRONX  Spuyten Duyvil Area 550,000
3101 Independence Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, detached, Spanish-style colonial; entry foyer, dining room, fireplace, 2-car garage; 3/4-acre lot; taxes $5,000 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Riverdale 172,500
3671 Hudson Manor Terrace  (Manor Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, renovated kitchen, terrace, Hudson River view; maintenance $789, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  BROOKLYN  Midwood 185,000
945 East 13th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 27- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,285 (Broker: Dwork &amp; Korn)  Park Slope 675,000
112 Prospect Park West  2-family, 4-story, brownstone; 5 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, dining room, 2 fireplaces, in primary triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dining area in other; 20- by 107-ft. lot; taxes $2,787 (Broker: William B. May/Fogarty Real Estate)  Park Slope 135,000
164 12th Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached, frame house; dining room, finished attic, hospitality suite on garden floor; 18.4- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $476 (Broker: Harbor View Realty)  QUEENS  Forest Hills 240,000
101-05 Ascan Avenue  2-family, attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dinette in each unit; finished basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,650 (Broker: Dix Realty)  Elmhurst 250,000
82-15 57th Avenue  2-family, detached, brick house; 2 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Century 21/Metalios Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Grymes Hill 390,000
64 Greta Place  3-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, detached, center-hall colonial; dining room, sitting room, fireplace, 2-car garage, 58- by 114-ft. and 45- by 124-ft. double lot; taxes $3,000 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  St.
George 115,000
114 Benziger Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, Victorian; dining room, 2-fireplaces, veranda, 1-car garage, 37- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $500 (Broker: Rand Properties)


The World: Ethiopia; Rebels Take Control, Not to the Relief of All
AS victorious rebels in the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa, tried to take control of a dispirited and wary population last week, the future of Africa's second-most-populous nation seemed uncertain.
Having helped persuade the old tyrant, Lieut.
Col.
Mengistu Haile Mariam, that the time had come to leave, the United States welcomed in a new crowd at negotiations here in London -- a battle-tested guerrilla group about whom little is known.
Officials from Washington put on a brave face, saying the Ethiopian Peoples Revolutionary Democratic Front had dropped its Albanian Marxist ancestry for more pragmatic positions.
The best the American negotiators could extract from the talks was a promise from these guerrillas to establish a broad-based transitional government by July 1 and an understanding that they would pursue democratic principles -- a condition for Western aid.


Scott Fitzgerald Budd Is Wed to Laura Soper
Laura Bliss Soper, a New York advertising executive, and Scott Fitzgerald Budd, a district sales manager for trade publications, were married yesterday at the Caramoor Fine Arts Center in Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
Avery Manchester performed the Episcopal ceremony.
Mrs.
Budd, 28 years old, and her husband, 29, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is an associate media group head for Wells, Rich, Greene in New York.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Tappen Soper of Zurich, where her father is the general manager of Bankers Trust A.G.


Iceland
To the Editor: As one who has spent a number of enjoyable vacations in Iceland, I enjoyed Pamela Petro's article "Warm Welcome at Farmhouses in Iceland" (Travel, May 5).
Ms.
Petro mentioned that traveling by car -- the means she chose -- is not the best way for Americans to see Iceland.
I would suggest using buses and planes.
A bus pass is available for about $200 and permits unlimited travel for a week.
The Icelandair Iceland Air Pass costs $190 and is valid for 30 days.
It offers four flights within the country.
An Air-Bus Rover ticket for a single trip (flying from Reykjavik to Akureyri and returning by bus) is available for $121.
Longer combination trips are also offered.
These plans allow an individual to get to a particularly interesting area inexpensively.
Then the traveler can take a local sightseeing tour or rent a car in the region.


Faith in British Justice Is Shaken by Forced Confessions and False Jailings
Noel R. Bell nervously clasped his hands together as he sat at a table with his parents in the visitors' center at Maghaberry Prison and talked about the confession, seven and a half years ago, that put him behind bars for life for a murder he says he had nothing to do with.
"I just told the police what I thought they wanted to hear," Mr.
Bell, who is 27 years old, said in the accent of his native Armagh.
"I was afraid they'd keep beating me until they got it. I was sure it would all be straightened out, like a joke. It sounds naive, doesn't it?"


A New Literary Hero: The Limp, Silent Type
I am no slave to literary trends, but when a guy gets his 15 minutes of fame after waiting for 2,000 years in a peat bog, I think we should sit up and pay attention -- no matter how ugly he is.
And so, behold the bog man.
He is not only monumentally ugly, he is also dirty, soggy, tanned, redheaded, nearly naked and, above all, dead.
Some 2,000 years ago, during the Iron Age in northern Europe, hundreds of people -- most of them men -- were sacrificed and then dumped into peat bogs, where the acids tanned their bodies, dyed their hair red and sometimes preserved their stomachs, complete with their last meal.
A few decades ago, many of them were unearthed by peat cutters.
And now these deflated balloons of flesh, these sad sacks, have become storybook heroes.
They have insinuated themselves into short stories, novels and poems across the English-speaking world, and not just as creeps from the muck -- these are not bogymen, after all -- but as true romantic figures, even sex symbols: the limp, silent type.


Mexico
To the Editor: I would like to caution tourists traveling by air to Cancun, Mexico, who plan to stay in Mexico more than 30 days to check their visitor's permit.
Immigration officers at Cancun airport do not ask tourists how long they plan to remain but establish a 30-day limit, which is indicated in writing, but I did not notice.
There are no signs at the airport to advise tourists of this regulation.


Tech Notes; Beep! Paul Revere Updated in N.Y.
Commuters who want up-to-date traffic and weather reports can now get them without punching their car-radio buttons continually.
A traffic beeper, just introduced, is providing reports 16 hours a day, seven days a week.
The service is a joint venture of Traffix Information Services of Brooklyn, a new concern, and Telecommunication Network Inc., a beeper company in Kendall Park, N.J.


Compromise Clears Way for Virginia Power Plant
The National Park Service and two electrical power companies announced Friday an unusual environmental compromise that will help clear the way for construction of a coal-fired power plant in Virginia, provided that an existing plant reduces air pollution that is threatening the Shenandoah National Park.
Park Service officials and Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr., along with power company officials, hailed the compromise as a "significant new pollution-reduction agreement" that would protect the environment and still permit industrial development.


SUMMER PLACES: THE SUPER VODKAS
THE first upscale vodka drinker of note was, of course, James Bond.
Historians seeking the origins of the current trend toward imported vodkas -- the so-called "super-premiums" -- should turn to chapter five of "Moonraker," in which the British spy, dining with M. at Blades, jumps at the chance to sample a "prewar Wolfschmidt from Riga." Call it connoisseurship, or call it snobbery, but 007 was on to something back in 1955.
The prewar Wolfschmidt has long since run out, but imported vodka is now a $700 million business -- and one of the few expanding segments of a declining liquor industry.
First came the Soviet Union's Stolichnaya, whose success begat Absolut, the Swedish vodka with the clever advertising campaign and the spiffy bottle.
Suddenly, Scandinavian was chic, and the super-premium category witnessed a Nordic onslaught on a scale not seen since the Vikings swooped down on Europe in the ninth century.
One after another, new vodkas descended from the frozen north, enswirled in a dry-ice fog: Finlandia (Finland), Elduris and Icy (Iceland), Denaka and Danzka (Denmark).


Public Housing Tenants Organizing for Self-Help
Paulette Blackshire has lived for nearly 30 years in the Robert Taylor Homes, a sprawling public housing complex on Chicago's South Side.
But it was only last fall that she learned how to get a stubborn housing bureaucracy to repair a lock.
The lock, on Ms.
Blackshire's front door, remained broken for five years despite her repeated calls to the Chicago Housing Authority, even after she explained that vandals had moved into a vacant apartment next door and tried to break into her home.
She felt frustrated and powerless.


Kathleen Dooley Is a Bride
Kathleen Ann Dooley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund R. Dooley of Cape Elizabeth, Me., was married yesterday to Prentice Ford Weathers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wade B. C. Weathers of New London, N.H.
The Rev.
Katharine Baker-Carr, a Congregational minister, performed a nondenominational ceremony at the Lake Sunapee Yacht Club in Sunapee, N.H.
Mrs.
Weathers, 28 years old, was until November the director of marketing and operations for Newcom Link, a New York branch of the French communications group Le Nouvel Observateur.
She is a graduate of Smith College.
Mr.
Weathers, 35, is the manager of custom projects for racing yachts at Navtec Inc. in Littleton, Mass.
He graduated from the University of Denver.


The Nation; Bush Resumes Hyperspeed; Is He Up to It?
GEORGE BUSH, the Eveready President, just keeps going and going and going.
Despite a thyroid condition that left him thinner, wan and tired, Mr.
Bush has recently seemed for all the world like the mechanical bunny with the bass drum on the battery commercials.


THE PHONY FARM
Like Laura Cunningham and her husband, my husband and I are former Manhattanites who have started a farm in upstate New York, with no previous farm experience.
However, before buying our animals, we read everything we could get our hands on, attended workshops at Cornell University and worked on other farms.
We, too, could spout monetary outlays that have not yet been reimbursed by products, but the adage is true that you get back what you put in.
My husband and I provide fresh chicken and goose eggs and drug-free lamb to more than 50 customers a year.
CONNIE HESS
Windham, N.Y.


Global Executive Becomes Global Writer
IN business, Chapter 11 means bankruptcy.
In a new novel about the world of business, by chapter 11 an assassin wielding kung-fu knives has assaulted the company controller and demolished his North Shore house, and an audit of the company's deficits has occasioned five murders.
"A Whisper of Treason" is no ordinary business novel, just as its author, Sandy London, is no ordinary executive.


What to Expect At a Travel Clinic
Travel medicine clinics began to appear in the early 1980's to help people get ready at one center for a trip to the developing world or any place in the tropics, instead of dashing around to doctors and the public health department.
What should you expect at a travel clinic?
A good clinic, after giving you a questionnaire on your proposed itinerary, medical history and past immunizations, will give you shots, probably three or four types, some preventive medicines to take by mouth and discuss and explain precautions that are specific to you and the places you are going.
More than one visit may be required because some immunizations are given in multiple doses.


French Supreme Court Rules Surrogate-Mother Agreements Illegal
France's Supreme Court has outlawed surrogate motherhood, stating that it violates a woman's body and improperly undermines the practice of adoption.
In a ruling issued late Friday, France's highest court, the Court of Cassation, endorsed the arguments of the nation's solicitor general that "the human body is not lent out, is not rented out, is not sold."


Miss Edwards to Wed W. L. Prickett
Mr. and Mrs.
George D. Edwards Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Beckham Edwards to William Loening Prickett, the son of Louise Truesdale Loening of Greenville, Del., and William Prickett Jr. of New Castle, Del.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Edwards is a product manager at Wellington Management Company, investment advisers in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Williams College.
Her father is the principal at George D. Edwards &amp; Company, New York management consultants.
Her mother, Gail Fletcher Edwards, is the executive director of the Investment Counsel Association of America in New York.


Armchair Travel
To the Editor: I wonder if you are aware of the important service you are performing for your readers; I never see it mentioned in your paper.
Each Sunday I turn eagerly to the Travel section to read the letters to the editor.
As I read through the heartbreaking stories of one kind of travel and tourism disaster after another, I settle back in my recliner with a contented smile on my face, put a little Mozart on the hi fi and, cool drink at the ready, muse on how delightful it is -- not to mention exciting and fulfilling -- to spend the summer just staying at home.
JOHN SAVAGE Old Greenwich, Conn.


Love and Hate in Black and White
"Jungle Fever," Spike Lee's new film, opens with a still photograph of Yusuf K. Hawkins, the black teen-ager killed by a white mob in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn two summers ago.
But if the screen had remained blank, the memory of that murder would have suffused "Jungle Fever" just as palpably, for it explores the nexus of race, sex and place that in one instance cost a 16-year-old innocent his life and in a broader historical scheme has tormented America for centuries.
After touching these issues to both serious and comic effect in his earlier work, Mr.
Lee with this latest film has driven to their core.
Hawkins was not shot, after all, because he crossed the line into a white neighborhood; he was shot because he was mistaken for being the companion of a local girl who was considered a pariah for dating blacks and Hispanics.
And in the art Mr.
Lee has forged from reality, the threatening prospect of interracial intimacy is embodied by Flipper Purify (Wesley Snipes), a married architect, and Angie Tucci (Annabella Sciorra), the temporary secretary who becomes his lover.


Making a Difference; This Time, a Risky Ride on the Rails
Plunging ahead with risky gambles was the singular trademark of William J. Agee during his tumultuous rein as chief executive of the Bendix Corporation, which ended after a spectacular takeover war in 1982 with the Martin Marietta Corporation.
The bid for Martin Marietta backfired on Mr.
Agee when the pursued became the pursuer, forcing Bendix into the arms of a white knight, the Allied Corporation.
Now Mr.
Agee is gambling big again.
His plan to build the nation's first high-speed rail system was accepted last week by Texas officials, who gave the Morrison Knudsen Corporation and its partners a franchise for a 620-mile system to link Dallas, Houston, San Antonio, Austin and Fort Worth.


The Countryside of Balzac and Sand
"INFINITE love . . . I found expressed by this long ribbon of water streaming in the sun between two green banks, by these lines of poplars guarding this vale of love with their quivering tracery, by the oak woods rising up between the vines on hillsides bordered by the winding river, and by these horizons full of contrasts . . . Without the Touraine, perhaps I could no longer live . . . ."
This passage, which goes on to evoke an idyllic village with turning water mills and hedges of honeysuckle, is from "Le Lys Dans la Vallee" by Balzac.
It comes as a surprise to readers who know Balzac better as the cynical 19th-century chronicler of "The Human Comedy," but here he is in lyrical mood: the countryside is transfigured by a passionate attachment.
In the book, the young hero falls in love with Madame de Mortsauf, a beautiful married woman old enough to be his mother who, in the end, is destroyed by her own love for him.
In life, the young Balzac fell in love with Madame de Bernay, a similar mother figure, who lived near Paris.
But he himself came from the center of France and that region appears under one aspect or another in many of his books.
Most frequent as settings are the Loire towns of Tours and Saumur; "Le Lys Dans la Vallee," however, takes place a little farther south, in the true heart of France which lies between the vineyards of the Loire basin and the foothills of the Massif Central.


Minor White Show Returns
THE Art Museum at Prince ton University is twice blessed first for being heir to Minor White's personal archive and second for having access to Peter C. Bunnell.
A one-time student of White's and, since 1972, the university's McAlpin Professor of the History of Photography and Modern Art, he is responsible for "Minor White: The Eye That Shapes."
Having opened two years ago at the Museum of Modern Art, where Mr.
Bunnell was previously curator of photography, this traveling show has now returned home.
It comes with a catalogue containing an illustrated biography, some of the photographer's letters, unpublished poems and journal entries, together with three essays by the curator.


Campus Life: Houston; Her Thesis Offers Advice to Coaches On the Long Pass
Michelle Fredricks, a 5-foot-8 rookie quarterback, did not complete any 50-yard passes at the University of Houston's all-women's Beauty Bowl game last fall.
In fact, her range ends at barely half that distance.
But her contribution to the game could change the way coaches look at their quarterbacks.
In her senior honors thesis on passing, Ms.
Fredricks provides an answer to a coach's prayers -- a formula for hurling perfect long passes.


Postings: Sonny Mae Program; Wider Mortgage Eligibility
The State of New York Mortgage Agency -- known as Sonny Mae -- makes home mortgages with below market rates available to first-time homebuyers who aren't too rich and whose dream houses are not too costly.
Under new income and cost guidelines established last month, threshold standards have been raised, making it easier for more people to qualify for the program.
Although income and home cost limits vary by region of the state, the income maximum for households to qualify for the mortgages has been raised $4,200, on average, statewide, to just under $50,000.
Housing cost limits for one-family properties were raised by an average of $11,900 for all regions, and now range from about $120,000 in much of upstate to $176,000 on Long Island.


Review/Dance; Kistler and Neal in 'Chaconne' Pas de Deux
Much was pleasant about the New York City Ballet's program on Thursday night at the New York State Theater.
Yet something was missing.
When Darci Kistler and Philip Neal entered in the first pas de deux of George Balanchine's "Chaconne," the concluding work on the program, they immediately revealed what it had been: mystery.
The way Ms.
Kistler smoothly glided and sometimes posed in high extensions made her appear to be a being from another world who chose, for her own pleasure, to set foot on this earth and dance with Mr.
Neal, the noble mortal who was lucky enough to be her partner.
She was a serene and lovely apparition.


Julie Meidinger Is Wed
Julie Ann Meidinger, an assistant editor at Progressive Architecture magazine in Stamford, Conn., and Graham Laurence Trelstad, an urban planner at the Columbia University School of Architecture, were married yesterday at Mountain Lakes Preserve in Princeton, N.J.
Mayor Richard C. Woodbridge of Princeton performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Trelstad, 24 years old, graduated from Columbia College in 1989, as did her husband.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in architectural and design criticism at the Parsons School of Design.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Meidinger of Auburn, Kan.
Mr.
Trelstad, 23, is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Trelstad of Princeton.


A la Carte: Unexpected Quality at the Buffet Table
BUFFETS, especially low-priced ones like the $9.95 Monday- and Tuesday-night offering at Ristorante Venere in Westbury, are often tugs-of-war between restaurateurs and diners.
Although the restaurant owners are glad to see the numerous patrons that such smorgasbords attract, they are equally concerned about making a profit on the all-you-can-eat crowd.
As a result, large quantities of inexpensive foods like cole slaw and potato and macaroni salad sometimes dominate the buffet table.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Camille Paglia seems to forget that the wonderful German educational tradition and system, which she venerates, were not effective against Nazi persecution, and it is well known that numerous German intellectuals still enjoy a more tolerant reception at our universities than in Germany.
Yet she insists that American theorists are like "plastic Ken dolls, beady-eyed, greedy, cutthroat," and claims that American universities are becoming more narrow because of their theory.
Such accusations are so preposterous that I wonder why you published them.
JACK ZIPES  Minneapolis


Mary Buck Weds Dr. James Young
Mary Moss Buck, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Buck of Evanston, Ill., was married in Cambridge, Mass., yesterday to Dr.
James Braham Young, the son of Marguerite Luce Young of Lancaster, Pa., and the late Dr.
James L. R. Young.
The Rev.
William W. LeConey, a Baptist minister and a cousin of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Memorial Church.
Mrs.
Young, 36 years old, is the administrative director of the East Asian Legal Studies program at the Harvard University Law School, where she received a J.D. degree, and a doctoral student in history at Harvard.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father, an editorial consultant, teaches journalism at Loyola University in Chicago.
Her mother, Ruth Moss Buck, is an assistant section editor at The Chicago Tribune.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Mar. 91
Mar. 90
Change
Starts
901
1,298
-30.6%
Completions
1,178
1,371
-14.1%
Sales
490
559
-12.3%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.73
9.77
10.56
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.32
7.37
8.67
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.56
9.59
10.35
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.28
7.27
8.37
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.57
9.59
10.45
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.08
7.08
8.56
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.95
9.86
10.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.73
7.71
8.69
Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
6.15
6.13
8.22
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.24
9.24
9.82
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Miss Davis Weds Richard Jones Jr.
Edwina Voss Elder Davis, a partner in a Pennsylvania art gallery, and Richard Irwin Gibbons Jones Jr., a law student, were married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church Christiana Hundred in Greenville, Del.
The Rev.
William Lane performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Jones, 26 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University.
She is an owner of the Kace Gallery in Kennett Square, Pa.
A daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George du V. Davis, Mrs.
Jones was reared by Mr. and Mrs.
Willard A. Speakman of Wilmington, Del.
Mr.
Speakman, her uncle, is president of the Speakman Company, producers of plumbing fixtures.


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Pow!
Bang!
Bam!
C.
Paglia is no dahlia!
She'll maul ya &amp; gall ya!
She makes meat a'  Jack da Reada!
GUS FRANZA  Moriches, L.I.


A Dude Ranch With Grizzlies
TO some, ecotourism is an oxymoron, along the lines of bureaucratic efficiency or military justice.
How can pristine wildernesses and unspoiled wildlife habitats be preserved by opening them up to visitors, however well-meaning -- not to mention the thundering herds that follow once a place catches on?
Whatever the paradoxes, an apparently successful experiment to combine tourism with protection of a threatened ecosystem is being conducted along the eastern front of the Rockies in Montana.
The Pine Butte Guest Ranch, which looks like a dude ranch, acts like a dude ranch and charges whoever wants to come and visit like any other other ranch, is really part of a huge nature preserve operated by The Nature Conservancy, a 550,000-member nonprofit organization that manages 1,631 preserves, forming the largest private sanctuary system in the world.


Rise in G.O.P. Loyalty Now Ebbing, Poll Finds
A rise in the proportion of Americans considering themselves Republican, detected in some polls after the end of the Persian Gulf war, has now faded, researchers for the Gallup Poll say.
The new analysis is based on 14 national Gallup polls totaling more than 14,000 respondents nationwide, interviewed by telephone from Feb. 14 to May 26.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; A Rowhouse for the D.A., Spanish Moviehouses
This is another in a series of columns answering readers' questions about New York's changing streetscapes.  23 East 39th Street
Q.
Who designed the brownstone at 23 East 39th Street?
We occupy the old kitchen, parlor and dining room and our clients often ask about the ornate design work.
We understand that a Mr.
Nichols, a government official, had this building erected in 1872.  . . .
John O'Donnell, Manhattan.


Fame in Dining Room
When DON BUDGE won the Australian, French, Wimbledon and United States titles in 1938, he became the first player to complete what became known as the Grand Slam and it was 24 years before anyone matched that feat.
Budge was among four people inducted Friday night into the Eastern Tennis Association's Hall of Fame at the United Nations Delegates Dining Room.
Also enshrined were DR.
IRVING GLICK, from Kings Point, L.I., a pioneer in sports medicine and an orthopedist for stars including BJORN BORG and MARTINA NAVRATILOVA; CLIFF SUTTER, past president of the association, a two-time N.C.A.A. singles titlist for Tulane and an undefeated United States Davis Cup player, and the late Frank Shields, the United States Davis Cup captain in 1951 (AP)


Give Us a Break, Ms. Paglia
To the Editor:
Camille Paglia appears to have the sensitivity of a pit viper on a bad day.
Maybe the essay should have been titled "The Closing of Camille Paglia's Mind." JOHN K. FITZGERALD  Beverly, Mass.


WINDSOR KNOT
We in the United States also are experiencing high unemployment and hard times, but this fact does not deter our own elite parasites in Washington from pursuing their extravagant life styles at the peasants' expense.
We have no latitude with which to criticize monarchy when we have our own thinly veiled monarchy without the velvet and ermine.
WILLIAM HADLEY
Milford, Conn.


Quotation of the Day
"This was always the club. It gave the aura of something big, something nice, something to attain. There was something almost glamorous about bridge then. Today it just doesn't seem to matter so much." -- Sam Hersh on the closing of the Cavendish Club in New York. [ 40:1. ]


Bridge
Most inexperienced players have had the experience of bungling a bridge deal and then being the object of cutting sarcasm from some relatively expert partner.
The feelings of the victim have never been better expressed than by Dorothy Parker, whose mastery of tongue and pen were of little help to her at the card table.
"If my partner gives me a dirty, even a slightly soiled, look," she wrote in a review of a bridge book that was far beyond her, "I am broken for the evening, and all my thoughts are of the emptiness of life and the sweet solace of the grave."


Giants' Erhardt Is Alone Out Beyond the End Zone
Ron Erhardt's new world has him slightly off to the side.
Erhardt was the architect of the Giants' offense, the one that former coach Bill Parcells called "classic" and that helped the team win two Super Bowls.


CASH CRISES FORCE LOCALITIES IN U.S. TO SLASH SERVICES
Weakened by recession and by drastic reductions in state and Federal aid, cities and counties around the country are shedding or slashing many of the services that have helped define their mission for decades.
As mayors and governing bodies try to balance their budgets for the 1992 fiscal year, which begins on July 1 for most, the reductions are epidemic.
Honolulu is cutting back on road repairs.
Sacramento, Calif., cannot open its new main library.
Salt Lake City cannot build a fire station for a growing neighborhood.
Houston is eliminating 111 hospital beds for indigent patients.
Bridgeport, Conn., plans to stop cleaning its streets on July 1 and may stop guarding its beaches this summer.


Aspin's Ties to Arms Contractor Questioned
Representative Les Aspin, who led an effort to buy and upgrade M-1 tanks that the Pentagon did not request, is dating an executive of a steel company that had more than $6 million in contracts on that type of tank, a newspaper has reported.
In its Sunday issue, The Wisconsin State Journal said Mr.
Aspin, a Wisconsin Democrat who is the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, led the effort that added to a spending bill the $375 million for the tanks.


Dance in Review
Princeton Ballet
Pace Downtown Theater Manhattan
The Princeton Ballet offered a program of sunny, sweet-tempered dance on Saturday night.
"Still Lifes," a ballet by Dermot Burke, the former Joffrey Ballet dancer who now directs the New Jersey company, is an enjoyable rendering of a familiar genre.
Set imaginatively to a lilting Irish folk song recorded by the Paul Winter Consort, the romantic duet has two statues in a sculptor's studio come to life, reach out to each other and fall in love.
Though slight, the duet was to the point and, until the curtain bows, not at all sentimental.
It was performed with delicate lyricism by Lisa de Ravel and Gerald Premick.


The Media Business: Television; Tisch Expects CBS to Regain Its Glory
LAURENCE A. TISCH, the chairman and chief executive of CBS, has declared himself unapologetically bullish about television -- though some doubters are still translating that to bull-headed.
Even in the face of what he concedes is a dismal short-term forecast for network television, Mr.
Tisch sees a rosy corrective lens forming in front of the CBS eye.


Dance in Review
Accion Colectiva
La Mama E.T.C.
Accion Colectiva took dancegoers on a spree at "Noche de Luna Llena Nightclub" ("Night of the Full Moon Nightclub").
That was the overall title for the program of two dances this troupe from Caracas, Venezuela, presented Saturday night.
The bizarre nightclub depicted on stage would surely not be listed in any travel guide.
Nevertheless, the company made a visit there a fascinating example of choreographic slumming.


Puzzling Turns in a Life Devoted to Children
Kodzo Dobosu sits on a Harlem park bench and describes his adopted children: There's the blind son who had been whipped, and the boy with kidney disease who was expected to die, and the girl with syphilis of the spine.
There's the deaf boy who could not speak and the boy with spina bifida.


Schoolgirl Sets National Mark
Marion Jones, a 15-year-old sophomore from Rio Mesa High School in Oxnard, shattered the girls' 100-meter national interscholastic record at the 73d California state track and field championships Saturday at Cerritos College.
While a capacity crowd of 10,510 cheered her on, Jones cruised to an 11.17-second clocking, which eclipsed the listed record of 11.29 seconds by Barbara Bell of Fort Worth in 1981.


Manila Reports Gains In Talks on U.S. Bases
Foreign Secretary Raul Manglapus said today that the United States had dropped its demand for a 10-year treaty on its military bases in the Philippines and the two countries were nearing agreement on a compensation package.
Mr.
Manglapus said negotiators were working out a compromise on how long the United States could use Clark Air Base and the Subic Bay naval base, the largest American bases in Asia.
The current American lease on them runs out in September.


Coody Rolls to Victory After Early 45-Foot Putt
Making a 45-foot putt with a 3-foot break for a birdie on the second hole can inspire any golfer, including a seasoned professional like Charles Coody.
Coody used that birdie-3 on the 320-yard second hole at Sleepy Hollow Country Club today to spark himself to the title of the $400,000 Nynex Commemorative tournament on the Senior PGA Tour.


Hearns Determined to Suit a Fancy: A 6th Title
Thomas Hearns is 32 years old and still has notions.
It didn't figure that of the glorious bunch who dominated the middle divisions in the 1980's -- Hearns, Sugar Ray Leonard, Marvelous Marvin Hagler and Roberto Duran -- he would outlast them all.


INSIDE
Budget Accord in Albany Legislative leaders announced that they had reached final agreement on a $51.9 billion state budget, nine weeks after it was due.
Page B1.
Israel Says 'Yes' to Jordan The Israelis welcomed King Hussein's proposal for talks, saying such a meeting could take place in either Jerusalem or Amman.
Page A3.
Computer Blamed in Crash Austria said a computer malfunction was responsible for the airline crash in Thailand a week ago that left 223 people dead.
Page A3.


India TV's Sleepy Response To Gandhi Death Irks Some
On the night Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated, Doordarshan, the Government television network, was showing a film on the nesting habits of the cuckoo bird.
The show was not interrupted, even after Mr.
Gandhi's death was known.
"Most of India went to bed without knowing about his killing," Anuradha Chopra, a television critic for The Times of India, said last week.
"Only when the cuckoo saga was over did the last bulletin of the day give the news."


Taylor Adds Touch to Yanks' New-Found Magic
Wade Taylor walked off the mound yesterday afternoon and stepped into the middle of a joyous ovation, as if the crowd that came to the Stadium had found itself a new Yankee hero.
By the end of the day, Taylor had won a game, won a new following of fans and won another chance to pitch in the big leagues.


Lakers Edge Bulls in Game 1 of N.B.A. Final


Bridge
In an unusual scheduling overlap, the finals of New York's two most important team championships were played side by side yesterday at the Gotham Club in Manhattan.
If there had been any player overlap, the Grand National Team final would have been postponed.
As it was, Bob Jones, Bjorn Fallenius, Rick Zucker and Jim Krekorian faced off against R. Jay Becker, Ira Herman, Glenn Milgrim, Jared Lilienstein, hoping to advance to national playoffs in Las Vegas in July.
At the first quarter, Jones led Becker by 1 imp.


David Ruffin, a Pop Singer, 50; Featured on the Temptations' Hits
David Ruffin, an original member of the Temptations, whose gospel-charged baritone was featured on hits like "My Girl" and "Ain't Too Proud to Beg," died Saturday of what appeared to be a drug overdose, the police said.
He was 50 years old.
Detective Joan Duffy said a limousine pulled up to the University of Pennsylvania Hospital emergency room shortly before 3 A.M.
The driver dropped off Mr.
Ruffin, saying the singer had overdosed on drugs, she said.
Mr.
Ruffin was pronounced dead at 3:55 A.M.
An autopsy was performed, but no results were released today.


Cranston Jones, 73, Architecture Author And Writer at Time
Cranston E. Jones, a writer and editor with Time and People magazines for 38 years and an author of books on architecture, died on Saturday at New York Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer of the esophagus, his daughter, Abigail, said.


Hope Harrison Weds in Boston
Hope Millard Harrison and Michael Harry Weinstein were married yesterday at the St.
Botolph Club in Boston in a nondenominational ceremony by the Rev.
Donald B. McGaw, a Methodist minister.
The bride is the daughter of Dorothy G. Blaney of Allentown, Pa., and New York, and Robert L. Harrison of Albany.
The bridegroom is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Monte Weinstein of Albany.


Comeback for Moose in New England Creates a Road Hazard
It is spring in northern New England.
But the fresh vegetation in the meadows has brought a new and rapidly growing danger to residents of small villages like this one on the northern edge of the White Mountains: migrating moose.
On May 20, Paul Buccifurri was driving home after dark when he hit a moose on the narrow mountain road that leads into Jefferson.
The collision with the 1,000-pound moose sent his pickup truck hurtling off the road and into a tree, killing Mr.
Buccifurri, who was 29 years old.


The Media Business: ADDENDA; Wells, Rich Is Planning A Big Announcement
Wells, Rich, Greene and Boulet Dru Dupuy Petit, the French advertising agency that owns part of New York-based Wells, plan to make what they are calling a significant announcement on June 11.
Wells declined to comment on the nature of the announcement.
The trade publication Adweek, in its May 27 issue, reported that within weeks B.D.D.P. would take a majority interest in Wells, in which it purchased a 40 percent stake last year, and add its name to Wells's.


Market Place; Trends Expected To Aid Brinker
STOCKS of restaurant companies with casual themes and varied moderate-priced menus have lit up Wall Street this year, rising in market value as a group by nearly 50 percent.
The group is prospering despite the recession because of the bulging numbers of aging adults and families with school-age children who often favor more leisurely full-service meals over quick trips to a McDonald's or Burger King.


10 Years of AIDS Battle: Hopes for Success Dim
The age of AIDS officially began 10 years ago, on June 5, 1981, when the Centers for Disease Control published a short, dry report on an outbreak of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia among five gay men in Los Angeles.
The rare disease had previously been seen only occasionally in the United States in cancer patients with suppressed immune systems.
The agency placed it on the second page of its Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, after a paper on dengue in an island in the Caribbean.
Now AIDS has now spread its shadow around the globe.
By the year 2000, the World Health Organization recently calculated, about 40 million people will be infected with the AIDS virus.
A million Americans are thought to carry the virus, and more than 106,000 have died from it.


Plan for Nude Sunbathing
The National Park Service is considering a proposal that would allow nude sunbathing at a park in Hawaii, an Interior Department official said Saturday.
"We're a long way from a formal declaration," said Steve Goldstein, a spokesman for Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr., whose agency oversees the park service.
He said the proposal was in a management plan for the Kaloko-Honokohua National Historical Park, which is to open in the fall on the island of Hawaii.


As Angry Kurds Surge Through Town, U.S. Soldiers Protect Iraqis
Hundreds of angry Kurdish refugees surged through the streets of this American-occupied town today, attacking Iraqi officers and shouting demands that American soldiers stay here to protect them.
The most violent clash came at the local police headquarters, where about 50 Iraqi police officers are posted.
Demonstrators overran the building, tearing down the Iraqi flag and forcing officers to flee.
They also destroyed several unmarked police cars.


Critics Say Authorities Are Bungling Gandhi Case
Allegations that Government officials have seriously bungled the investigation of the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi grew today as the police insisted they were nearing the identity of the killer.
Security officials have indicated the woman suspected of carrying the bomb that killed Mr.
Gandhi on May 21 was from a town in northern Sri Lanka, and that she was connected to a violent Tamil secessionist group that Indian armed forces have sought to crush.


OPEC Price Warning
OPEC ministers must set the stage this week for a smooth resumption of Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil exports or risk a price war next year, officials and analysts said today.
"We are on the threshold of many serious problems," said a senior Libyan delegate to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
An OPEC meeting begins here on Tuesday, and some are predicting a price war if producers who increased production during the Persian Gulf crisis do not lower output to accommodate Iraq and Kuwait's return to the market.


New Jersey Primary Offers Outlet for Voter Tax Anger
After months of anger among taxpayers and fear among Democrats, legislators face the voters in party primaries on Tuesday for the first time since some of the lawmakers voted for Gov.
Jim Florio's $2.8 billion tax package.
There is no statewide office on the ballot to heighten voter interest, and there is only a handful of contests in the 40 election district races.
As a result, Midge Trainor, director of the state Division of Elections, estimates that only about 11.5 percent of the state's 3.6 million voters will go the polls, which will be open between 7 A. M. and 8 P.M.


Enter Senate, Begin Chasing Money
John F. Seymour, the new Senator from California, says he needs to do one thing in the next 30 days to gain credibility as a political heavyweight, and it has nothing to do with legislation.
Mr.
Seymour, a moderate Republican, has to raise $1 million by the end of June.
And that's only the beginning.


Dr. Amy Roskin Wed at Princeton
Dr.
Amy Catherine Roskin, a physician, and George Michael Pushner, a doctoral candidate in business economics at Columbia University, were married yesterday at Prospect House, a faculty club at Princeton University.
Rabbi Edward Wisnia officiated.
The bride is daughter of Dr.
Gerald Roskin and Dr.
Joan Roskin of Roslyn, L.I.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Pushner of New London, Conn.


Nancy Gutman, Student, Is Wed
Nancy Esther Gutman, a daughter of Roberta B. Gutman of Greenwich, Conn., and Daniel L. Gutman of New York, was married yesterday in Greenwich to Howard Simon Schrader, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Schrader of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Rabbi Martin Sofer, a cousin of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Homestead Inn.
The bride, 33 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Barnard College, she is a doctoral candidate in economics at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Her father is an investment manager at the Tucker Anthony brokerage in New York.
Her mother teaches emotionally disturbed children at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Harrison, N.Y.


'Dashing' Sydney Always in a Rush
SYDNEY MAREE used to rise by 5 A.M. to exercise before catching a 6:10 train to school in South Africa.
Almost 20 years later, Maree still is getting up at 5 in the morning and exercising.
But this time the train he takes is Amtrak's 7:40 from Philadelphia to New York.


Amtrak and Albany Blamed After Train Kills 3-Year-Old
New York City Council members and state legislators assailed the State Department of Transportation and Amtrak yesterday for failing to maintain protective fencing along the railroad tracks where a 3-year-old boy was struck and killed by a train on Saturday.
"This is tantamount to a murder in my community," said Councilman Stanley E. Michels, who represents the Washington Heights neighborhood where the boy, Justin James Rodriguez, died.


Quotation of the Day
"It was in June of 1981, on Ward 3B. We saw a young gay man with most devastating immune deficiency we had ever seen. We said, 'We don't know what this is, but we hope we don't ever see another case like it again.' " -- Dr.
Samuel Broder of the National Cancer Institute, recalling the beginning of the AIDS epidemic.  [ A14:5. ]


Clozapine's Price, and Value
Clozapine, a highly effective new treatment, promises relief for thousands of schizophrenics, and Federal administrators merit praise for insisting that all states make it available to the poor under Medicaid.
It can save millions and reclaim lives.
Concerns remain that the drug's manufacturer, Sandoz Pharmaceuticals , is trying to profiteer from the desperation of mental patients and their families.
But that no longer seems a compelling reason to deny patients the drug.


U.S. Still Seeks Lower Rates Abroad
When the industrial world's finance ministers gather here on Tuesday, the United States will continue to press other countries to lower their interest rates, American officials say.
At the annual ministers' meeting of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady will ask the industrial nations to tilt their policies more vigorously toward growth, these officials said.


Albania Communists Reported Set to Resign
Albania's Communist Government plans to resign to make way for a multi-party caretaker government that will prepare new elections, opposition sources in Tirana said today.
The sources, reached from Vienna, said Kastriot Islami, chairman of the Communist-dominated Parliament, said the plan had been agreed on after a meeting of Albania's main political parties.


Arrest Made a Week Later at Murder Scene
A man was charged with murder yesterday after detectives saw him in the subway station where a man was murdered a week ago and thought he fit the description of the suspect, a transit police spokesman said.
"He literally returned to the scene of the crime one week later," said the spokesman, Al O'Leary.


Giants and 49ers To the Rescue
San Francisco's 10,000 junior high and high school athletes would have been locked out of their school gyms next term if it hadn't been for an infusion of money from the 49ers and Giants.
THOMAS SAMMON, executive assistant to the San Francisco schools superintendent, explained in an interview that "the whole interscholastic program would have been cut." The city needed more than $1 million.


The S.A.T. Goes P.C.
Like many high school juniors, I just took the Scholastic Aptitude Test.
I emerged from the three-and-one-half-hour ordeal struck by the too large number of questions that emphasized the achievements of minorities, women and third world countries; bemoaned the shortcomings of American society, and advanced fashionable causes.
That such causes are presented in what is supposed to be an objective test is surprising; that they are advanced in a way that ultimately compromises them is sad.
The questions  [ verified with the Educational Testing Service last week ]  informed us that the writer Zora Neale Hurston had been exposed to black folklore at an early age; that "Invisible Man" by Ralph Ellison was considered a great book when it was published and probably will always be considered one, and that "The Piano Lesson" by August Wilson chronicles his experience and is set in Pittsburgh.
So far, so good.
There's nothing wrong with references to the lives of writers or a celebration of their works.
As it happens, I admire these writers.
The problem is that the unrelieved piling up of such citations amounted to a racial focus of skewed proportions.
The questions cited Richard Wright, Gwendolyn Brooks, Lorraine Hansberry and Jackie Robinson, twice.
It seemed as if almost half the questions that named real people named blacks.
Furthermore, the fiction-reading comprehension section was from Maya Angelou's "I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings."
The Educational Testing Service also took pains to focus on other minorities.
There were questions about Mexican Americans, native Americans and Eskimos.
And, as a nod to third world supporters, the test mentioned Zimbabwe's celebration in 1982 of its second year of independence.
Other questions emphasized women.
Doris Lessing, we were reminded, is the 20th century's Jane Austen.
There was a reading-comprehension section about the English author Fanny Wright and her book about the early U.S. -- a book, we were told, that recognized some of the country's problems but failed to understand how difficult solutions would be.
I, too, think that recycling paper is a good idea.
But when a question that mentions white men stresses Theodore Roosevelt's contribution to wilderness conservation, and a reading-comprehension passage speaks of delicate lake ecosystems, it all begins to seem a bit simple-minded.
Stung by criticism that the S.A.T. has been culturally biased, the E.T.S. has, it seems, tried to redeem itself and perhaps avert future criticism by emphasizing the achievements of minorities and women.
The trouble is that this emphasis reveals as much about stereotypical thinking as anything could and may well offend many students -- minority and majority, male and female -- who take the test.
African-Americans, women and Asians should complain because the E.T.S., in so pointedly turning stereotypes upside down, highlights them.
Jews should complain because Albert Einstein and Saul Bellow seem not to be subjects of questions.
Men should complain because they rarely seem to achieve anything unless they're of minority origin.
Everyone should complain because, in one way or another, the S.A.T. distorts reality.
This imbalance reflects a conformism that is prevalent in America and that hurts all of us, particularly those whose causes it seeks to advance.
By painting reality in the hues of wishful thinking, it lulls us into believing serious inequities have been set right, and it strangles the openness, dynamism and complexity that define and give hope to our still evolving, ever more inclusive democracy.


Let's End Food-Claims Double Standard
To the Editor:
I strongly support the Food and Drug Administration's efforts to stop the deceptive use of the word "fresh" in product labeling and the F.D.A.'s intention to go after misleading cholesterol claims (front page, May 12).
This is a refreshing change in agency policy after a decade of inaction.


H. N. Swanson, 91, An Agent for Writers In Hollywood Deals
H.
N.
Swanson, a screen literary agent who represented some of America's greatest writers in Hollywood for more than half a century, died on Friday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 91 years old.
He died of complications from a stroke he suffered a month ago, said his stepson, Thomas J. Shanks.


Police Increase Subway Patrols After 3 Attacks
The number of transit police officers patrolling subway stations in Greenwich Village and SoHo has been increased in response to a series of screwdriver attacks on women leaving stations there, officials said yesterday.
The three attacks, which left one woman hospitalized, are believed to be the work of one man.
Detectives said they will hand out leaflets in the subways today with a sketch of the man, a plea for information and a warning to women, said Capt.
Joseph Carney.


The Media Business: ADDENDA; Coming and Going At TBWA Advertising
At TBWA Advertising, New York, there is news of an arrival and a departure.
The arrival is Lois Geller, 47 years old, who leaves AC&amp;R Direct, New York, to found Geller Associates, TBWA's first direct marketing subsidiary.


A Meeting of Mayors at Israel Day Parade


Dinesh Goswami, Indian Politician, 56
Dinesh Goswami, Law Minister under former Prime Minister V. P. Singh, was killed this morning in a car accident in his home state of Assam.
He was 56 years old.


Drama in Berlin: More Intense Offstage Than On
Berlin's Culture Minister has taken the daring step of dismissing the head of the Berliner Ensemble, the venerable theater dedicated to works of Bertolt Brecht, the best-known German dramatist of this century.
The director, Manfred Wekwerth, was a student of Brecht, but the Culture Minister, Ulrich Roloff-Momin, said he had also been a member of the Communist Party Central Committee, the arbiter of censorship in the old East Germany.
"Under a free democratic order, such a theater director is for me an anachronism," Mr.
Roloff-Momin said.


The Talk Of The Book Show; Hot Books, Cool Town For 10,000 At Meeting
After a steamy and nondescript Saturday, the air-conditioning and some hot books appeared yesterday to give an upbeat twist to the plot involving more than 10,000 booksellers and publishers thrown together, like passengers on a giant ocean liner, in the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan.
It was not that the "R" word had been abruptly conjured away by the fertile literary minds of those attending the four-day American Booksellers Association convention, which ends tomorrow.
But nobody had been mugged, and amid the hubbub of publishers imagining great things for their books, the recession did seem to be further away and, with any luck, on the wane.


Bank Loans Show Drop
Commercial and industrial loans on the books of commercial banks, excluding acceptances, fell $1.21 billion, to $311.82 billion in the week that ended on May 22, the Federal Reserve Board said on Friday.
Including acceptances, loans fell $1.27 billion, to $313.38 billion, the Fed said.


Mets Wither Away, 3-1, In the Heat at St. Louis
The Mets, left withered by the sun and defeated, 3-1, by the Cardinals, stumbled out of the 130-degree heat of Busch Stadium and into the dark and quiet cool of their clubhouse.
Almost immediately, though, word of another alarming reading filtered from locker to locker.
The Pirates had beaten the Phillies, 5-3, for their ninth straight victory and their lead over the Mets in the National League East had swollen to six games.
There would be no relief from the heat.


MGM-Pathe's Surprise: A Low-Cost Hit
MGM-Pathe's new hit, "Thelma and Louise," is the latest reminder of an often-forgotten adage in Hollywood: money isn't everything.
The film cost a relatively modest $18.5 million to make and already looks like a winner in a summer field in which many movies cost $40 million or more.


A German Architect For Chicago Museum
The German architect Josef Paul Kleihues has been chosen to design the new building and sculpture garden for the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago.
The project, to be built on a two-acre site at 234 East Chicago Avenue now occupied by the Chicago Avenue Armory, is to be almost four times the size of the existing museum on East Ontario Street.
It is to open in 1995.
Among Mr.
Kleihues's completed projects are the Museum for Pre- and Early History in Frankfurt and the Berlin-Neukolln Hospital.
He is also the architect for the new Museum of Contemporary Art in Berlin.


Tens of Thousands of Ukrainians Enter Poland to See the Pope


The Man Who Mastered Belmont
The most demanding horse race in America is the Belmont Stakes.
It is the final leg of the Triple Crown for 3-year-old horses, who are comparable to teen-aged athletes, still growing and developing and learning.


Going Is Rough and the Exit Early for Capriati
Under the most placid of blue summer skies, the proceedings turned turbulent on the red clay today at the French Open.
Jennifer Capriati, last year's tournament sweetheart when she went to the semifinals of her first Grand Slam event, was dismissed in straight sets in the fourth round by Conchita Martinez, and 10th-seeded Michael Chang took advantage of his familiarity with center court to upset seventh-seeded Guy Forget of France.


U.S. Officials Believe Iraq Will Take Years to Rebuild
Three months after the Persian Gulf war devastated Iraq's military and many of its civilian industries, the country remains seriously incapacitated, facing a potentially catastrophic health crisis this summer and many years of rebuilding its civilian economy, Bush Administration analysts say.
A comprehensive assessment of the damage from the intense 43-day allied bombardment remains classified within the Administration, which has been reluctant to divulge details.
But an overview of the damage to key sectors of Iraq's economy emerged in recent days from a series of interviews with Administration analysts, who agreed to discuss it if they were not identified.


The Media Business; New Daily Takes On Racing Form
After buying a copy of The Racing Times at a Manhattan newsstand, Ed Piesman, a dentist and an avid horse-racing fan, said he preferred the new paper to the venerable Daily Racing Form because "the columnists are much better" and some of the statistics "are much, much better."
But the news dealer who sold him the paper said people like Dr.
Piesman were few.
"The Racing Times, I sell two a day, maybe five when there is a big race," said Ashok Patel, whose stand at 72d Street and Broadway is adjacent to an off-track betting parlor.
"The Daily Racing Form, I sell 40 or 50 a day."


Dance in Review
Dance Africa
Brooklyn Academy of Music
Long before multi-culturalism became a hot item among the politically correct on both ends of the spectrum, the Dance Africa series was presenting programs of African and Afro-American folkloric dance, theater and music that not only entertained but also educated.
Now in its 14th year, Dance Africa offered an afternoon of dance and music on Saturday that included things new, fresh looks at the old, a pinch or two of uplift, and a good deal of strong, high-spirited performing.


Man Leaving Subway Is Hurt by Stolen Van
A 42-year-old man was critically injured as he left a Bronx subway station yesterday when a stolen van backed into the station and dislodged a pole that struck him on the head.
The incident occurred at 157 East 182d Street in the Tremont section about 1 P.M., a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina S. Mohrmann, said.


Magadan Stands By Actions
Dave Magadan watched the television replay in his hotel room hours later.
It provided a couple of additional details, but more than anything else confirmed his basic belief: He had no choice and thus no play, and so there was no reason for him to apologize for the strange sequence that decided a 6-5 loss to the Cardinals in the 10th inning Saturday night.
With half of Milt Thompson's bat whirling toward his head at the same second he was reaching for Thompson's grounder, Magadan had to duck for cover, and in so doing concede that Gerald Perry would score from third and the Mets would lose a game they had once led, 5-0.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-11
Iraq remains seriously incapacitated, according to assessments by Bush Administration officials.
They say it will take Iraq many years to rebuild the military and civilian industries devastated by the war.
Page A1
Hundreds of angry Kurdish refugees attacked Iraqi officers in the American-occupied town of Zakho.
The demonstrators overran the local police headquarters, destroying police cars and forcing officers to flee.
A8


Campbell Shares Sold
Two members of the family that controls the Campbell Soup Company have reduced their stake in the corporation.
Dorrance Hamilton and Hope Van Beuren sold two million shares of Campbell's common stock, or about 11 percent of their holdings in the food company.
The stock was sold to several institutional investors, Campbell said Friday.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 3


Corrections
A chart yesterday about an East- West treaty on conventional arms summarized the treaty's status incorrectly.
It was signed in November.


Dig This, Baseball Aging Gracefully
Like the origins of the universe, baseball keeps getting older and older.
Now the National Pastime's archaeologists have unearthed evidence that the game was played as long ago as 1825 -- "The earliest reference to baseball that I know of," contended TOM HEITZ, the librarian at the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y.
The reference appears in the July 13, 1825, issue of The Delhi (N.Y.) Gazette.
Under the headline "A Challenge," nine players dare "an equal number of persons . . . to play the game of BASS-BALL for the sum of one dollar each per game. . . . "


Editorial Notebook; What the Doctor Ordered
The Supreme Court recently upheld censorship in family planning clinics -- a ruling that rests on a perception of reality so skewed as to invite questions about whether five justices have even a common-sense awareness of the world around them.
The ruling suffers from many flaws in logic, but its most conspicuous failing is on this human level.
In 1988, the Department of Health and Human Services issued new rules relating to abortions.
As in the past, these prohibit abortion services in federally funded clinics.
But, reversing two decades of policy, they also prohibit any mention of abortion at all.


War's Repercussions Continue
American troops restored order when Kurds stormed a police station in an Iraqi town.
Page A8.


The Cold War and Appendix B
Unquestionably, Communism lost.
The cold war has ended in economic and political turmoil on the other side.
But is the converse true: did democracy and capitalism win?
That's not so clear, to judge by the experience of an American scholar who has just had his appendix removed for the second time.
Last year, while visiting the Soviet Union, his appendix burst and he was rushed to the hospital in a provincial capital.
The facilities were primitive; there was one towel for five people in intensive care.
Two weeks ago, having long since returned to work in New York, the man suffered from sudden severe intestinal pain.
His appendix had to be removed.
Appendix?
Yes: about one person in a hundred has two, and what his bookish friends labeled "Appendix B" was strangling his intestine.


India Can't Remain a Gandhi Family Property
To the Editor:
Your May 25 and 26 reports on the aftermath of the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi point out the myriad problems facing India.
For many of these problems of adventurism abroad (against Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bangladesh or the Maldives) and separatism at home (Punjab, Kashmir, Assam), the roots lie in the divisive policies initiated by Indira Gandhi to fortify her power and faithfully embraced by Rajiv Gandhi, her son.
Unfortunately, both died violently and, despite many praiseworthy qualities, history will not remember them kindly for both have damaged India's democratic institutions.


Americans Complain of Bias By Japanese Bosses in U.S.
As more and more Japanese companies open for business in the United States, Americans contend that there is a new kind of discrimination: They say Japanese employers are reserving the best jobs for Japanese managers.
There are no statistics to document the extent of the problem, and it clearly does not apply to every Japanese employer in the United States.
Japanese companies employ less than 1 percent of 118 million working Americans.


Kohl's Party Loses 3d Consecutive State Election
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Party was dealt another blow today as voters in the northern city-state of Hamburg gave the Social Democratic Party a clear majority in its legislature.
The result was the third consecutive setback for Mr.
Kohl's party in regional voting since he was confirmed in power in national elections last December, and dealt an equally sharp blow to the Free Democrats, the junior partner in the Chancellor's Bonn coalition.
The Free Democrats barely scraped over the 5 percent hurdle required for representation in Parliament.


Corrections
A report last Monday about the marriage of Lynn Klotz and Matthew Salt misstated the location.
The wedding took place in South Salem, N.Y., not in New Jersey.


Come On Guys, Save a Tree
The American Booksellers Association convention has come to New York just in time to see BILL PARCELLS (and ghostwriter JERRY IZENBERG ) fetch $327,000 from the publisher William Morrow for the autobiography of ex-Giants' coach.
Nice piece of change, but not in the same league as LARRY BIRD.
His book "Drive" garnered a $750,000 advance, believed to be a record for sports books.
PETE ROSE (and ROGER KAHN ) actually got a million-dollar advance from Warner Books, but they wound up going to Macmillan for less once Rose was plagued with legal problems and banned by baseball.


Amy Graydon, Architect, Wed
Amy Graydon, a daughter of Lynne Graydon of Short Hills, N.J., and Al Graydon of South Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Daniel Kaplan, a son of Dr.
Eugene Kaplan of Columbia, S.C., and the late Sarane R. Kaplan.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Marjorie Slome at the Palm House of the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an architect with her own office in New York.
A graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, she received a master's degree in architecture from Harvard University.
Her father is the president of Graydon-Sherman Inc., a wholesale distributor of personal computers in South Orange.


Iraq Plans to Import Produce
Iraq will import vegetables because of food shortages, the Iraqi News Agency said today.
The Information Minister, Hamed Youssef Hammadi, was quoted as saying the measure had been taken "to secure foodstuffs and overcome the negative effects of sabotage on the production of vegetables this season." The dispatch, monitored in Cyprus, did not elaborate.
Allied bombing during the gulf war destroyed the distribution system Iraqi farmers depend on.


Dr. Elizabeth B. Aksionoff Is Wed to Michael Salshutz
Dr.
Elizabeth B. Aksionoff and Michael Salshutz were married yesterday at Sans Souci in Sea Cliff, L.I., by Rabbi Charles G. Agin.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Aksionoff of Flushing, Queens.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Salshutz of Flushing.
The bride, 31 years old, is an assistant clinical professor at the State University of New York College of Optometry in Manhattan and has an optometric practice in New Rochelle, N.Y.
She is a graduate of Cornell University and the SUNY College of Optometry.


Treasury Is Selling Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings for this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late in the day on Friday the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.53 percent and the six-month bill was at 5.67 percent.
The Federal National Mortgage Association plans to announce the interest rates tomorrow for a two-part Fannie Mae financing totaling $1.4 billion equally divided between five- and 10-year maturities.
The following fixed-income issues are scheduled this week:  TAXABLE WEDNESDAY  Private Export Funding Corp., $100 million in notes, due in 1997, Series JJ.
Citicorp Securities.
ONE DAY DURING THE WEEK
CPC International, $250 million in liquid yield option notes, due in 2006, A-3/NR/A-.
Merrill Lynch.
Johnston Coca-Cola Bottling Group Inc., $150 million in subordinated notes, due in 2001, B-1/BB+/B-.
Salomon Brothers.
Marriott Corp., $500 million face amount in liquid yield option notes, due in 2006, Baa-3/BBB-/BBB-.
Merrill Lynch.
Salomon Inc., four million shares of $25 preferred stock, A-2/A-/A.
Salomon Brothers.
Tribune Co., $500 million face amount in liquid yield option notes, due in 2011, A-3/A/NR/ Merrill Lynch. (Source: MCM CorporateWatch) Ratings: Moody's/Standard &amp; Poor's/Duff &amp; Phelps.
TAX-EXEMPT MONDAY  San Bernardino County, Calif., $130 million in tax and revenue anticipation notes.
Competitive.
TUESDAY  Rhode Island Depositors Economic Protection Corp., $150 million in special obligation bonds.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Washington State, $155 million in general obligation bonds.
Competitive.
Western Michigan University Board of Trustees, $64.125 million in university revenue bonds.
Lehman Brothers.
WEDNESDAY  Monroe County, N.Y., $169 million in various purpose general obligation bonds.
Competitive.
New York State Medical Care Facilities Finance Agency, $91.2 million in revenue bonds for mental health services.
Competitive.
San Francisco, $68 million in general obligation bonds.
Competitive.
Virginia, $68 million in general obligation bonds.
Competitive.
THURSDAY North Texas Higher Education Authority Inc., $90 million in student loan revenue refunding bonds, due in 2005, Series 1991-G.
Manufacturers Hanover Securities.
TENTATIVE OFFERINGS THIS WEEK
California Health Facilities Finance Authority, $88 million in hospital revenue bonds.
Goldman, Sachs.
California State Public Works Board, $70 million in lease revenue bonds.
Grigsby Brandford Powell.
Eastern Municipal Water District, Calif., $96 million in water and sewer refunding revenue bonds.
Paine Webber Inc.
Massachusetts Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $100 million in bonds for Boston University.
Lehman Brothers.
New York City, $600 million in general obligation bonds.
Goldman, Sachs.
Pitt County, N.C., $59.6 million in debt securities for Pitt County Memorial Hospital.
First Boston.
Washington Housing Finance Commission, $70 million in single-family mortgage revenue bonds.
Paine Webber.
American Express+ (Lehman Brothers)


Spectradyne In Playboy Deal
Playboy Enterprises and Spectradyne Inc., which provides movies on hotel-room television sets, have reached an agreement in principle to produce a guide to in-hotel television for the United States and Canada.
The joint venture is expected to be announced this week.


Orthodox Jews Battle Neighbors in a Zoning War
This Rockland County village, just two months old, is New York State's newest.
But it is already a symbol of the bitterness that comes from clashing cultures as growing numbers of Orthodox Jews leave New York City for what are sometimes unwelcoming suburbs.
In April, Airmont, which is part of the Town of Ramapo, incorporated as a separate village.
The most volatile issue facing residents and local officials is whether to permit small synagogues in homes.
The Orthodox say they need such places to worship because Jewish law forbids them to travel by car on the Sabbath.


Nintendo-Philips Deal Is a Slap at Sony
A day after Sony announced a deal with Nintendo to make electronic game players, Nintendo announced that it had struck a deal with Philips, one of Sony's principal rivals.
The Nintendo Company evidently turned to Philips N.V., the Dutch electronics giant, to try to maintain its domination of the $4.7 billion video game market after signing what some experts say is an unfavorable deal with the Sony Corporation.


Korean Protesters Seek Ouster of President


Man Missing in Boat Accident
A Mineola man was charged with operating a boat under the influence of alcohol after the boat slammed into a pole and threw a passenger overboard Saturday night, the police said.
Authorities were still looking today for the man who went into the water, who was identified as Thomas Ryan, 27 years old, of Plainedge.
The owner and operator of the 22-foot boat, James Burke, 30, of Mineola, was arrested and charged in connection with the incident, which took place just east of the Meadowbrook Bridge, the police said.


If It's Tuesday, Brown's Packing
Friends say that what LARRY BROWN really wants to do is return to U.C.L.A.
But Brown, coach of the National Basketball Association's San Antonio Spurs, has admitted he would listen if approached about the vacant post at the University of South Carolina. . . .
The 25th anniversary of the merger agreement between the American and National football Leagues will be celebrated without fanfare on Saturday.
Although the leagues didn't actually become one until 1970, they started the Super Bowl after the 1966 season. . . .
Still bowling after all these years: CARMINE SALVINO enters tournament No. 732 tonight.
It's a $110,000 seniors event in Las Vegas, Nev.
The 57-year-old also is a self-taught chemist and owns several patents on, you guessed it, bowling balls.


Sinai Was for Traveling, Not Settling In
To the Editor:
Your May 21 article from Nuweiba, Egypt, on the lost secrets of Sinai describes the Nabateans as "an industrious people who populated much of the area for a few hundred years before and about 200 years after the birth of Christ."


Manhattan Magic Show


Pope Tries to Patch Schism of Poles and Ukrainians
When Pope John Paul II finished his sermon in this town near the Polish-Soviet border, he plunged into a crowd of Ukrainians who had waited for hours to glimpse the leader of a church they had kept alive clandestinely for a generation.
Tears streamed down the faces of men and women, some of whom had only a rudimentary knowledge of the Roman Catholic religion.


Grand Bargain-Hunters
After some badgering, an official U.S. source responsible for knowing the extent of Moscow's current subsidy of Communism in Cuba disgorged this figure for 1990: $4.5 billion.
That does not include the aid that the folks who gave the world Chernobyl are giving Fidel Castro to install uninspected nuclear reactors a stone's throw from Florida.
Let's assume that our bailout establishment -- including Kansas Senator Bob Dole, who never met a grain credit he didn't like -- succeeds in pouring $1.5 billion in unsecured credit down the Kremlin drain.
President Bush, alternately looking stern and professing much anguish, will soon do that as a "humanitarian gesture" to put bread on Moscow's tables.


Rise Seen In Hiring in 3d Quarter
Recent graduates and other job seekers may soon find that jobs are not so scarce.
A survey of business hiring plans by Manpower Inc., the nation's largest temporary-employment agency, forecasts a notable upturn in the third quarter, which begins on July 1.
Such a development is eagerly awaited by economists since a recovery cannot take hold as long as people are losing jobs and incomes.


Lesson for Giants: Miracles Happen
Life didn't begin on the West Coast for the Giants and Dodgers.
But AL ROSEN, the San Francisco Giants' general manager and president, wants his players to remember the once-upon-a-time.
Concerned about their early season slump that had them fall far behind the front-running Dodgers, Rosen recently received 30 copies of a new book, "The Home Run Heard 'Round the World," by Ray Robinson and then lectured his players about the time it evoked: 1951, when the Dodgers led the Giants by 13 1/2 games only to lose the pennant on BOBBY THOMSON's ninth-inning homer in the rubber game of a playoff.


India Can't Remain a Gandhi Family Property; The Human Atom
To the Editor:
If we were able to bring Rajiv Gandhi back to life, we would.
So would we, if we could, turn back the clock to before his assassination to prevent it.
Since we cannot, we must look beyond this tragedy to what it symbolizes and ask ourselves if such human behavior must continue to be accepted.
Is this not the time when we must assume responsibility to avoid such occurrences in the future?


Factories With Amenities Hinder Poland's Stark Turn to Capitalism
Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki recently visited the sprawling Azoty chemical works here, and what he saw chilled him to his free-market bones.
More than a year after the Government began its pioneering program to dismantle the centrally managed socialist economy, this state-run company seems frozen in an earlier time, when profits did not matter much and companies typically took on the role of municipal governments.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on May 23 about the International Contemporary Furniture Fair at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center omitted the name of a sponsor.
It was Bellerophon Publications Inc., publisher of Metropolis magazine.


More Pyrotechnics by Pirates As Bonds Keys Ninth Straight
Barry Bonds drove in three runs, including one on a double in the ninth inning that sparked a two-run rally, as Pittsburgh defeated the Philadelphia Phillies, 5-3, today for the Pirates' ninth straight triumph.
The sweep of the three-game series meant the Pirates have their longest winning streak since July 1988.
Pittsburgh is 6-0 against Philadelphia this year and has won the last 12 meetings.


Torrential Rain Causes More Flooding in Nebraska


Tokyo Stocks Off a Bit
Stock prices were down slightly in late trading in Tokyo today.
Less than an hour before the close, the Nikkei index of 225 was off 11.93 points, or less than one-tenth of a percent, to 25,777.69.


Heidi Siegel Wed to Dr. Jon Oletsky in New Jersey
Heidi Ellen Siegel, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan Siegel of West Orange, N.J., was married yesterday in Morristown, N.J., to Dr.
Jon Oletsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pacy A. Oletsky of Owings Mills, Md.
Rabbis H. Hillel Horowitz, Alvin M. Marcus and Joel Zaiman performed the ceremony at the Governor Morris Royce Hotel.
Mrs.
Siegel Oletsky, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and is to receive an M.D. degree on Wednesday from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.


France's New Prime Minister Put to the Test
In office for less than three weeks, France's new Prime Minister, Edith Cresson, has suddenly found herself confronted by a wave of strikes, widespread rioting by poor youths and a weak economy that is pushing up unemployment and the nation's budget deficit.
On Friday, Paris experienced its worst subway and bus strike in five years as a one-day walkout by the Communist and Socialist labor federations led to the closing of 11 of the city's 13 subway lines.
Angry Parisians elbowed their way onto the few buses and trains that ran, and many of the 950,000 people who use public transit each day walked to work instead.


White Flight From Schools Leveling Off
After two decades in which white families have increasingly spurned New York City's public schools, the number of white families leaving the system appears to have leveled off, an ethnic census of the city's public-school children indicates.
The census also suggests that an influx of immigrants from Central and South America may soon make Hispanic residents the system's dominant ethnic group.


Computerized Ordering Helps Bookstores Thrive
While some publishers are singing the blues at the convention of the American Booksellers Association, which ends tomorrow after four days at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, many book retailers are singing an upbeat tune.
At a time when most businesses are tightening their belts, bookstores, especially the independents, are proliferating, and many are prospering -- although many booksellers say they are worried about rising book prices.


The Media Business: Advertising; Cigarette Companies Avoid Aggressive Publicity Efforts
NOWADAYS, the nation's leading cigarette companies are letting their advertising speak for itself -- though not entirely by choice.
It is increasingly common for marketers like Philip Morris USA, R. J. Reynolds Tobacco and the American Tobacco Company to play down, or forgo, the extensive, expensive publicity and public relations programs that were once key elements of introducing brands or advertising campaigns for existing brands.


Video-Image Advances By Apple and Microsoft
Apple Computer Inc. will introduce software technology on Monday that will make it far easier for its Macintosh computers to display video images and animation, bringing closer the day when such features will become a standard part of personal computers.
On Tuesday, the Microsoft Corporation is expected to announce that it has licensed crucial software for a similar purpose from the Xing Technology Corporation, a small Southern California company.
Microsoft is expected to try to incorporate this technology into its operating software, including the popular Windows.


Fiscal Epic by Moscow and Harvard Gets Skeptical Reviews
It resembled a Hollywood deal.
First, a group of Soviet economists with another raw script for Soviet economic reform teamed up with rewrite men from Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government.
Then they acquired a catchy working title: "The Grand Bargain."


A's Steinbach Better After a Hit in Head
Oakland Athletics catcher Terry Steinbach was in fair condition in a Chicago hospital today after being struck in the head by a pitch Saturday night, hospital officials said.
The nature and extent of Steinbach's injuries had not been determined, nor had doctors estimated how long Steinbach would be hospitalized, said Joan Hession, the acting director of Mercy Hospital.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of June 3:
MONDAY


Norris Proves How Easy It Is to Spot a 'Champ'
The word "CHAMP" was shaved into the nape of Terry Norris's neck as he climbed into the ring Saturday night to defend his World Boxing Council super-welterweight title against Donald Curry.
It was truth in advertising.


Review/Dance; 3 Ballerinas' Offer Visions of 'Fall River Legend'
Do you have to be American to perform a ballet about small-town America in 1892, especially "Fall River Legend," Agnes de Mille's celebrated dance-drama about the Lizzie Borden murder case?
Two fabulous if different performances by two European superstars provided the answer over the weekend with American Ballet Theater at the Metropolitan Opera House.


Newcomers Try to Save Fading Past
Beyond the junkyards, abandoned buildings and battle-weary tenements on the river's edge of East Harlem, there is Pleasant Village.
Tucked amid streets strewn with old sofas and tires, Pleasant Village is a faint, but still palpable, memory of East Harlem's better days.


Julia A. Jitkoff, Sculptor, Is Married To B. Waring Partridge 3d, Executive
Julia Armstrong Jitkoff and B. Waring Partridge 3d were married yesterday at the bridegroom's home at Meeting House Farm in Lincoln, Va.
The bridegroom's mother, the Rev.
Cora Cheney Partridge, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.
The bride is the daughter of John B. Armstrong of Kingsville, Tex., and the late Henrietta Larkin Armstrong.
The bridegroom is also a son of Benjamin W. Partridge Jr.
His parents live in St.
Marks, Fla.


Debating the Curbs on 'Baby Bells'
The Senate appears likely to approve a bill this week allowing the seven regional "Baby Bell" telephone companies to manufacture equipment.
The legislation's prospects are far less certain in the House of Representatives, where drafts of a similar bill have been circulating for months.
If it becomes law, the measure could mark the biggest change in the communications industry since the breakup of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in 1984.


The Media Business: ADDENDA; Top Endorsers Of the N.B.A.
The N.B.A. playoffs aren't over, but Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, has already chosen the winners for product endorsements.
In a report, "Dribbling for Dollars," the advertising agency picked Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls as first in the starting lineup of endorsers.
Mr.
Jordan already pitches products for a long list of companies, including Coca-Cola and McDonald's.


Press Agent Confounds the Skeptics
Every Hollywood publicity agent who dreams of writing something besides a press release must take heart from the success of Michael O'Hara, a public relations executive at NBC for 10 years who has recently joined the top ranks of the town's writer-producers.
The movie made from Mr.
O'Hara's script "Switched at Birth," starring Bonnie Bedelia and based on a true story about two families fighting for custody of a child who was given to the wrong parents at the hospital, was broadcast this spring.
It became the most successful mini-series of the year.
It is Mr.
O'Hara's third television movie, following "Those She Left Behind" in 1989 and "She Said No" in 1990.
He admits that it took him a while to shake the label of ex-press agent.
"Immodestly, I think 'Switched at Birth' has buried that forever," Mr.
O'Hara said recently over lunch.


Elizabeth Sarnoff Weds Andrew Cohen
Elizabeth Ann Sarnoff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur I. Sarnoff of New York, was married yesterday at the Plaza to Andrew Scott Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester Cohen of New York.
Rabbi Robert N. Levine officiated.
Mrs.
Cohen, 30 years old, is the director of Brooke Alexander Editions, an art gallery in Manhattan.
She graduated from the Fieldston School and the University of Virginia.
Her father is the president of the Bruno Appliance Company in New York.
Her mother, Joan Sarnoff, is a vice chairwoman of St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.


Petition Urges Health Care for All
Almost 10 percent of Vermont's doctors have signed a petition saying the nation's health care system must be overhauled to protect patients who cannot afford to get sick.
Doctors leading the petition drive that calls for universal health coverage held a news conference here on Saturday urging lawmakers to make fundamental changes in a system that they said had left millions without access to basic medical services.
The petition is signed by 130 of Vermont's 1,392 licensed doctors.


Best Wishes for Jackson From Fellow Ex-Knicks
In each of the nine seasons the North Dakota-born Phil Jackson played for the Knicks, one of his off-season rituals was to have Bill Bradley, Willis Reed, Neal Walk or Bill Walton accompany him to an Indian reservation to teach basketball to the youngsters.
"They would pay their own way," June Jackson recalled as she watched her husband coach the first ever National Basketball Association championship series game to be played at the 62-year-old Chicago Stadium.
"It was a labor of love but not only were they doing what they loved, to play and teach basketball, but it brought them closer together."


Venetian Boatmen Jam Grand Canal to Protest Tax


Sports of The Times; For Michael and Magic, It Was All a Dream
BOTH Magic Johnson and Michael Jordan, participants in a basketball game here yesterday afternoon, slept miles apart the night before, but neither got his full 40 winks.
"I tossed and turned," said Jordan, who has a home in a suburb here.
"After all, it's my first time in an N.B.A. finals."


Knights Guilty; Sentence Is Vacation
The New York/New Jersey Knights could be hauled up on charges of aiding and abetting in the demise of their season.
After blowing a 17-0 second-quarter lead and two fourth-quarter scoring opportunities today, the Knights allowed London to steal a 42-26 victory in a World League of American Football semifinal playoff game before 23,149 fans at Giants Stadium.
With the loss the Knights finished their first season with a 5-6 record.


Liaisons Hired by Tokyo Act to Help or to Control
Many Japanese companies install Japanese executives to work alongside their American counterparts.
Also called technicians and management coordinators, they sometimes do not show up in the rosters of company managers and can be used either to help the American executives work with Tokyo headquarters or to control them.
"Some people like to call it a shadow staff," said Jim Olson, the vice president for external affairs for Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A. in Los Angeles, which with 3,500 employees manages the sales of cars here.
"I don't. I have a senior executive coordinator who advises me on things. He tries to interface between two cultures. He warns me if I'm being too American, too pushy, in dealing with Japan. I don't consider him a blockage or a spy. He's a friend. He doesn't run the department."


CHRONICLE
After a 40-year career in government, civil rights and community service, HORACE W. MORRIS is retiring as executive vice president of the United Way of New York City.
About 400 colleagues and friends of Mr.
Morris turned out on Thursday night at a reception to say goodbye.
Mr.
Morris, 63, who was instrumental in the merger of the Greater New York Fund and the United Way in 1988, instituted new directions for the organization, particularly in expanding services to minorities.


AIDS After 10 Years
The AIDS epidemic begins its second decade this week, having swiftly moved from an obscure illness to one that has killed more than 106,000 people in the United States alone.


Further Fall Seen in Foreign Rates
So far this year, global demand for capital has not forced American interest rates higher, despite concerns to the contrary.
If anything, credit market analysts said, the pressures from overseas will probably ease over the next six to 12 months, as the recession in the United States, Britain and Canada spreads to the rest of the industrial world.
Foreign interest rates, off their peaks from a year ago, will fall further, the analysts added.


Debt
*
Amax Inc. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $200 million in 10-year notes through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. and First Boston Corp. *
Bear Stearns Cos. has filed for up to $150 million in senior notes. *
Morgan Guaranty Trust Corp. is offering $200 million in noncallable 6 3/4 percent senior notes, due in 1993, at 99.80 to yield 6.859 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The notes are rated triple-A by both Moody's Investors Service and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation. *
Navistar Financial Corp. is offering $117.5 million in noncallable 9.5 percent notes, due in 1996, at 99.6168 to yield 9.6 percent through J. P. Morgan Securities.
The notes are rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P. *
Phillips Petroleum Co. is offering $250 million in noncallable 9 percent notes, due in 2001, at a price of 100 through Morgan Stanley.
The issue is rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P.


The Media Business; For Papers, a Way to Deliver Profits
In the four months since postal rates jumped sharply, what had been a mild interest among newspapers regarding the door-to-door delivery business has become an industrywide fascination that shows signs of evolving into a passion.
Indeed, the door-to-door delivery business has emerged as one of the most enticing ways for newspapers to generate new revenues while also satisfying the increasing number of advertisers who wish to aim their messages to specific ZIP codes or even specific addresses.


Don't Blame Disabled for the Delay in Building Public Toilets; Working on It
To the Editor:
Contrary to your suggestion that New York City may be delaying a proposal to put kiosk-style public toilets on midtown sidewalks (news article, May 21), we have been working to determine how to move forward on the project.
A four-month trial installation of the public toilets would provide valuable experience to decide on a more extensive program.


Medical Experiment Still Haunts Blacks
It has been nearly 60 years since 412 poor black sharecroppers suffering from syphilis were rounded up in Tuskegee, Ala., for what would become the most notorious example of human experimentation in this country.
For 40 years, the men were never told what had stricken them, while doctors observed the ravages of the disease, from blindness and paralysis to dementia and early death.
Even after penicillin proved to be an effective treatment for syphilis, they were not told about it.


Even Good People Err, Williams College Hears
Guido Calabresi, dean of the Yale University Law School, delivered the main address to 538 graduating seniors at Williams College yesterday.
Mr.
Calabresi told the graduates that even good people could make "catastrophically bad decisions." As an example, he cited the roles played by President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Supreme Court Justices Hugo Black and Earl Warren in the decision to intern Japanese-Americans in World War II.


An Early Test on Race as a Campaign Issue in '92
When the House votes this week on civil rights, more is at issue than this one bill.
It is an early test of the continuing resonance of race as a political issue, a leading indicator of the tone of the 1992 campaign.
The bill, after all, will still have to make its way through the Senate, and a House-Senate conference committee.
Then it will confront a threatened Presidential veto, and if that happens, there will be votes on overriding the veto.
So the decision on whether Federal law will be changed to make it easier for victims of job discrimination to sue and collect damages is some time off.


Broadway's Best


Books of The Times; Ali: A Victim of His Road to Renown
Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times By Thomas Hauser Illustrated. 544 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.95.
Boxing, let us agree, is a nasty, brutish activity whose point is to attack the very source of civilization, the human brain.
So it does not speak well of us that the man we have made the most famous in the world won his celebrity by boxing.
Yet what is most immediately distinctive about him now is the damage he suffered as a result of having his brain attacked.


Computer Blamed in Thailand Crash
A computer malfunction that switched one engine into reverse caused a Boeing jetliner to crash in Thailand a week ago, the Austrian Transport Minister said today.
The Lauda Air Boeing 767-300ER crashed shortly after takeoff from Bangkok on May 26, killing all 223 people aboard in Thailand's worst aviation disaster and the first crash of a 767.


DINKINS COALITION FIGHTS FOR COUNCIL
A loose coalition of minorities, feminists, labor leaders and liberal whites that played a major role in electing David N. Dinkins as Mayor of New York City is reassembling in an effort to gain greater control of the City Council in a special election in November.
The coalition's leaders, mainly Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch and Dennis Rivera, the leader of the municipal hospital workers' union, see a historic opportunity in the new City Charter's expansion of the Council from 35 members to 51, whose districts will be detailed today in a final plan by the city's Districting Commission.


Israel Accepts Jordan King's Call to Meet
The Israeli Government, responding to a proposal from King Hussein of Jordan for "face-to-face contacts" with Israeli leaders, today invited the Jordanian leader to meetings in Jerusalem, and said it would also agree to meet him in Amman.
Foreign Minister David Levy said Israel was "ready to meet him at any time or any place, with no delay," adding, "He is invited to come to Jerusalem, and we will meet him with a red carpet and a band as well."


Kuwait Emir Schedules Elections for October 1992
The Emir of Kuwait declared today that parliamentary elections would be held in October 1992, later than opposition politicians had demanded.
Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah's decree, announced on state radio, said an interim assembly, the National Council, would meet on July 19 for the first time since the invasion by Iraq.
The council is likely to consider new election rules that could help determine how open the voting will be next year.


Albany Chiefs Agree in Full On Budget
Nine weeks past a statutory deadline to adopt a new state budget, New York State's legislative leaders announced final agreement on one tonight.
While many details of the $51.9 billion plan had been thrashed out days ago -- and many parts involving state agency spending and capital projects had already been approved -- the lack of an overall accord had held up disbursement of state aid to New York City and other cash-starved municipalities.


Review/Rock; Ohio Players With the Old And the New
Funk is just a short way from gospel music in the songs of the Ohio Players, who performed Wednesday night at S.O.B.'s.
The songs may extol a "Sweet Sticky Thing" or boast about feeling "Skin Tight," but when the band is singing in a cappella harmony or vamping behind one of Leroy (Sugar) Bonner's bits of preaching -- "I'm gonna tell you what heaven is," he declared, then itemized a list of worldly pleasures -- the boundary between sacred and secular is hard to pinpoint.
The Ohio Players flourished in the mid-1970's, with hits like "Love Rollercoaster" in 1975.
The recent recycling of funk riffs by rappers and by bands like the Royal Crescent Mob has put the Ohio Players back on the circuit.
Seeing them now, it's clear that Prince learned a lot from the band, particularly from Mr.
Bonner's inside-out gospel, his showy guitar squiggles and his nasalized singing.


Robert Gulack Is Wed To Zdena Nemeckova
Zdena Nemeckova and Robert Gulack were married yesterday in Chester, N.Y.
Walter Lawton, a leader of the Society for Ethical Culture in New York, performed the ceremony at the home of Celia Linden and Richard Schacher.
The bride is the daughter of Kamila Alleyn of Santa Clarita, Calif., and Zdenek Nemecek of Prague.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian Gulack of Fair Lawn, N.J.


Corrections
An article in some editions yesterday about a 3-year-old boy killed by an Amtrak train in Manhattan misstated the location of the accident and misidentified the boy's mother.
The boy was struck beside Fort Washington Park; his mother is Monica Rodriguez.
Later developments are reported today on page B3.


Major Differences Over Civil Rights
The House will vote, probably on Tuesday, on civil rights legislation dealing with job discrimination.
Three bills will be considered: one sponsored by members of the Black Caucus, one backed by the Democratic leadership and some Republicans, and President Bush's bill.
DISPARATE IMPACT Suits involving hiring or promotion practices, like tests, that are apparently fair on their face but have a "disparate impact" -- resulting in the hiring, for example, of proportionately more whites than blacks or more men than women -- are sometimes called "unintentional discrimination" cases.
There are major differences on how each stage of such cases should be handled.
Issue: How specific do complainants have to be in court?
In the 1989 Wards Cove v.
Atonio case, the Supreme Court said it would be unfair to employers to allow complainants to attack a group of practices and assert that their cumulative effect was discriminatory.
Black Caucus: Complainants can demonstrate that a "group of employment practices" caused a discriminatory result.
Democrats: Complainants must cite a specific practice, or practices, unless a court finds that despite a "diligent effort," that is an impossible burden, as when, for example, an employer had not kept records.
Bush: A specific practice, or practices, would have to be cited.
Issue: Who has the burden of proof, the employer or the employee?
In the Wards Cove case, the Supreme Court held that once complainants had shown, usually through statistics, that a "disparate impact" had resulted from an employment practice, the complainants still had the burden of proof of showing that the employer had no business necessity for the practice.
Black Caucus: Once a "disparate impact" is shown, the burden of proof shifts to the employer, on the ground that the employer, not the complainant, is in the best position to know why a practice is necessary.
Democrats: The same.
Bush: The same.
Issue: What kind of "business necessity" can legitimize a practice that screens out women and minorities?
In Wards Cove, the Supreme Court ruled that an employment practice with apparent discriminatory effect can be justified if it "serves, in a significant way, the legitimate employment goals of the employer." It need not be either "essential" or "indispensable."
The Wards Cove definition is easier for employers to meet than the definition set in the 1971 Griggs v.
Duke Power Co.
Under Griggs, employers had to show that the practice had a "manifest relationship to the employment in question," focusing more narrowly on the job at issue rather than the employers' overall business concerns.
Democrats say a loose definition would encourage discrimination; the White House contends that a definition that makes business necessity difficult to prove would lead employers to use quotas rather than risk losing lawsuits.
"QUOTAS" Issue: The use of numerical quotas in hiring or promotion is generally prohibited.
Affirmative actions plans that involve less specific goals and timetables and require employers to make greater efforts to hire and promote women and minorities are generally acceptable.
Precise quotas are sometimes acceptable if they are imposed by court order against an employer found to have consistently discriminated in the past.
The White House says that the way the Democrats would outlaw quotas would really encourage their use because the Democrats define quotas in a narrow way.
Black Caucus: No provision.
Democrats: Bill states that it does not "require or encourage or permit" quotas.
It also makes their use an "illegal employment practice" under the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
Someone denied hiring or promotion because of a quota could sue to get the job and seek damages too.
Quotas are defined as the setting of "a fixed number or percentage of persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex or national origin which must be attained, or which cannot be exceeded, regardless of whether such persons meet necessary qualifications to perform the job."  Bush: No direct reference to quotas.
DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT Issue: In the 1989 Patterson v.
McLean Credit Union case, the Supreme Court held that the right to sue for damages for racial job discrimination under an 1866 law did not apply to on-the-job harassment or other forms of discrimination after someone was hired.
Since then, lower courts have disagreed as to whether the law applies to dismissals, promotions and other practices.
Black Caucus: The Patterson decision would be rejected absolutely, and the Reconstruction-era law would be clearly defined as applying to hirings, promotions, dismissals and all other terms of employment.
Democrats: The same.
In addition, this proposal makes clear that the provision applies to nongovernmental discrimination as well as discrimination based on state law.
Bush: Identical with Democratic version.
Issue: Victims of intentional discrimination or harassment based on sex, religion, national origin or disability are protected under the 1964 Civil Rights Act, not the 1866 law.
All a judge can order is back pay and employment or reinstatement on a job if it was lost.
Compensatory and punitive damages are not permitted, and women argue that their claims under this act therefore have less weight  Black Caucus: Amend the 1866 law so that it also covers sex discrimination.
Amend the 1964 law to allow compensatory and punitive damages.
Either side could request trial by jury.
Democrats: Amend the 1964 law to permit suits for compensatory and punitive damages and back pay.
Punitive damages would be limited to $150,000, or the total of back pay and compensatory damages, whichever is higher.
Because that would still be less than victims of racial discrimination can seek under the 1866 law, the provision has been attacked as unfair, to women in particular.
If either side asked, the case would be tried before a jury.
Bush: Damages would be allowed only in harassment cases, including sexual harassment, and no more than $150,000 in damages would be allowed.
But a victim could not sue if he or she had failed to use in-house grievance procedures.
The case would be tried before a judge without a jury.
Victims of other sorts of intentional discrimination would still be entitled only to back pay and employment or reinstatement.
REOPENING OLD DISCRIMINATION CASES Issue: In the 1989 Martin v.
Wilks case, the Supreme Court ruled that since some white firefighters in Birmingham, Ala., had not been parties to two earlier suits challenging discrimination in the city's fire department, they had a right to go into court later to attack hiring and promotion policies established by consent decrees that settled the suits.
Black Caucus: People could not sue to reopen employment cases if they had "actual notice" of the decree at the time it was entered and a "reasonable opportunity" to object.
Nor could they sue if their interests "were adequately represented" in the original case.
Challenges would also not be allowed "if reasonable efforts were made to provide notice to interested persons." Democrats: The same.
Bush: Endorses the Martin v.
Wilks decision; would write it into a statute.
ADJUSTMENTS OF EMPLOYMENT TESTS Issue: In a practice called "race norming," the Labor Department has urged state employment services to score the results of a widely used aptitude test separately for white, blacks and people of Hispanic descent.
Under this practice, in effect since the beginning of the Reagan Administration, some blacks with low raw scores of correct answers are rated higher than some whites with more correct answers.
Black Caucus: No provision.
Democrats: Prohibit both "race norming" and the use of biased employment tests that fail to predict job performance equally well, regardless of race, religion, sex or national origin.
Bush: Would prohibit "race norming."


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL Florida Eliminates No. 1 Florida State Freshman right-hander Marc Valdes threw a three-hitter to lead fifth-seeded Florida to a 5-0 victory over Florida State yesterday, eliminating the top-seeded Seminoles from the College World Series in Omaha.
Valdes (13-4) struck out five, walked three and hit two batters to keep the Gators (50-20) in the national tournament.
Florida moves to tomorrow's elimination game against Fresno State.
Florida State fell into the loser's bracket with a 6-3 defeat at the hands of Fresno State Friday night.
The Seminoles are the first team to head home from the 1991 tournament.
It was the school's 11th trip to the C.W.S. without a title. (AP)


Japan Splits the Difference on Building Contracts
Japan's agreement on Saturday to open 17 public works projects to bidding by foreign construction companies represented a last-minute willingness to split the difference with Washington.
J.
Michael Farren, the Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade and the Government official in charge of the American negotiating team, said in Tokyo that he would recommend that planned sanctions against Japanese construction companies in the United States be dropped.


New Jersey Arrests 2 Under Gun Ban
The Camden County prosecutor's office said it has made the first arrests under the state's new law banning semiautomatic weapons during a weekend drug raid.
During the raid on Saturday afternoon, prosecutor's investigators seized 23 rifles and shotguns, 9 handguns and an Intratec TEC-9 with a 32-shot magazine -- one of the weapons banned under the law that took effect on Friday, officials said.


A Sick System
Medical insurance forms and bills have become a torment for middle-class Americans.
We have trouble understanding their complexities, and we do not know why the computers keep spewing them out at us.
When we telephone for help, we usually end up more frustrated.
The paperwork is just one symptom of the extraordinary complications of the American system of health insurance, the most complicated on earth.
Another, which can be even more burdensome, is the penalty we pay for mobility.


Games End as Ballplayer's Future Begins
Most winter mornings, as Maria Roque headed up Fort George Hill on the way to her cafeteria job at George Washington High School, she would be overtaken by a tall young man in a blue sweatsuit, with an automobile tire roped to his waist.
The young man would greet Mrs.
Roque and then run on, up the steep half-mile incline, dragging the tire that bounced on the pavement behind him.
"Run, Manny, run!" Mrs.
Roque would shout in Spanish to Manny Ramirez, the star third baseman on the George Washington team and the best high school baseball player in New York City.
"Keep on! Or I'm not going to give you lunch!"


Why Look Past Mr. Gates's Past?
The averted gaze, the tortured logic, the awkward silences and the double-talk about Robert Gates's nomination as Director of Central Intelligence -- it all suggests a Senate with no urge to know.
Indeed, the senators seem so eager to overlook his past that they're sowing doubt about their will to oversee the C.I.A.'s future.
Mr.
Gates joined the agency as a Soviet analyst in 1966.
Thanks to several tours of duty at the White House, he rose rapidly, becoming Deputy Director of Intelligence in 1982 and principal deputy to William Casey four years later.


Hot Authors With a Common Goal: Promotion
They have in common their multimillion-dollar contracts, their colossal book sales and the fact that they are coveted by all publishers.
But there the similarities end.
One is a friendly fellow with a ponytail, the other a supercilious character who likes to sport an F.B.I. badge.
They are, respectively, Stephen King and Tom Clancy, the two hottest properties in American publishing.


Kidney Transplants in China Raise Concern About Source
A letter, businesslike and detailed, was sent to virtually all Hong Kong doctors recently, offering kidney transplants at the Eastern China Military Region Main Hospital in Nanjing for $12,800.
The letter specified that the fee would cover not only the operation, but a kidney from a living donor in China and round-trip air fare from Hong Kong.


The Media Business; Networks Step Up Promotion Drives
Continuing their efforts to reverse the weak demand for commercial time and their declining viewership, two television networks are stepping up their advertising and promotional programs.
Beginning today in New York City, ABC News is introducing a campaign aimed at the people who buy commercial time for ad agencies.
A billboard on the West Side Highway, as well as posters on buses and bus shelters, will feature a photograph of seven ABC News broadcasters under the headline "Air Supremacy."


India Can't Remain a Gandhi Family Property; Father of Independence
To the Editor:
Barbara Crossette's eyewitness account of the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi (front page, May 22) was a historic piece of journalism.
But your editorial and news commentary on the tragedy contained what I believe was a historical error.
Both stated, as your editorial put it, that "It was the Congress party that guided India to freedom under the unchallenged leadership of Jawaharlal Nehru."


The Public's Right To Put a Padlock On a Public Space
Jackson Square Park is a quarter-acre anomaly.
The square, bounded by Eighth and Greenwich Avenues and Horatio Street in the West Village, is actually a triangle.
In contrast to the patches of concrete that often pass for parks in New York City, it is an oasis whose 24 pin oak trees form a verdant canopy over a functioning fountain.
It was presumably named for Andrew Jackson, but the fortitude of its neighbors evokes Stonewall.


I.B.M. Losing Ground in Japan
Through most of the 1980's, Japanese politicians loved to point to the International Business Machines Corporation as evidence that American companies not only survive in Japan, but prosper.
At the end of the decade, the company's Japanese business was I.B.M.'s brightest star, accounting for 19 percent of the company's profits.
But in the last 18 months, IBM Japan Ltd. has been in steady retreat.
It has surrendered big chunks of its market share to Fujitsu, Hitachi and NEC.
Profits have plummeted, and seem likely to fall further as the company is forced to cut prices sharply.
It has moved too slowly to bring out products.
And last year, when Japan's computer market grew a remarkable 10 percent, I.B.M.'s sales here climbed 1.1 percent.


Don't Blame Disabled for the Delay in Building Public Toilets
To the Editor:
"In New York, Few Public Toilets and Many Rules" (news article, May 21) makes people with disabilities -- who suffer the indignities of inaccessible housing, transportation and public accommodations, and rampant discrimination -- the scapegoat for New York City's inability to build public toilets.


Common Stock
*
Smithfield Foods Inc., Smithfield, Va., has filed for an offering of two million common shares through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. *
Telnekron Communications Systems Inc., Berkeley, Calif., has filed for an initial public offering of 5 million common shares, with 3.75 million shares sold in the United States through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.


Yankees Must Make Difficult but Enviable Decision
Gene Michael was in Las Vegas, Nev., just over a month ago, contemplating a very different but potentially costly gamble.
The vice president and general manager of the Yankees had gone across the country to watch the Arizona State University Sun Devils.
Michael's organization holds the first selection in the amateur draft that begins this afternoon and the Yankees' intention to choose Mike Kelly, the junior center fielder for the Sun Devils, may have been the worst-kept secret in baseball.


Microsoft To Adopt Code System
The Microsoft Corporation plans to announce today that it has obtained a license to use a computer software security system from RSA Data Security Inc.
The system is being deployed by a growing number of computer makers and software publishers to protect and authenticate electronic mail messages and documents stored in computers.
The system developed by RSA, of Redwood City, Calif., has already been adopted by Digital Equipment, Lotus Development and Novell.
Apple Computer and Sun Microsystems are also said to be planning to adopt the method, which can be used to create a "digital signature" on a message or document and to protect electronic mail from eavesdropping.


CHRONICLE
HENRY ROSOVSKY, who has enjoyed many honors and much affection from Harvard University, is getting a building named after him.
Harvard-Radcliffe Hillel, the Jewish student organization, will name its new student center Rosovsky Hall.
It is being designed by MOSHE SAFDIE, an architect and a friend of Mr.
Rosovsky's.
Four donors have pledged to raise $2 million for the building.
They are: LESLIE H. WEXNER, chairman of the Limited; KENNETH LIPPER, an investment banker and a former Deputy Mayor of New York City; ROBERT MEISTER, vice chairman of Frank B. Hall Brokers, and JEFFREY EPSTEIN, president of Wexner Investment Company.


Jordan Heroics Fall Just Short As Lakers Win
When Michael Jordan's last shot spun out of the basket today, you could almost hear the entire city of Chicago groan.
Jordan would not be the hero.
The Chicago Bulls would not win Game 1 of the National Basketball Association championship series.
And the Los Angeles Lakers would prove once again that when you have Magic, anything is possible.


Review/Rock; Marshall Crenshaw
When he released his first album in 1982, Marshall Crenshaw already knew how to connect a catch phrase to a melody with the natural grace of Buddy Holly and Beatles songs.
But until now, too many of his songs have seemed slight and undeveloped.
His new album, "Life's Too Short" (MCA), changes that, with lyrics that are just a little more explicit about romantic strife.
At the Village Gate on Wednesday night, Mr.
Crenshaw's new songs illuminated his old ones, proving that his easygoing tunes always harbored a distrust of pop's promise that love conquers all.
Leading a five-piece band that included Mitch Easter, a noted pop-rock producer, on guitar, Mr.
Crenshaw sang unforced melodies and tossed off concise guitar riffs.
He chose from among his best old songs (like "Someday, Some Way," more desperate than it sounds), tough new ones ("Don't Disappear Now") and covers that were tributes to influences, like the Byrds' "Have You Seen Her Face," or obscure finds, like the Tall Dwarfs' neo-psychedelic "Face of Fashion."


Gephardt View on Cars
The House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, said today that he believed Japan was "dumping" automobiles in the United States at unfairly low prices, as domestic auto makers contend.
The Big Three American auto makers filed a petition with the Commerce Department and the International Trade Administration on Friday, asserting that Japanese producers were dumping mini-vans.
It was the first such joint complaint of dumping ever filed by the General Motors Corporation, the Ford Motor Company and the Chrysler Corporation, and named Toyota, Mazda, Nissan and Mitsubishi.


Question Box
Basketball Champions
Q.
Has a basketball player ever been a member of an N.C.A.A. champion, an Olympic champion and an N.B.A. champion in his career?
A.
You could package one starting five of players who have accomplished all three titles, and if they suited up in a U.S.A.
Olympic uniform, it wouldn't hurt to place a Celtics' logo somewhere, for four of the five earned their National Basketball Association credential with Boston.
Here's how such a squad would line up:


Sharon Harvey Wed to Avi Rosenberg
Sharon Harvey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Harvey of Cherry Hill, N.J., was married yesterday to Avi Rosenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yosef Rosenberg of Mountain Dale, N.Y.
Rabbis Yaakov Schwartz and Meir Fund performed the ceremony in the Shakespeare Garden in Central Park.
Mrs.
Rosenberg, 32 years old, is the managing editor of Bank Letter and a contributing editor to Institutional Investor magazine in New York.
She is a cum laude graduate of Georgetown University.
Her father, who is retired, was a junior high school mathematics teacher in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Barbara Harvey, is a supervisor of day-care centers for the Philadelphia school board.


Political Alliance Ruling Panama Breaks Up
The political alliance that fought Panama's military dictatorship for years and led the return to democracy 16 months ago has fallen apart, with the Christian Democratic Party going into opposition to the Government of which it was previously the strongest component.
Both sides say this was a normal step at some point in the democratic transition, although Ricardo Arias Calderon, the Christian Democratic leader, said he thought it was "premature."


Elyssa Perlberg Wed To Stuart C. Malakoff
Elyssa Laine Perlberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Perlberg of Franklin Lakes, N.J., was married there yesterday to Stuart Charles Malakoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Malakoff of Cedarhurst, L.I.
Rabbi Joel Y. Zion and Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony at the Indian Trail Club.
The bride, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a designer of computer systems in Wyckoff, N.J.
She and the bridegroom are graduates of the University of Rochester.
Her father is the corporate vice president of research and development at the Hartz Mountain Corporation in Harrison, N.J.


For the Ethiopians of '84, Some Unsettled Matters
A week after they were airlifted to Israel, more than 14,000 Ethiopian Jews are struggling with culture shock and the thick red tape of registering as new Israeli citizens.
But the transition has been eased for them by an earlier airlift of Ethiopians, most of whom lead lives that are difficult to distinguish from those of native Israelis.
The 7,000 Ethiopian Jews who arrived in 1984 have endured the blunders of a Government that did not know quite how to handle them as well as the rigors of the Orthodox Jewish religious establishment, which did not fully accept them as Jews.
They struggled to preserve their culture while adjusting to a modern nation where their traditions were not understood.


The Media Business: ADDENDA; Accounts
*
Air New Zealand to Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, after a competition with Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, both of Los Angeles.
The account, which has a budget of $2 million to $3 million, was previously handled by Mendelsohn/Zien, also of Los Angeles. *
Ben Hogan Co., Fort Worth, a manufacturer of golf equipment, has returned to Tracy-Locke, Dallas.
The agency handled the account, which has undisclosed billings, for nine years before losing it last year to GSD&amp;M, Austin, Tex. *
American Speedy Printing Center Inc., Bloomfield Hills, Mich., to Barkley &amp; Evergreen, Kansas City, Mo., for its $1.2 million account, previously handled by Group 243, Ann Arbor, Mich.


Paul Ziffren, Democratic Leader In California in 1950's, Dies at 77
Paul Ziffren, a Democratic Party leader in California in the 1950's, died Friday night at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 77 years old.
His family declined to disclose the cause of death.


New Director Is Named For Edinburgh Festival
Frank Dunlop, director of the Edinburgh International Festival for eight years, will step down after the 1991 festival closes on Sept. 1, the festival administration has announced.
He is to be be succeeded by Brian McMaster, managing director of the Welsh National Opera.
Mr.
McMaster, 48 years old, started his career in music with the International Classical Division of EMI Music.
He has also held posts at the English National Opera and the Vancouver Opera.


'Yonkers' and 'Will Rogers' Win the Top Tony Awards
"The Will Rogers Follies," a corn-fed, all-American extravaganza complete with rope tricks, a dog act and long-legged Ziegfeld chorines, marched off last night with six Tony Awards, including best musical of the 1990-91 Broadway season.
"Lost in Yonkers," Neil Simon's Pulitzer Prize-winning comedy-drama about family problems in a New York suburb during World War II, won four, including the Tony for best play.


CHRONICLE
It will be a family affair on Friday at an Alice Tully Hall tribute to Leonard Bernstein, who died last Oct. 14.
ALEXANDER BERNSTEIN will stage a concert version of his father's opera, "Trouble in Tahiti." MARIN ALSOP, a Leonard Bernstein protegee and former assistant, will conduct the Concordia orchestra in a program that will also include selections from "On the Town" and "Fancy Free." JUDY KAYE, soprano, and WILLIAM SHARP, baritone, will be guest artists.
And one daughter, NINA BERNSTEIN, will cater the post-concert supper at Mr.
Bernstein's apartment in the Dakota, on Central Park West.
The evening is a benefit for Concordia , of which Mr.
Bernstein was a major supporter, Alexander Bernstein said.
A teacher at the Packer Collegiate Institute, a prep school in Brooklyn, Mr.
Bernstein, 35 years old, worked once with his father, as the voice of Tony on a recording of "West Side Story." "That was nervous-making," he recalled.
"But this is tremendous -- to be collaborating with him, in a way."


3 Killed as Israelis Hit P.L.O. Site in Lebanon
Israeli fighter-bombers blasted a Palestine Liberation Organization base in southern Lebanon today.
The police said 3 people had been killed and 11 wounded.
Black smoke billowed from a two-story building flattened by air-to-surface missiles fired by two jets as the loud explosions sent hundred of residents fleeing to safer places, witnesses said.
The target, at the outskirts of the Palestinian quarter of Mieh Mieh in the port city of Sidon, had served as headquarters for the intelligence branch of Al Fatah, the main component group of the P.L.O., the police said.


U.S. Highways Have Too Many Trucks
To the Editor:
You state in "Are Triple Trailers a Threat?" (editorial, May 20), "Improved efficiency is a serious matter." I say: What price efficiency?


Reforms Alter the Landscape of Czechoslovakia's Farming
In 1953, local Communist authorities forced Marie Pracna's parents to bring their small farm into a new agricultural cooperative.
Resistance was futile.
The family had already seen neighboring farmers deemed too rich or intransigent exiled or sent to prison.


Quotations of the Day
"I do not believe that the creation of a pregnancy for the sole purpose of creating an organ donor is ethically acceptable." -- Dr.
Mark Evans of Hutzel Hospital in Detroit.  [ C3:3. ]
"People have babies for all sorts of screwy reasons. Most people have a child without thinking about why. At least in this case, they are having a child partly from this notion of altruism." -- Dr.
Arthur Caplan of the University of Minnesota.  [ C3:3. ]


FRANCE WILL SIGN 1968 NUCLEAR PACT
Twenty-three years after a treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons went into effect, France announced today that it would finally join the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and 139 other nations as a signer of the accord.
The French announcement was coupled with a package of ambitious proposals for arms control worldwide, including calls for the destruction of chemical weapons, a ban on production of biological weapons, reduction of nuclear arsenals and negotiations to limit the multi-billion-dollar trade in conventional armaments.
The plan was announced by President Francois Mitterrand just days after President Bush proposed a ban on weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
French officials said the two plans were complementary, although the French initiative favors a global approach to arms control.
Both proposals are to be taken up in Paris this month at a meeting of arms control experts from the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council: the United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain and France.
Officials said the French plan was conveyed to both President Bush and the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, over the weekend.
French officials said Mr.
Bush telephoned President Mitterrand to congratulate him on France's decision to sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
The treaty, the subject of intensive negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union in the mid-1960's, bans the export of nuclear weapons and nuclear arms technology.
It emerged after the two superpowers and Britain in 1963 signed the first important arms control treaty, banning nuclear tests in outer space, the atmosphere and underwater.
The treaty went into effect in 1968.
Protecting a Monopoly
The treaty was controversial because it sought to make permanent the nuclear weapons monopoly of those nations then possessing such weapons -- the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France and China -- and sought pledges from other countries not to acquire any.
The treaty also committed the nuclear powers to work toward total nuclear disarmament and to help nonnuclear nations signing the accord in developing peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
From the start, France and China refused to sign the treaty, although France has always insisted that it has adhered to its provisions.
In refusing to sign, President Charles de Gaulle maintained that France was not adequately consulted by Washington and Moscow when the treaty was being negotiated.
But France's refusal was more broadly based, being part of de Gaulle's wish to signal that France had its own foreign and defense policy.
The same reasoning led de Gaulle to pull France out of NATO's integrated military command in 1966.
Today, French political experts said that non-adherence to the treaty had not only lost its usefulness as a symbol of France's political independence, but could also weaken international support for the French disarmament proposal.
In Bonn, a Government spokesman said today that Germany supported France's initiative.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl was personally briefed on it by Mr.
Mitterrand last week.
A British spokesman also welcomed France's decision.
The signing of the treaty by France will leave China as the only permament member of the Security Council not to have done so.
The French disarmament plan was also sent to the Chinese Government over the weekend, but French officials who visited Beijing last month said China had given no indication that it might join the nonproliferation pact.
India, which has exploded a nuclear device, and Pakistan, Israel, South Africa, Argentina and Brazil, countries thought to possess advanced nuclear technology, have also refused to sign.
But most countries have accepted it, including nations like Iraq and North Korea that are believed to have ambitions of developing nuclear weapons.
Western diplomats said that while the decision by France to sign the treaty was aimed at bolstering its arms control initiative, they considered it the major feature of the plan.
"It's all part of France's effort to position itself on the world stage after the gulf war," a diplomat said.
As with the American plan announced last week by President Bush, Mr.
Mitterrand's move has been prompted by the Persian Gulf war and fears of a new postwar arms race, but it also reflects France's embarrassment at having been the principal Western supplier of weapons to Iraq from 1975 to 1990.
While France has called for global controls on weapons production and transfers, however, the American plan focuses only on the Middle East, contemplating a freeze and eventual ban on ballistic missiles, a ban on biological weapons, an end to production of materiel that could be used for nuclear weapons and guidelines on transfers of conventional weapons.
"Our objectives are clear," the French statement said.
"Chemical arms should be eliminated. Bacteriological arms should not be produced. Nuclear arsenals should be brought down to the lowest possible levels compatible with dissuasion. Nonproliferation of nuclear arms remains imperative."
On conventional weapons, France adopted a British proposal for establishment of a registry of arms sales at the United Nations and it proposed negotiations to achieve "a balance of forces" in all regions of the world.
Borrowing from the 34-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, it suggested that different regions should adopt such confidence-building measures as the exchange of military information and set up agencies to monitor weapons.
French officials emphasized that France was not trying to establish a weapons monopoly for the world's principal military powers because it recognized that many third world nations had legitimate security concerns.
"This is not a Cocom of weapons," one French official said, referring to the committee of 17 Western nations that has long controlled the export of sophisticated technology to Soviet-bloc and third world nations.
But the French initiative nonetheless underlined the special responsibility of the permanent members of the Security Council, who account for over 80 percent of all foreign weapons sales.
France is believed to be the world's third largest arms exporter after the United States and the Soviet Union.
In its statement today, France also made it clear that it was still not willing to consider dismantling any of its three-pronged nuclear capability: missiles, submarines and aircraft.
It said it supported efforts by the Soviet Union and the United States to reduce their nuclear arsenals and would be ready to join nuclear disarmament talks once conditions spelled out by Mr.
Mitterrand in 1983 were met.
These include the reduction of Soviet and American nuclear weapons stockpiles to the same levels as those of France.
And as one Western diplomat put it, "That's still a long way from happening."


For Tierra del Fuego, It's Time to Consider a Rain Forest's Worth
On this sweeping island of tundra, mountain and wind, a developing country is in the throes of deciding whether the offer of more than $65 million in foreign investment is worth risking the disappearance of one of the world's most unusual rain forests.
Tierra del Fuego, the island that Magellan first saw when it was ablaze with fires set by the native Indians, has vast and dense stands of lenga trees, a very slow-growing hardwood that covers more than a quarter of a million acres.


Student Sentenced to Prison in U.S. Drug Case
A University of Virginia student was sentenced today to 13 months in prison for selling drugs in a fraternity house seized by Federal authorities in an attack on drug dealing on college campuses.
The student, Ernest Brown Pryor, 19 years old, pleaded guilty to two counts of drug distribution near a school.


Music Therapy Is Vital In Neurological Cases
To the Editor:
A May 14 news article on proposed cuts in services for Connecticut nursing homes mentions music therapy as one of the services affected and portrays it as entertainment.
This is a misapprehension.


Our Towns
Roslynne McCarthy is a mother and an English teacher.
It takes her seven minutes to drive two of her children to high school in Norwalk and seven minutes in the other direction to drive herself to work at the high school in New Canaan.
At her children's school, Mrs.
McCarthy heard what they said about the rich people who live in the suburb of New Canaan.
And at her own school, Mrs.
McCarthy heard what they said about those people who live in the city of Norwalk.


Yankees' Resurgence Dampened by Blue Jays, 5-3
By the time rain began falling at the Stadium last night, Tim Leary had been knocked from the game, the Toronto Blue Jays had scored five runs and the Yankees had suddenly found themselves two runs behind after five innings.
The night, however, did not improve after the downpour stopped.
The game resumed after midnight after the Blue Jays held firmly their lead, surviving a 2-hour-8-minute delay and beating the Yankees, 5-3.


Top Executive Quits at G.P.U.
Standley H. Hoch resigned Friday as chairman, president, chief executive and a director of the General Public Utilities Corporation, the big electric- utility holding company that operates in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
Mr.
Hoch, 59 years old, had been on the job only 26 months.
The Wall Street Journal said yesterday that an important factor was concerns about his relationship with G.P.U.'s vice president of corporate communications, Susan Schepman, who had joined the company from the St.
Louis public relations firm Fleishman-Hillard about a year ago.
The relationship came to light as a result of an anonymous letter received by the company about two months ago, and a follow-up investigation.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 4


Bid Made For Healthnet
An investment firm offered $200 million today to acquire Healthnet, a California not-for-profit health maintenance organization.
The California Department of Corporations is already considering a $108 million offer from Healthnet's management.
The new offer, from Shamrock Investments, a Los Angeles firm, consists of $40 million in cash and $160 million in notes.
Because Healthnet's managers and Shamrock propose converting Healthnet to a profit-making operation, the state agency must approve the transaction.
Under California law, the money would go to a public trust.
Healthnet's management is offering $15 million in cash and $93 million in notes.


Six Years After Queens Stun Gun Scandal, Officer Is Cleared


Slump? What Slump? Says Baines As He Blasts A's Over White Sox
Harold Baines broke out of a slump with four hits against his former team, including a three-run homer, as the Oakland Athletics beat the Chicago White Sox, 5-3, tonight.
The Athletics and White Sox split a four-game series, which included a bench-clearing brawl on Saturday when A's catcher Terry Steinbach was hit in the head by a Bobby Thigpen pitch.


Doonesbury Needs a Job
Now comes the latest, and perhaps most shocking, layoff in the advertising industry: Michael Doonesbury.
The make-believe ad executive has lost his job, readers of the popular "Doonesbury" comic strip learned yesterday.
Under the direction of the strip's creator, Garry Trudeau, Mr.
Doonesbury over the years moved from the creative side to the account side of his unnamed agency.


PATTERNS
Geoffrey Beene's much-heralded lower-priced collection, called Mr.
Beene, is no more.
After one year in business, the high-fashion-for-less collection has become a casualty of the soft retail climate and production problems, executives said.


Review/Television; Health Care of America's Children
Dr.
C.
Everett Koop, the former United States Surgeon General, begins a painfully timely series at 10 tonight on NBC .
"Children at Risk," the first of his five hourlong reports, calls attention to the millions of families that cannot obtain health insurance and to the effects of spotty medical care on children in rural areas and the inner cities.
NBC, whose recent record of documentaries has not been impressive, made a wise decision in going to the MacNeil/Lehrer production company for "C. Everett Koop, M.D." In the next few weeks, Dr.
Koop will look at preventive health care, at the problems of adolescents and the elderly and at ideas for providing decent health care for everyone.


People
*
John J. Fenton has joined D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Asia, as managing director.
He will be based in Hong Kong. *
Chris Strange has been promoted to senior vice president at J. Walter Thompson, Chicago.


Bar Group Told to Stop Rating Judges
The Justice Department has told the City Bar Association in New York that it should get out of the business of evaluating who becomes a Federal judge in New York, something it has done since at least 1920.
Underlying the dispute is a long effort by President Bush and President Reagan before him to push the Federal courts in a more conservative direction, an effort occasionally hampered by outside groups passing on candidates' qualifications.


Does Bo Know Doyle? He May, Shortly
Philip Doyle doesn't consider himself on the same plane as Bo Jackson or Deion Sanders, two of the more renowned two-sport stars.
At this point, he isn't even in the same sphere.
However, if two major "ifs" in his life pan out, he may at least be mentioned in the same sentence.
Doyle, 22 years old, is a place-kicker and a third baseman.
When he signed with the Giants as a rookie free agent this past weekend, he said he hoped to be selected in the major league baseball draft, which continues through Wednesday.
At Alabama last year, the 6-foot, 210-pound Doyle led the nation in field-goal percentage (24 of 29).


Trials in Kuwait Are Taking a New Turn
Martial-law courts are continuing trials of people accused of collaborating with Iraqi occupation forces, and in some cases witnesses for the prosecution have appeared for cross-examination.
On Saturday, as a martial-law court held a one-day trial of 24 defendants, a Kuwaiti woman accused of writing for the newspaper set up by Iraq's occupation force was confronted with testimony by other journalists who said they had rejected her advice to collaborate.
The court then adjourned the case until June 15, when the five-man panel is to hand down verdicts and sentences on those said to have worked for the newspaper, Al Nida.
Several collaboration trials have convened in the last two weeks.
Today 36 defendants were on trial, mainly Palestinians.
The charges ranged from theft or forgery to running a prostitution ring for Iraqi troops, Reuters reported.
Two trials are set for Tuesday, including one of Iraqi actors living in Kuwait who were said to have supported the occupation, and another involving a rape charge, a Justice Ministry official said.
The trial on Saturday included the first time that prosecution witnesses have spoken in public and been cross-examined by defense attorneys.
A woman named Ibtessam al-Dukhail was the most important defendant at today's hearing, and her case took up about half the nine hours of arguments.
She has said she worked at the paper under pressure from the Iraqis.
But the other journalists who testified against her undermined her case in the eyes of many neutral observers in the crowded courtroom.
The trial of the newspaper employees was being closely watched by human rights advocates.
They have been encouraged somewhat by the handling of the trials recently, but have said a crucial question is whether witnesses testify under cross-examination.
The very first collaboration trial was a one-day affair on May 19 that heard from no prosecution witnesses and produced immediate, harsh sentences.
The newspaper trial featured the same chief judge, Mohammed Jassem ibn Naji, as the first trial in the series.
Apart from the three journalists who testified against Miss Dukhail, there was only one other witness for the prosecution, a police officer who testified against all 24 defendants accused of working for the newspaper.
He offered mainly hearsay evidence, and repeatedly refused to reveal the sources of the information he presented.
"There are too many people whose lives are in the hands of that secret source," Mohammad al-Enezy, a defense lawyer, said in his closing statement.
But the presiding judge refused to allow questions about the policeman's informants, taking the side of the prosecution and the witness, who argued that security would be compromised if the matter was discussed in the open.
All of the defendants are charged with working for Al Nida, the daily newspaper published by the occupying Iraqis after the August invasion and annexation of Kuwait.
Most of them held menial or clerical jobs, and apart from Miss Dukhail, there were no other Kuwaiti citizens in the group.
One defendant's lawyer said his client, an Iraqi resident of Kuwait, had done the right thing by complying with the invaders' orders.
Paraphrasing his client, the lawyer said: "If I did not join the newspaper, I would have to join the Iraqi Army. It would be better to work for newspapers than to kill people and do bad things to Kuwaitis."
Miss Dukhail's attorney insisted that she worked for the newspaper only under threats by the Iraqi authorities.
But the three other Kuwaiti journalists testified that after the invasion Miss Dukhail had personally urged them to join the paper's staff.


CHRONICLE
GEORGE LUCAS plans father, grandfather and great-grandfather of "Star Wars," three "prequels" to his original trilogy.
And there may be sons and grandsons, too.
Mr.
Lucas said yesterday that he would return to work on further feature episodes of the series.
"George has the story for nine episodes," said Lynne Hale, a spokeswoman for Lucasfilm , his production company.
"What have been seen represent episodes 4, 5 and 6."


Purchasing Index Shows Sharp Gain
Spurred by a sharp increase in new orders, the nation's manufacturing economy improved in May, according to a monthly report issued yesterday by corporate purchasing managers.
The National Association of Purchasing Management said its index of economic activity increased to 45.4 percent in May, up from 42.1 percent in April.
The May reading was the highest since August, when the index stood at 47.6 percent.


Music in Review
Itzhak Perlman and Daniel Barenboim Avery Fisher Hall


In July, Fun at Lincoln Center Is Serious
Serious Fun, Lincoln Center's midsummer series of performance art and nontraditional dance events, is about to celebrate an anniversary.
When the three-week avant-garde festival begins at Alice Tully Hall on July 11, it will be starting its fifth season.
Opening this year's series is "The Mysteries and What's So Funny," an evening-length dance-theater work by David Gordon that features 13 actors, a solo piano score by Philip Glass and sets by Red Grooms.
"Mysteries," which Serious Fun co-commissioned with the Spoleto Festival U.S.A., had its world premiere last week in Charleston.
S.C, and its three New York performances will take place July 11 to 13.


For Gottex, Flattery Is Step No. 1
From now until the end of June is the prime time for buying swimsuits, but Miriam Ruzow is already deeply involved in planning the styles women will be wearing next year.
As the director of United States operations for Gottex , the world's largest swimsuit manufacturer, she knows that next summer, swimsuits will have more control for the body built in and will provide more coverage.
She also knows the patterns they will have, like the plaids that are fashion's latest enthusiasm.


Chapter 11 Plan By Developer
The General Development Corporation, which was accused of defrauding buyers of 11,000 housing sites, presented a bankruptcy reorganization plan today that would keep the Miami- based developer in business.
The company, which builds planned communities, intends to cancel its stock, held largely by insurance companies and investment houses, and pay unsecured creditors from $200 million in new notes and 9.75 million shares of new common stock.
Secured creditors would eventually be paid in full.


Sun Stake To Be Sold By A.T.&amp;T.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company announced today that it would sell its 19 percent stake in Sun Microsystems Inc., formally ending a partnership that once terrified computer industry competitors but now has become inappropriate in light of A.T.&amp; T.'s recent agreement to purchase the NCR Corporation.
"In view of the recent merger agreement between A.T.&amp; T. and NCR, both A.T.&amp; T. and Sun management agree the time is now right to concentrate our efforts on our respective businesses," A.T.&amp; T.'s computer chief, Robert M. Kavner, said in a statement today.


California Water Refunding Issue
The Eastern Municipal Water District of California yesterday initially priced about $100.7 million in water and sewer revenue refunding certificates of participation through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.
The maximum yield on the issue was 6.848 percent for securities due in 2020.
Another long maturity offers a yield of 6.803 percent for certificates due in 2009.


William A. McCarty-Cooper, 53, Interior Designer
William A. McCarty-Cooper, an interior designer and art collector, died on Thursday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 53 years old.
He died of complications from AIDS, his lawyer, John Hutchinson, said yesterday.


'I Am Innocent,' Embattled Biologist Says
Ranged against Dr.
Thereza Imanishi-Kari's view of events are the Secret Service, a Congressional committee, a panel of five prestigious scientists, and, lately, the Nobel laureate David Baltimore as well.
This short, gray-haired woman of 48 years remains unmoved.
She is the focus of one of the most bitterly disputed cases involving allegations of misconduct in the history of American science.
But in her laboratory at the center of the storm, there is an unreal calm.


Drug Review Canceled
An advisory committee of the Food and Drug Administration has canceled a July 22-23 meeting at which the Cetus Corporation's interleukin-2 cancer drug was to have been reviewed, an F.D.A. official said today.
No reason was given for the meeting's cancellation, and the panel has not set a new date to review the drug, the official said.
In its initial review of interleukin-2, to be marketed by Cetus under the name Proleukin, an F.D.A. advisory committee last July put off action on the drug as a treatment for advanced kidney cancer.
Late last month, an agency official said the drug was being reviewed.


Follow Bouncing Kisio
Four days after he was plucked from the expansion draft by the Minnesota North Stars, KELLY KISIO, the Rangers' captain the last four seasons, was traded yesterday to the National Hockey League's newest franchise, San Jose.
The Sharks acquired the veteran center in exchange for SHANE CHURLA, an enforcer who returns to the team that lost him to San Jose last week in a dispersal draft.
Kisio, 31 years old, was hampered by injuries last season and managed just 15 goals and 20 assists in 51 games after seven consecutive 20-goal seasons. . . .
In an exchange of defensive prospects, the New Jersey Devils yesterday acquired BRENT SEVERYN from the Quebec Nordiques for DAVE MARCINYSHYN.
The 25-year-old Severyn, of Vegreville, Alberta, appeared in 50 games with the Halifax Citadels of the American Hockey League and recorded 7 goals, 26 assists and 202 penalty minutes.
He has career N.H.L. totals of 35 games played with 2 assists for 2 points. . . .
LOU LAMORIELLO, the president and general manager of the Devils, announced yesterday that the team has signed a new five-year contract with WABC Radio that will allow the 50,000-watt station to broadcast the Devils' games through the 1995-96 N.H.L. season. (AP)


A.T.&amp;T. Testing Facsimile Service
A.T.&amp; T. said it was conducting a test in the United States of a public self-service facsimile system.
The test of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's fax service is scheduled to run until October, with fax locations in airports, hotels and truck stops.


Space Station Defeated in Key Committee Vote
The House Appropriations Committee voted today to kill the planned space station, ignoring a White House veto threat and prompting opponents to promise to fight to restore the funds.
Ratifying a decision made last month by the panel's subcommittee that oversees the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the full committee decided to provide none of the $2 billion President Bush requested for next year for the space station Freedom.


Hard-Liners in China: Old, but by No Means Out
Two years ago, when China's hard-liners used troops and tanks to crush the democracy movement here, most Chinese and foreigners predicted that the aging leadership would not last even a couple of years.
Yet it has.
Far more than most people expected, Prime Minister Li Peng and those around him have consolidated their hold and imposed a sullen stability on the land.
At times, China is still likened to a volcano, but few see an eruption soon.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Deutsche Bank Financial Inc., a unit of Deutsche Bank A.G., is offering $100 million in 6 7/8 percent notes due in 1993 at 99.982, to yield 6.90 percent, through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Noncallable for life, the notes are rated Aaa by Moody's and AAA by S.&amp; P. *
Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $1 billion in debt securities.


6 Years Later, Queens Officer Is Cleared in Stun-Gun Case
For six years after he was charged with helping torture prisoners with an electric stun gun at a Queens station house, Police Officer Michael Aranda languished in a prosecutorial purgatory.
His guilt was not proved, but neither was his innocence established, as his trial was repeatedly postponed in a tangle of delays and legal maneuvers that grew out of the charges, part of a major scandal that rocked the New York City Police Department in 1985.


Chess
It is sometimes possible to unsettle a solid positional player by hyperaggressive tactics, but two questions have to be answered before trying this: how sound is your action?
And how strong is the opponent?
If he is one of the highest-rated players in the world, second thoughts are in order.
In the first round of the Fifth Verenigde Spaarbank Tournament in Amsterdam on May 2, Viktor Korchnoi failed the quiz by trying too unreliable an attack against too tough an adversary.
The erstwhile challenger for the world championship, who now lives in Switzerland, chose a wild, flimsy onslaught against the Soviet grandmaster Valery Salov, who repulsed it smartly nd won when Korchnoi blundered a piece.


Guy T. O. Hollyday, Ex-Housing Chief, 98
Guy T. O. Hollyday, a retired Baltimore businessman who was commissioner of the Federal Housing Administration in 1953 and 1954, died Friday at Mercy Medical Center in Baltimore.
He was 98 years old and lived in Sparks, Md.
Mr. Hollyday died of pnuemonia, a spokesman for the family said.


Tough Tests Don't Create More Inner-City Jobs; Let Go of Old Ways
To the Editor:
The real story behind "Scandal Over Cheating at M.I.T. Stirs Debate on Limits of Teamwork" (Education page, May 22) is surely the way our archaic methods of testing hinder attempts to improve teaching.
While the Massachusetts Institute of Technology students were encouraged to work collaboratively -- and will have to work collaboratively in their future careers -- they were tested individually.
No wonder they looked on the test as an obstacle, rather than an integral part of the course.


An Apple PC Version of Lotus 1-2-3
The Lotus Development Corporation today announced its long-delayed 1-2-3 spreadsheet program for the Apple Macintosh.
Lotus vowed to catch its rival, the Microsoft Corporation, whose Excel spreadsheet has a commanding lead in the Macintosh market.
"This is a product that will meet any scrutinizing that any skeptic might have," said Apple's chairman, John Sculley, who spoke at Lotus's annual meeting here.
"I was skeptical," he added, but he said that Lotus had finally developed a version of 1-2-3 that was suitable for the Macintosh.
That view was shared by several analysts.
No Direct Stake
Apple has no direct stake in the Lotus product, but computer companies are always pleased when popular software becomes available for their machines because it enhances sales.
This time, Mr.
Sculley has a particularly strong reason to cheer: A Macintosh using the new Lotus program can read 1-2-3 files from an I.B.M. or compatible computer, either directly from a disk or over a network.


Banks Agree To Spinoff of Monarch Life
The healthy life insurance subsidiary of a troubled Massachusetts financial services company will be spun off to a private investment banking group, under an agreement reported yesterday.
According to a Reuters report last night, Private Capital Partners Inc. of Purchase, N.Y., said it intended to form the Old Bay State Life Insurance Company to acquire the stock of the Monarch Life Insurance Company of Springfield, Mass.


Corrections
A caption in the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday about the film "Begotten" misstated its opening date at the Film Forum.
It is tomorrow, not Friday.





Ex-Wedtech President Gets Prison Sentence
A former Wedtech official whose perjury on the witness stand helped lead to the reversal of the convictions of three men in the case was sentenced to 27 months in prison yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The former president of the defunct Bronx defense contractor, Anthony Guariglia, 38 years old, was a crucial witness in the Government's 1989 case against E. Robert Wallach, a close associate of former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, and two others, Wayne Franklyn Chinn and Rusty Kent London, all convicted of racketeering.


Observer; Just Stumbling Around
The Democrats may not run anyone for President next year.
Former Senator Paul Tsongas has offered to run for them, of course, but that doesn't mean the Democrats will let him.
Mr.
Tsongas, being a Massachusetts man of Greek-American heritage, reminds them too painfully of the 1988 campaign when a Massachusetts man of Greek-American heritage lost to the Stars and Stripes, Willie Horton and two promissory lips that all America loved to read.


Corrections
A report on May 26 about the marriage of Suzanne Ingram and Eric Schaefer referred incorrectly to the bridegroom's mother.
She is Mrs.
Samuel H. McIver; she lives with the bridegroom's stepfather in Cazenovia, N.Y.


Banc One in Stock Deal To Buy First Illinois
The Banc One Corporation said yesterday that it planned to acquire the First Illinois Corporation of Evanston, the second Illinois banking company of more than $1 billion in size that Banc One has agreed to acquire this year.
The acquisition of First Illinois, with 15 suburban branches, will give Banc One, based in Columbus, Ohio, a foothold in the Chicago market, where it has been limited to one small downtown office.


Progress on Cholera
A team of scientists in the Netherlands has determined the structure of a cholera-like toxin, an advance that could help researchers devise new drugs or make a more effective vaccine.
The scientists studied a protein secreted by Escherichia coli, a bacterium commonly found in the intestines.
It is nearly identical to the poison secreted by the cholera virus, Vibrio cholerae, which attacks the body's intestinal system, causing severe diarrhea that can lead to death.


BALTIC CRACKDOWN BACKED IN REPORT
The chief Soviet law enforcement officer denied today that Soviet troops shot and killed civilians during a violent confrontation in Lithuania last January, sharply contradicting accounts by Western journalists and Lithuanian demonstrators who witnessed the assault.
In a preliminary report to the Soviet legislature on its investigation into the killing of 13 demonstrators and one K.G.B. security officer during the seizure of the Vilnius television tower, the Soviet prosecutor, Gen.
Nikolai Trubin, said the military's actions were justified, and he blamed the republic's leadership for the Jan. 13 attack.


Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony92d Street Y


'Country's Good' to Close
"Our Country's Good," a drama by Timberlake Wertenbaker, is to close after the evening performance on Saturday at the Nederlander Theater.
The play, directed by Mark Lamos, will have run for 40 regular performances and 12 previews.


Anne Roe Simpson, 87, A Clinical Psychologist
Anne Roe Simpson, a clinical psychologist and educator, died last Wednesday at her home in Tucson, Ariz.
She was 87 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Jays' 'Etiquette' Disturbs Howe
As a relief pitcher, Steve Howe is accustomed to confrontations in the late innings.
He almost had a different sort of clash last night against the Blue Jays.
After Howe struck out Devon White in the eighth, he stared him down and then was verbally taunted by the Toronto dugout.
Howe said White had stared him down after the second strike.
Howe pointed toward the dugout and waved at someone to come out on the field.
Manager Stump Merrill rushed out of the Yankee dugout to restrain Howe.


Ethiopia's New Rulers Try to Shed Ethnic Baggage
The people who are emerging as the new rulers in Addis Ababa are members of the small ethnic and linguistic minority, the Tigreans, who come from a region hundreds of miles from here.
Their current control of this ancient city marks a break from centuries of almost uninterrupted rule by the Amhara ethnic group, which provided both the dynasty whose last ruler was the Emperor Haile Selassie, and Lieut.
Col.
Mengistu Haile Mariam, who seized power after the Emperor was overthrown in 1974 and imposed a dictatorship on a Soviet model, while maintaining the old dominence of the Amharas.


Music in Review
Alyssa ParkViolinist Alice Tully Hall


Chief Plans Big Role for Small Panel
By Washington standards, the National Science Foundation is one of many small Government organizations relegated to the back of budget books as "other independent agencies."
Although it is dwarfed in size and budget even by companion technical agencies, like the National Institutes of Health and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the National Science Foundation is in a period of extraordinary growth.


Accounts
*
Campbell Soup Co., to Backer Spielvogel Bates, New York, for the introduction of the Healthy Request product line, with a budget of $8 million.
The line, previously known as Special Request, a low-sodium brand, is being reformulated to be lower in fat as well.
The line will be introduced nationally in the fall.
The agency already handles several Campbell soup lines.


HIGH COURT WIDENS BAN ON USING RACE TO EXCLUDE JURORS
In a significant expansion of earlier decisions, the Supreme Court ruled today that jurors may not be excluded from civil cases on account of race.
The 6-to-3 ruling extended into the civil area a landmark 1986 decision that barred prosecutors in criminal trials from using peremptory challenges to exclude potential jurors on the basis of race.


North Skirts Topic Of His Legal Case In Talk to Baptists
A week after the Supreme Court let stand rulings that could invalidate his conviction in the Iran-contra case, Oliver L. North said at a convention of Baptists today that it was his faith that sustained him through his trial and its aftermath.
"What else would it have taken for a young Marine and his family to face the threats of one of the most brutal terrorists in the world, to have faced the threat of the independent prosecutor, the Congress and all of that inquisition, the tens of millions of dollars and the countless people arrayed against us," Mr.
North said.


Hills Stores Has Deficit
Hills Department Stores Inc. said today that it lost $21.9 million in the quarter that ended May 4 on sales of $324.9 million.
Company officials, however, said the retailer's business had been picking up.


President Resumes Jogging
President Bush said today that he had resumed jogging after being stricken by a heart irregularity a month ago.
Mr.
Bush told reporters at the White House that he jogged for a half-mile around his home in Kennebunkport, Me., over the Memorial Day weekend.
He said he was feeling no after-effects from the thyroid ailment that caused the heart problem and that doctors were reducing his medication.


Catalogue-Clutter Warning For Mail-Order Merchants
AS the eighth annual Catalogue Conference and Exhibition starts today in Chicago, the industry that sold consumers an estimated $35 billion worth of merchandise last year through glossy pages of advertising finds itself challenged as perhaps never before.
At the heart of its struggle is an attitude among consumers that ordering by catalogue "is not like shopping in stores, when if you don't like one store, you go to another," said Charles E. Williams, founder and vice chairman of Williams-Sonoma Inc., the San Francisco-based purveyor of products from kitchenware to quilts.
All too often, he said, "if a customer doesn't like the mail-order experience, that customer gives up on mail order."


The Face On Simpson's Golf Bag
YOU'VE seen them on milk cartons, at toll booths and elsewhere: the face and name of a youngster under the word "Missing" and above a 1-800-843-5678 telephone number.
Since late February, touring pro Tim Simpson's golf bag also has displayed the face of a missing child in the area of that week's PGA Tour event.
During the Masters tournament in April, Simpson's bag showed a computer-aged photo of a 9-year-old girl, Shannon Minor, who had disappeared from her Atlanta home in 1983 when she was only 18 months old.
Five days after the Masters ended, the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children received an anonymous phone call.


Courier (Politely) Dismisses Martin
Jim Courier, a 20-year-old American in search of his first Grand Slam title on his favorite surface, ended the Cinderella saga of qualifier Todd Martin, his countryman and sparring partner, in the fourth round of the French Open this afternoon.
Courier, seeded ninth, advanced to his first Grand Slam quarterfinal after dominating an overmatched Martin, 6-2, 6-3, 6-3.


Pope Delivers Angry Sermon on Abortion to Poles
In a voice rising in anger, Pope John Paul II today delivered an impassioned sermon against abortion and demanded that his fellow Poles make an accounting of their sins.
His normally sonorous, pacific voice shaking with rage, the Pope departed from his prepared text and assailed Poland's moral state as if it were a personal affront.


Head of Division Named At Kaufman &amp; Broad
The Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corporation has announced that Roland Osgood, a seasoned figure in the California housing industry, will head a new home building division for the company, the largest builder of single-family housing in California.
Mr.
Osgood's unit, Kaufman's ninth, will develop and market single-family homes for entry-level buyers and the trade-up market in the three-county area of Riverside, Orange and San Bernardino.
They will carry a still-undecided brand name, and are intended to move Kaufman beyond its popular entry-level housing line known as the California Series.


Tony Award Winners
Following are the winners of the 1990-91 Tony Awards, presented Sunday night at the Minskoff Theater:
Best Play: Neil Simon, "Lost in Yonkers"


Plan for New City Council Passes in Praise and Anger
After months of wrangling, the New York City Districting Commission passed a final plan yesterday for 51 new Council districts that commissioners said would give minority candidates a reasonable chance to win at least a third of the seats.
But even as the plan was being prepared for submission to Washington, the political and racial divisions that bedeviled its creation continued.
Several political and civic groups said they were considering challenging the plan in court on the ground that it fell short of its mandate of giving minorities a fair share of the city's political future.
Others, including some Council incumbents, said the plan had sacrificed fairness to what they called reverse racism.


Al Bernknopf Is Dead; A U.A.W. Leader, 82
Al Bernknopf, a retired senior vice president of District 65 of the United Auto Workers, died on Friday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Atlanta.
He was 82 years old and lived in Atlanta.
He died of a stroke, said Robert Kirkman, a spokesman for District 65.


New Chivas Regal Ad: Just a Special Occasion?
Is Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons pouring out a new advertising campaign for Chivas Regal?
For many years, the super-premium Scotch has been the subject of print advertisements by DDB Needham Worldwide with the theme "What are you saving the Chivas for?" The ads were a shift from previous long-running campaigns that gave Chivas an image of a brand on a pedestal, to be consumed only on special occasions.


Long-Quiet Japanese Volcano Erupts With Fury
A volcano in southern Japan erupted late Monday, setting houses and forests aflame and raining superheated rocks on small villages.
Two people were confirmed dead, 31 people were missing and more than 20 people were burned, many of them critically, the authorities said.


The Horrors We Inflicted on the Iraqis
To the Editor:
"Health Crisis Said to Grip Iraq in Wake of War's Destruction" (news article, May 22) summarizes the report of a Harvard University medical team, which estimates 170,000 more child deaths this year in Iraq.
"How to Aim the Embargo Weapon" (editorial, May 23) takes no note of this report, but deals with the political objectives of the embargo President Bush wants to maintain indefinitely.
The war that President Bush and Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney authorized against Iraq was much more than a war to limit military reinforcements from reaching Iraq's forces in Kuwait.
The systematic destruction of the electric-power plants and water utilities of Iraq constituted an assault on the civilian population.
What we have done guaranteed the epidemic spread of disease from polluted water and a lack of the hospital services necessary to deal with it.
Transportation and even the harvesting of food in Iraq have been crippled by the destruction of oil refineries.
Outside aid is urgently needed.
We violated international law in our assault on civilian life in Iraq, and few people have the courage to tell this to the American public and to point out our moral obligation to act quickly and adequately to reduce the predicted toll of 170,000 more child deaths.
There is, to put it bluntly, no moral leadership in Washington, or in the news media, if the horror that we have created is swept under the carpet.FREDERICK S. LIGHTFOOT  Greenport, L.I., May 23, 1991


Bond Rating Is Affirmed for New York City
Despite continuing uncertainty over its budget, the Dinkins administration won a vote of confidence from a major bond rating agency yesterday as Standard &amp; Poor's affirmed its rating of city bonds, finding the city's challenges manageable and its assumptions realistic.
But in affirming its A- rating, which surprised some city officials who were bracing for a downgrading, Standard &amp; Poor's complicated the already complex effort by Mayor David N. Dinkins to avert the worst of the service cuts called for in his budget.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALLNational League CHICAGO CUBS -- Named Richie Zisk organizational hitting instructor.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Activated Barry Larkin, shortstop, and Bill Doran, second baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Fired Buck Rodgers, manager.
Named Tom Runnells manager and Jerry Manuel third base coach.
Named Pat Kelly manager for Indianapolis of the American Association.BASKETBALLWorld Basketball League LONG ISLAND SURF -- Signed Anthony Mason, forward, and Rich Henry, guard.
NEW HAVEN SKYHAWKS -- Signed Maurice Brittian, forward-center; Darren Rowe, forward; Kevin Calhoun, forward; and Keith Amerson, guard, to one-year contracts.
PHILADELPHIA SPIRIT -- Signed Paul Graham, guard-forward, and Jerome Coles, forward, to one-year contracts.HOCKEY National Hockey League MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Traded Kelly Kisio, center, to the San Jose Sharks for Shane Churla, right wing.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Traded Dave Marcinyshyn, defenseman, to the Quebec Nordiques for Brent Severyn, defenseman.WATER POLO U.S.W.P. -- Named John Tanner assistant coach for the National A team.


NEW YORK CLOSES PARK TO HOMELESS
Hundreds of New York City police officers rousted about 200 homeless people from their scraggly encampment in Tompkins Square Park yesterday morning, and to keep them out the city immediately announced that the park would be fenced off for renovations for at least a year.
The carefully orchestrated police sweep and the sudden start of a long-deferred project to demolish the concrete bandstand -- which the police say has become a haven for drug dealers -- are intended to take back control of the Lower East Side park from homeless people and self-styled anarchists who have clashed repeatedly with the police there over the last three years, most recently on Memorial Day.


How to Make Landmarking Fair
No question inflames politics in New York City more than whether landmark regulation wrongs the churches and charities that own landmarked properties.
The issue is so touchy that two years ago the Charter Revision Commission, which eagerly recast many city functions, bucked it to the City Council.
There's no more passing this buck.
The Council has until June 30 to establish a new mayoral panel with the power to review certain decisions of the Landmarks Preservation Commission about tax-exempt institutions.
Determining its powers is at the center of an emotional battle that's drowning out larger, underlying concerns.


Justices to Decide Macy Suit On Proposition 13 Realty Tax
The United States Supreme Court agreed today to hear a suit, brought by R. H. Macy &amp; Company, asserting that California's Proposition 13 unfairly assesses strikingly higher taxes on newly purchased property.
The suit challenges the taxpayers' revolt proposition, which was a 1978 amendment to the California Constitution.
Proposition 13 set local property taxes at 1 percent of assessed valuation, rolled back assessments to 1975 levels and limited subsequent increases to 2 percent a year.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
A law intended to encourage involvement of minority-owned firms in managing assets seized from failed savings and loans appears to be having little effect.
Government documents show that Federal contracts to manage everything from multimillion-dollar loan portfolios to small apartment buildings have gone almost entirely to companies owned by whites.  [ Page A1. ]
The U.S. will lift itself out of recession in the second half and unemployment will stop climbing in that period, the O.E.C.D. forecast.
The group is widely respected for its projections.  [ D1. ]


Hearns Beats Back Age and Prevails Over Foe
The Hit Man can still punch.
Thomas Hearns had enough authority in his fists to hold off old age and Virgil Hill and win the World Boxing Association light heavyweight title tonight in a unanimous 12-round decision at Caesars Palace.
Judges Chuck Giampa (116-112), Jerry Roth (115-113) and Art Lurie (115-113) all scored the bout for the 32-year-old challenger.


New Jersey Assault-Weapon Ban Nets One Gun and Many Appeals
Three days after New Jersey's "toughest in the nation" ban on assault weapons took effect, only one person has turned in a firearm to the police.
And in a state where estimates of gun owners range from 100,000 to 300,000, only 191 people have certified that they have disabled their assault weapons.
Another 355 people have registered working firearms under a provision that allows certain weapons to be retained for target shooting.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a coalition's effort to gain greater control over the New York City Council misidentified Dennis Rivera.
As president of Local 1199, the Drug, Hospital and Health Care Employees Union, he represents workers in voluntary hospitals, not municipal ones.


Nuclear Treaty Next for Superpowers
Their differences resolved on a treaty to reduce conventional arms in Europe, the United States and Soviet Union are now expected to step up efforts to settle the last remaining issues holding up a pact to slash the superpower nuclear arsenals.
After nearly a decade of negotiations, only a handful of "technical issues" stand between a final agreement to cut long-range nuclear missiles by a third, Administration officials and arms control experts said.
The last major obstacles were cleared away more than 15 months ago.


Tough Tests Don't Create More Inner-City Jobs
To the Editor:
"Education Reform vs. Civil Rights Agenda" by Chester E. Finn Jr. (Op-Ed, May 18) discusses incentives for inner-city kids to excel in, and finish, high school.
The author attacks the problem from the other side, by offering tests to evaluate the graduating student.
I'm not sure this measure will help the inner-city student though.


Japan Sees U.S. Easing Stance
Japan expects the United States to lift a threat of trade sanctions because Tokyo has agreed to open more of its Government-financed construction projects to American companies.
The agreement, reached on Saturday, more than doubles the number of projects open for bidding by American companies, the United States Embassy said today in a statement.
But the statement also added that the lifting of the threat of sanctions required Cabinet-level approval in Washington.


Tough Tests Don't Create More Inner-City Jobs; A National Standard
To the Editor:
Your May 20 article on national tests of other countries calls the Scholastic Aptitude Test, which is sponsored by the College Board, "the closest American version of a national test." Unfortunately, you err in saying that the S.A.T. differs from the national tests of other countries because it "does not test what students have learned."


Citing Sexism, Stanford Doctor Quits
A surgeon at Stanford Medical School resigned last week after asserting that she was long subject to demeaning comments and unwelcome advances.
And today Stanford Medical School officials said she was right in asserting that some male surgeons had sexist attitudes.
"I don't doubt her sincerity at all," the school dean, David Korn, said of allegations by Dr.
Frances Conley, who turned in her resignation on Friday.
"We've been debating the whole question of insensitivity for a year."


Japanese Deny 'Dumping'
Japanese auto makers reacted with surprise and anger today to charges that they were "dumping" mini-vans in the United States.
The Big Three American car makers filed a petition with the Commerce Department and the International Trade Administration on Friday saying that Japanese producers were selling the mini-vans in the United States more cheaply than in Japan.


Review/Television; A Brief Reprieve for 'China Beach': Seven New Episodes, Then the End
"China Beach" disappeared from ABC 's schedule several months ago, very probably the victim of the patriotic boosterism encouraged during the hostilities in the Persian Gulf.
When the country is perking with Stormin' Norman, who needs reminders of a downer like Vietnam?
In any event, "China Beach" returns tonight at 10 with the first of seven episodes that are being broadcast for the first time.
Fans have been waging a letter-writing campaign to get them shown.
Their victory is limited.
The widely acclaimed series is not on the ABC schedule for next season.
The show returns in fine form, slipping seamlessly between two different time periods.
It's 1983 and Colleen McMurphy (Dana Delany) is in Portland, Ore., to be maid of honor at a wedding.
A perceptive guy named Joe (Adam Arkin) introduces himself as the band's drummer but later also turns out to be the best man.
As the wedding preparations proceed, McMurphy has flashbacks to 1969 and her China Beach friends in Vietnam.
An amateur production of "My Fair Lady" is being mounted, its familiar songs taking on new meanings as various romances ebb and flow.


G.M. Subsidiary Acquires Infocel
Electronic Data Systems Inc. has acquired Infocel Inc., a provider of information systems for local governments.
Electronic Data, the Dallas-based computer services unit of the General Motors Corporation, bought 30 percent of Infocel in March 1990 with an option to acquire the remaining equity.
Terms were not disclosed.


East Europe Latest Lure For M.B.A.'s
THE shifting economies of Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia have become magnets for M.B.A.'s and other students wanting a taste of what one dean calls a laboratory for capitalism.
Last spring two dozen students in the middle of their two-year programs at three graduate business schools -- Cornell, the University of Michigan and the University of Pennsylania -- made arrangements to work in Eastern Europe.
Some paid their way and some deans used school funds to help or raised money from donors.
Students received allowances for room and board from the companies or government entities for which they worked.


Dodger Manager's Son Is Dead at Age 33
The son of Los Angeles Dodgers Manager Tommy Lasorda died today at the age of 33.
Thomas Lasorda Jr., an artist, was ill for about five weeks and was hospitalized briefly at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.
Lasorda died of pneumonia and severe dehydration, said Dr.
Allen Metzger, who was him.


Few Minority Companies Get Contracts in Savings Bailout
A two-year-old law intended to encourage the involvement of minority-owned concerns in managing assets seized from failed savings and loans appears to be having little effect.
Internal Government documents show that Federal contracts to manage everything from multimillion-dollar loan portfolios to small apartment buildings have gone almost entirely to companies owned by whites.
Of the 126 contracts issued by the Resolution Trust Corporation, just 2 have been awarded to black-owned companies and 3 to Hispanic-owned companies, according to the documents.
The agency, which supervises the bailout, has issued contracts to manage more than $26 billion in assets from hundreds of collapsed savings associations.


Review/Dance; Bujones's Look at 'Raymonda' Divertissement
"Raymonda (Act III)" is American Ballet Theater's final new production in a season that has emphasized restagings rather than real premieres.
Fernando Bujones's version of a familiar divertissement derived from a 19th-century Russian ballet follows this formula of old wine in new bottles, but his own choreographic interpolations leave a sour taste.


Excerpts From Court's Ruling Widening Ban on Juror Exclusion by Race
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 6-to-3 decision yesterday holding that jurors may not be excluded on the basis of race from serving in civil cases.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy's majority opinion was joined by Justices Byron R. White, Thurgood Marshall, Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens and David H. Souter.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor filed a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Antonin Scalia; Justice Scalia also filed a separate dissent.
FROM THE OPINION
We must decide in the case before us whether a private litigant in a civil case may use peremptory challenges to exclude jurors on account of their race.
Recognizing the impropriety of racial bias in the courtroom, we hold the race-based exclusion violates the equal protection rights of the challenged jurors. . . .


Eyeing Goodwill Games
When Atlanta was named host of the 1996 Olympics, New York City sports promoters were forced to rethink their own bidding priorities for future events.
The end result: Officials from the New York City Sports Commission and from the Mayor's office will head to Atlanta today in a preliminary effort to land the Goodwill Games for 1998.


Trial by Jury, Fairer for Everyone
The Supreme Court has rightly extended its attack on covert racial discrimination in the selection of juries.
Five years ago the Court empowered judges in criminal cases to examine whether prosecutors were using peremptory challenges to exclude jurors of the same race as a defendant.
It was a breakthrough because normally such challenges are not questioned.
Two months ago the Court broadened the attack, allowing even white defendants to trigger an inquiry when blacks were being excluded.


Astaphan Receives Ban
Dr.
JAMIE ASTAPHAN, who said he prescribed steroids for the sprinter BEN JOHNSON and other athletes because he feared they would "kill themselves" if they continued to administer their own treatments, was suspended from practicing medicine for 18 months and fined $5,000.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
A.
B.
Dick Co., a unit of General Electric Co.
P.L.C., London, that provides graphic art supplies, named James L. Bast chief executive.
He succeeds David Powell, who will continue to serve as a director of the parent company. *
Baltimore Thermal Energy Corp., Baltimore, a subsidiary of United Thermal Corp. that provides steam systems, named Morris O. Hill president.


Reunion Is Postponed For the Negro League
The Negro League reunion this month has been postponed because the event proved too popular, William J. Guilfoile, the Baseball Hall of Fame's asociate director, said today.
"It's been such a success; we couldn't get enough hotel rooms to accommodate everyone who said they were coming," Guilfoile said.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.82
5.92
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.59
5.53
7.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.71
5.67
7.63
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.99
7.90
8.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.33
8.26
8.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.40
9.30
9.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.17
7.21
7.50
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Bold French Insurance Chief
Claude Bebear, a charismatic silver-haired man who personifies the new aggressiveness of French business, sometimes seems devoted to one goal: proving that insurance executives do not have to be dreadfully dull and cautious.
Mr.
Bebear, chairman of Groupe Axa, one of France's largest insurers, once organized an expedition of 80 executives, tents and all, into the Sahara to spur team spirit.
He once personally returned a stolen Ferrari to a policyholder -- and got a speeding ticket along the way.


Marv Albert Goes to the Finals
Marv Albert was his usual play-by-play self Sunday afternoon, presiding over Game 1 of the National Basketball Association finals.
The trademark yeses were there.
So were the raspy-throated descriptions of great plays and the trademark irreverence.
But the Bulls-Lakers series has a certain significance to Albert: After 24 years as the voice of the New York Knicks, he has never broadcast the N.B.A. finals on television.
Memorable as they were, his calls of the 1969-70 and 1972-73 Knicks championships were on radio, heard only in the New York broadcast area.


Dozens Missing as Volcano Erupts in Japan


Party Leader Fasts Amid Political Tension in India
In a political atmosphere already charged by more than 250 deaths in election campaigning and the assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, the Congress Party leader, a new center of tension is building in the southern city of Hyderabad, where the leader of another party is on a life-threatening fast.
Hyderabad, a city that was convulsed in violence at the end of last year, is the capital of Andhra Pradesh, the home state of Mr.
Gandhi's replacement as Congress Party president, P. V. Narasimha Rao.
The party heads the state government.


Dr. Bernard Lamport, 61 Dies at 61; U.S. Expatriate Who Left Russia
Dr.
Bernard Lamport, a scientific researcher who spent half a century as an American expatriate in the Soviet Union before his return to the United States in 1985, died on Saturday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 61 years old.
He died of colon cancer, his family said.


Boeing Contracts For Work on 777
The Boeing Company said it had awarded subcontracts for work on the primary systems and structures for its new 777 aircraft.


Jordan, Jordan, Jordan Needs a Hand Out There
It happens whenever Michael Jordan plays spectacularly, but his teammates play sporadically.
People wonder if Jordan carries too much of a burden for the Chicago Bulls.
They wonder if the Bulls, despite winning 61 games this season, will revert to being a one-dimensional offensive team when faced with a pressure situation.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16
Trade benefits for the Soviet Union were extended by President Bush.
He was said to be more receptive to inviting President Gorbachev to London during the meeting of the world's leading industrial nations.
Page A1


Goromonzi Journal; But Should the Good Earth Stay in White Hands?
At a time when most of Africa cannot feed itself and deserts are eating into fertile soil, Zimbabwe stands as an oasis.
Despite a growing population, this southern African country is self-sufficient in food and even able to spare some to help impoverished neighbors teetering on the edge of famine.


18-Month-Old Dies in Stroller In Hit and Run
An 18-month-old boy was killed and his mother was injured yesterday by a hit-and-run driver who slammed into them at an East Harlem intersection, dragged the baby in his stroller for a block and was captured by the police six blocks away.
The police said the mother, who lived with her child in a shelter for the homeless, was pushing the baby across East 106th Street at Third Avenue and had almost reached the opposite curb when a speeding 1985 red Oldsmobile struck them as it tried to pass a tractor-trailer on the right.


Yankees Choose High-School Strikeout Wizard in Draft
The Yankee organization, noted for its impatience most of the last two decades, displayed a willingness yesterday to wait for developing talent by choosing Brien Taylor, an overpowering left-handed high-school pitcher, as the first selection in baseball's amateur draft.
Mike Kelly, a center fielder from Arizona State University, who was long considered the most likely Yankee selection, was taken by the Atlanta Braves as the second choice.


Cranston Jones, 73, Architecture Author And Writer at Time
Cranston E. Jones, a writer and editor with Time and People magazines for 38 years and an author of books on architecture, died on Saturday at New York Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer of the esophagus, his daughter, Abigail, said.


Digital Has New 'Open' Software
The Digital Equipment Corporation introduced several new software products today that the company said could be used with other computer companies' hardware and software.
Digital is trying to position itself as a leading provider of "open systems" -- hardware and software that can be used with products from a variety of computer makers, instead of being bound by one manufacturer's proprietary system.


Austin, Tex., Offers Insured Bonds
The City of Austin, Tex., is offering $56.8 million in combined utility systems revenue refunding bonds through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Underwriters said the tax-exempt bonds had a maximum yield of 6.875 percent for a bond due in 2007.
For shorter maturities, there are serial bonds with yields ranging from 4.5 percent in 1991 to 5.8 percent in 1996, 6.35 percent in 2001 and 6.55 percent in 2003.


INSIDE
France to Sign Nuclear Pact
Twenty-three years after a treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons went into effect, France announced that it had decided to join the more than 140 signers.
Page A8.
Beijing Keeps the Lid On


Retailers Report Losses
The Allied Stores Corporation and Federated Department Stores Inc. today reported losses for April.
Federated said it lost $7.05 million, on sales of $335.9 million, in the four weeks that ended on May 4.
That compares with a loss of $9.33 million, on sales of $401.5 million, in the five weeks that ended on April 6.
Allied said it lost $11.4 million, on sales of $189.5 million, in the latest period, compared with a loss of $9.86 million, on sales of $217.1 million, in the previous five weeks.
Both companies, affiliates of Federated Stores Inc., are required to report their results each month to the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Cincinnati.
They filed for bankruptcy protection in January 1990.


Cotton Prices Fall Sharply As Supply Fears Fade a Bit
Cotton futures prices declined sharply yesterday after a weekend of favorable weather eased some of the supply worries that drove the market to a 10-year high last month.
Cotton futures settled 1.08 cents to 1.72 cents lower, with the contract for delivery in July at 84.50 cents a pound.
The July contract has fallen nearly 10 cents a pound since reaching 94.45 cents on May 21.


Nutri/System Suit
Nutri/System Inc. has been sued by Stanford University and two rival companies in separate Federal lawsuits over Nutri/Systems' advertising for its diet plan.
Stanford's suit accuses the Willow Grove, Pa., company of using the school's name and logo without authorization.
In their suits, Jenny Craig Inc. and Weight Watchers International Inc. said the ads were deceptive and were likely to damage competitors with false claims of an endorsement by Stanford.


Washington at Work; Courter Leads Way in Base Closings, and Some Call It a Suicide Mission
Whether he likes it much or not, Jim Courter is a man of two reputations.
One is that of military-affairs expert and small-town lawyer who has promised to dispatch the heroic and unenviable task of closing military bases with efficiency, a little ruthlessness and as much charm as he can manage.
The other is that of a political loser.
A six-term Republican Congressman, Mr.
Courter was beaten so badly in the nasty 1989 New Jersey race for governor that he lost his own home district to Jim Florio.
President Bush's decision to offer him the chairmanship of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission rescued him from political obscurity.
But the rescue came at a price.


German Terrorist Sentenced for '77 Killing
Susanne Albrecht, who rejected her affluent background and turned to terrorism, was convicted today in the slaying of a banker and the attempted killing of Alexander M. Haig Jr., then the NATO commander.
Miss Albrecht, 40 years old, was immediately sentenced to 12 years in prison by the upper state court in the southern German city of Stuttgart.
She could be eligible for parole in six years.


Anatomy of a Rumor: It Flies on Fear
Did you hear?
This woman trying on a coat in a department store put her hand in the pocket and was bitten by a snake.
See, the coat had been made in Taiwan where a viper laid eggs in the pocket.
The woman died.


Talent Spread Thickly For Belmont Weekend
Don't let the herd of elephants inside the fence on Hempstead Turnpike fool you.
This is a horse show taking shape at Belmont Park.
Best Pal was withdrawn from the Belmont Stakes yesterday because of sheer exhaustion, and Unbridled and Summer Squall will miss the Nassau Handicap for medical reasons.
But more great thoroughbreds will be on the track at Belmont Park this weekend chasing more money and prestige than at any time anywhere since the Breeders' Cup last October.


Excerpts From Court's Ruling Widening Ban on Juror Exclusion by Race
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 6-to-3 decision yesterday holding that jurors may not be excluded on the basis of race from serving in civil cases.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy's majority opinion was joined by Justices Byron R. White, Thurgood Marshall, Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens and David H. Souter.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor filed a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Antonin Scalia; Justice Scalia also filed a separate dissent.
FROM THE OPINION
We must decide in the case before us whether a private litigant in a civil case may use peremptory challenges to exclude jurors on account of their race.
Recognizing the impropriety of racial bias in the courtroom, we hold the race-based exclusion violates the equal protection rights of the challenged jurors. . . .


Drug Baron In Colombia May Give Up
Topic A in Colombia these days is whether Pablo Escobar, the most notorious of the world's cocaine traffickers, is about to turn himself in.
Mr.
Escobar, who has been on the run for more than 18 months, has indicated he is ready to accept a Government offer of leniency.


New York State Budget Approved Nine Weeks After the Deadline
The State Legislature approved a budget early today that will raise the cost of driving, using a cellular phone and attending a state university while at the same time sharply reducing state aid to education, health care and the arts.
The $51.9 billion budget, the latest in New York State history, will affect life in the state in countless small ways -- and in many large ones.
Its impact will be felt directly in increased parking fines, in larger class sizes at public schools and in longer lines at the Motor Vehicles Department.
And indirectly the budget is very likely to lead to higher local taxes and to cutbacks at locally run parks, centers for the elderly and youth programs.


A Beleaguered Tarkanian Takes His Case To Regents
The University of Nevada Board of Regents held a closed-door meeting in Las Vegas yesterday with basketball coach Jerry Tarkanian, and when the five-hour session had ended, the coach emerged with his job intact, but his status uncertain.
Tarkanian said he was pleased with the regents' response to his explanation of the latest troubles of his U.N.L.V. basketball team.
It was Tarkanian who sought yesterday's session with the board.


Bush Clears Soviet Trade Benefits and Weighs Role in London Talks
President Bush today granted an extension of trade benefits for the Soviet Union and was said to be increasingly receptive to inviting President Mikhail S. Gorbachev to London at the time of the July summit meeting of seven leading industrial nations.
In a move intended to help Mr.
Gorbachev, Mr.
Bush took the technical steps necessary to allow $1.5 billion in credits for additional food purchases to be granted to Moscow.
In December, the President, for the first time, approved measures allowing the Soviets $1 billion in credits.


Caution in West On Aiding Soviets
WITH ever-increasing urgency, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is asking the West for tens of billions of dollars to help salvage the Soviet Union's economy.
But a troubling theme runs through these requests and the reactions to them in Washington, Bonn and Tokyo.
Can the deteriorating Soviet economy absorb so much money without wasting it?
More to the point, Western governments and commercial banks express reluctance to lend even small amounts unless Moscow moves irrevocably to a free-market economy from central planning.
William R. Rhodes, a Citicorp senior executive who often represents American banks in foreign debt negotiations, outlines the preconditions.


CHRONICLE
The National Institutes of Health said thank you last week to Gov.
LOWELL P. WEICKER JR.  of Connecticut by naming a building for him.
DR.
BERNADINE P. HEALY, director of the institutes, cited Governor Weicker's 20 years in Congress as an advocate of medical research.


Travel Industry Erases Borders in Amazonia
In the magical universe conjured up by travel brochures, an imaginary new land is emerging: Amazonia.
Arcing through the heart of South America, this exotic new realm is the home of jaguars, alligators, birds of paradise, rustic river villages, friendly natives and wilderness sunsets.


Music in Review
I Cantori di New York Merkin Concert Hall


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALLClemson EliminatedWilly Speakman hit a home run to lead off the bottom of the ninth inning yesterday to give Long Beach State a 12-11 victory over Clemson, elminating the highest-seeded team remaining in the College World Series in Omaha.
Top-ranked Florida State, sent home Sunday night, and No. 2 Clemson (60-10) were each eliminated from the series without winning a game.
Sixth-seeded Long Beach State (45-21) advanced to today's elimination game against Creighton, which lost to Wichita State, 3-2, in 12 innings last night.
Clemson stole seven bases to tie a one-game series record. (AP)


A Treaty's First 23 Years
By Washington's tally, 143 nations including France have agreed to abide by the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty since its birth in 1968.
Others count differently; for example, East Germany and North Yemen both subscribed to the pact, but the United States no longer counts them, since they have merged with their neighbors.


Prices Drop on Notes and Bonds
Fresh signs of a looming economic recovery prompted credit market participants to sell Treasury notes and bonds yesterday, pushing up both short- and long-term interest rates.
Results from the May survey of the nation's purchasing managers, which showed that conditions in the manufacturing sector improved for the fourth straight month, as well as a report showing that construction spending rose by eight-tenths of a percent in April, helped to spur the selling.


More Racism From the G.O.P.
When the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed by the Congress, Republicans voted for it 4 to 1.
But in considering the Civil Rights Act of 1991, the G.O.P. seems less interested in a civil rights bill and more interested in reviving race as a campaign issue for 1992.
This is part of a consistent pattern.
In 1988, the Bush-Quayle campaign exploited racial fears in the shameless Willie Horton ads.
In the 1990 elections, the party successfully exploited the civil rights bill with race-based TV ads misrepresenting the bill and pandering to racist fears.


CHRONICLE
Triumphant after winning his third Tony Award on Sunday night, HINTON BATTLE walked from the Minskoff Theater over to the gala supper at the Marriott Marquis and was promptly refused entry.
Mr.
Hinton, of "Miss Saigon," won for outstanding performance by a featured actor in a musical.
But he had not received a ticket for the party given for the nominees and about 1,000 other guests.
A guard finally let him go upstairs to a reservations table after several guests recognized him.
But JOEL WYMAN , head of security for the event, was unmoved.
Pete Sanders, a spokesman for Mr.
Battle said, "By the time someone from the press office arrived, he had walked out."


An Absolut Campaign Open for Participation
Ideas in Absolut vodka advertising can be absolutely unending.
In the latest campaign by TBWA Advertising for Carillon Importers Ltd., the agency uses "drawings," as cartoons in The New Yorker are known, by some of the magazine's most famous cartoonists.
Among those appearing in "Absolut Cartoon" are Roz Chast, Ed Koren, William Hamilton and Charles Barsotti.


Ban Stays on Abortion Funds Abroad
The Supreme Court refused today to hear a challenge to a Federal policy cutting off Federal family planning grants to any overseas organization that spends money, from whatever source, on activities related to abortion.
The Court's action, in an unsigned one-line order, came 10 days after a 5-to-4 decision upheld limits on abortion counseling in federally financed family clinics in the United States.


Repair Kit for DNA Saves Cells From Chaos
Every moment, every cell of the body skirts along the rim of collapse.
The integrity of each cell's genetic instructions is under constant assault as noxious agents like ultraviolet light, toxic chemicals in the diet and malign byproducts made within the cell attack the precious genetic material.


Brooklyn School Chief Barred by Fernandez
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez refused yesterday to allow a Brooklyn school board to consider the reappointment of its superintendent.
He said the official's poor performance disqualified him from consideration.
It was the second time that Mr.
Fernandez had stepped into the selection process for superintendents in his effort to rule out what he considers corrupt or inept leaders.


Fencing Erected Along Tracks Where Child Died
Workers from the New York City Parks Department began installing temporary fencing yesterday along railroad tracks in Washington Heights as responsibility for the death of a 3-year-old boy struck by a train over the weekend was tossed about among city, state and Federal officials.
At the same time, the Manhattan District Attorney's office began a criminal investigation to determine whether any charges are warranted against Amtrak, the state or the city, said Gerald McKelvey, a spokesman for District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Thursday titled "Comparing the Korean Economies" misstated the square mileage of South Korea and North Korea in some editions.
South Korea is 38,025 square miles; North Korea, 46,540.


Rodgers Is Dropped by Expos And Replaced With Runnells
Buck Rodgers, whose Montreal Expos were in last place in the National League East, was fired today, ending his seven-year tenure as manager.
Upon firing Rodgers, whose team had a 20-29 record, Expos General Manager David Dombrowski replaced him with third-base coach Tom Runnells.


Boots Are Mounting And Bats Are Flying: Franco Needs Relief
In Brooklyn, the ritual is conducted by an elderly woman from Sicily, done in secret and loaded with mystery.
Hands are waved, chants are groaned, a scissor snips the air above the troubled person's head.
John Franco, who heard of the ceremony as neighborhood folklore throughout his childhood in Bensonhurst, is at a loss for its official name.
But being equally at a loss for answers about his strange fate this season, the left-handed closer for the Mets is interested in not only discovering the ritual's name, but perhaps also seeking out someone to perform it.


For Gizmo Reduction
To the Editor:
Re: "Gizmos for Gizmos" (editorial, May 23): There's got to be a simpler way than getting up to go to the television set to push a button to find the zapper to change the channel without having to get up to go to the set.
I don't want another gizmo to find the zapper.
I want the zapper easier to find.
That I've done with a loop (about 6 inches long) of fluffy yarn in bright orange, firmly attached to the gizmo with Scotch tape.


Canadian-Style Health System Gains Support
The United States could replace its current patchwork system of medical care with a government-paid plan and immediately save enough money to insure everyone in America, according to a government study due out Tuesday.
The report, from the General Accounting Office, concludes that switching to a plan under which the state governments pay most medical costs, as the provinces in Canada do, would save more than $75 billion a year.
That would be enough to cover all 32 million American who are now uninsured and make medical care for all others available without any insurance deductibles or other payments, the report says.


Texas Writer Wins $500,000 in Ted Turner Competition
Fourteen years after starting a novel about a series of philosophical conversations between a man and a great ape, Daniel Quinn of Austin, Tex., was named the winner of the $500,000 Turner Tomorrow Award yesterday for his novel about the discussions.
In addition to receiving the cash prize, reportedly the largest award for a single book, Mr.
Quinn will have his novel, "Ishmael," published by Turner Publishing and Bantam Books in January, with a first printing of 50,000.


Stocks Mixed as Dow Rises 7.83, to 3,035.33
Stock prices ended on a mixed note yesterday, with the blue chips extending their gains for the sixth straight day but the broader market moving lower.
Drug shares gave way as investors switched from growth stocks to cylical stocks in anticipation that the recession may soon be over.


Review/Pop; New Music From Traditional In World's Diverse Cultures
For its final three concerts of the season, the World Music Institute has set aside purism to present traditional musicians alongside those building new music on traditions they have studied.
"Keys and Gongs," which opened the institute's Improvisations festival on Friday night at Symphony Space, presented spirited music but also showed how difficult it is for an outsider to trump a time-honed tradition.
Zahar, a seven-piece band led by Hassan Hakmoun, offered rock based on Moroccan Gnawa music, after a taste of the tradition played by Mr.
Hakmoun and his brother, Said.
With the band, Mr.
Hakmoun plucked fast, propulsive modal riffs on an electrified sintir (a cello-like lute) and sang Arab-inflected melodies, often in fiery call-and-response with Said Hakmoun or with Radouane Laktib, who played an 11-string Moroccan mandolin.
The band pushed the songs toward a raw kind of funk; as the momentum built, the Hakmoun brothers put down their instruments and danced, leaping as if the stage were a trampoline.


Trial to Start Today for Suspect in Fatal Bombings
A year and a half after lethal mail bombs were delivered to judicial and civil rights targets in the South, a Georgia man with a longstanding obsession with the legal system goes on trial in St.
Paul on Tuesday, accused of killing a Federal judge and a civil rights lawyer.
The man, Walter Leroy Moody Jr. of Rex, Ga., faces 71 Federal counts, including murder and conspiracy, in connection with the mailing of four nail-studded mail bombs in December 1989.
Two bombs sent through the mail exploded and killed Judge Robert S. Vance of the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit at his home in Birmingham, Ala., and Robert E. Robinson, a civil rights lawyer and a City Alderman in Savannah, Ga.
Two other bombs, one sent to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People in Jacksonville, Fla., and the other to the offices of the 11th Circuit in Atlanta, were defused.
Jury selection begins Tuesday in St.
Paul.
The case, in which Mr.
Moody faces up to a potential life sentence on each of four counts and up to 20 years on each of the 67 other counts, was moved there after his lawyers said widespread publicity about the case in the South made a fair trial impossible.
Mr.
Moody is charged with the murder of a judge, civil rights violations in connection with Mr.
Robinson's death, attempted murder of Federal court personnel, illegally transporting explosives, and a variety of other crimes in connection with the mailing of the four bombs, one tear-gas canister, and nearly three dozen letters threatening judges, lawyers and others.
Because of the nature of the targets and letters to an Atlanta television station saying the incidents were in reprisal for the rape and murder of a white woman by a black man, officials originally believed that the incidents were racially motivated.
But what has emerged is a picture of a suspect with a history of psychiatric problems and and of filing litigation and appeals, most of which eventually came before the 11th Circuit.
Some officials have speculated that Mr.
Moody's real grievance was with the appeals court and that the racial elements of the case were included only to divert attention from him.
His lawyers had filed motions that would have allowed a plea of not guilty by reason of insanity.
But last month Mr.
Moody, who abruptly withdrew an insanity plea in an earlier, unrelated Federal prosecution with alleged witness tampering in connection with a 1972 bombing, told his lawyers that he wanted to plead not guilty.
His lawyers said they would try to prove that the Government had insufficient evidence to convict him.
Mr.
Moody, a 57-year-old self-employed literary consultant, originally became a suspect because of similarities between a bomb he was convicted of possessing in 1972 and the ones involved in the 1989 incidents.
A crucial witness is expected to be Mr.
Moody's second wife, Susan Moody, who divorced him last year.
Officials have said Mrs.
Moody has provided details about the assembly of bombs at their home and her part in buying materials for them.
She has pleaded guilty to charges in the case.
Mr.
Moody's extensive involvement with the courts began with his 1972 conviction for possession a bomb that exploded in the hands of his first wife, Hazel Strickland.
Mr.
Moody, who spent two years in prison for the offense, is contesting the conviction.


Amway in Hungary
The Amway Corporation, which sold $2.2 billion in cleaning and other products last year through one million distributors, expanded its operations today into Hungary.
Amway is privately held but reported the $2.2 billion in sales in the 12 months that ended last August.
The company expects $3 billion in sales this year, 63 percent from the 50 foreign countries and territories in which it operates, said Dan Shuster, the head of the company's international operations.


After-School Athletics Save Lives and Money
To the Editor:
As a New York State Senator with an extensive background in law enforcement, I have seen how well preventive measures can work in the battle against drugs and crime.


OPEC Expected to Shun Divisive Output Issues
Because little in their production picture is likely to change this year, the oil ministers of OPEC are expected to sidestep difficult output issues this week at their first full-fledged gathering since the end of the Persian Gulf war.
The ministers appear united in their belief that neither Kuwait nor Iraq, two key members of the organization, will be able to resume oil exports before the end of the year.


P-E-R-K-I-N-S


Sticks and Carrots for the Soviets
Is the prospect of reeling the Soviet Union into the Western economic orbit worth an infusion of Western aid, say $30 billion a year for five years?
Many Americans say no.
Just let the Soviet economy collapse.
Don't prop it up at a time when the Soviets are still spending billions on new armaments and aid to Cuba.
But that shortsighted view misses the point that this is a historic opportunity for the West to change the very character of a nation that has posed a military threat for four decades.


O.E.C.D. Sees Recovery for U.S. in 2d Half
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a 24-nation group promoting economic growth, forecast today that the United States would lift itself out of recession in the second half of this year and that unemployment would stop climbing during that period.
The Paris-based organization, widely respected for its economic projections, said the American economy would grow at an annual rate of 2.7 percent in the second half, compared with a 1.8 percent drop in output in the first half.


Excerpts From Court's Ruling Widening Ban on Juror Exclusion by Race
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 6-to-3 decision yesterday holding that jurors may not be excluded on the basis of race from serving in civil cases.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy's majority opinion was joined by Justices Byron R. White, Thurgood Marshall, Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens and David H. Souter.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor filed a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Antonin Scalia; Justice Scalia also filed a separate dissent.
FROM THE OPINION
We must decide in the case before us whether a private litigant in a civil case may use peremptory challenges to exclude jurors on account of their race.
Recognizing the impropriety of racial bias in the courtroom, we hold the race-based exclusion violates the equal protection rights of the challenged jurors. . . .


Scrap Time for Tanks, and Nuclear Arms
President Gorbachev has moved a reluctant Soviet military to comply with a far-reaching treaty to cut conventional forces in Europe.
Now it's President Bush's turn to show equally bold leadership in resolving interagency disputes in Washington that are holding up a sweeping strategic arms accord.
The treaty limiting conventional forces in Europe sets ceilings requiring the Soviets to scrap at least 7,500 tanks and 9,300 armored vehicles.
But the Soviet military tried to skirt the full consequences of the treaty by insisting that it did not cover 900 other tanks and 1,700 armored vehicles in coastal defense and naval infantry units.


Sabbat J. Strianse, 77, A Cosmetics Developer
Sabbat J. Strianse, a research chemist and former vice president for research and development at Yardley of London Inc., died on Thursday at his home in Caldwell, N.J.
He was 77 years old.
He died of a stroke, said a funeral home representative.


Work Without Lawyers
Everybody has to deal with legal documents at some time or another.
You may finally get around to making out a will, or want to sell an automobile or hire an employee.
For any of that, and more, you need a lawyer.
Or you could try Legal LetterWorks, a book-disk combination that contains more than 160 legal forms for most straightforward personal and business situations.
You call up the needed form with your word processor, fill in the blanks and edit it to suit.


Science Official Tells M.I.T. of Peril to Ethics
Dr.
Walter E. Massey, the newly appointed director of the National Science Foundation, told graduates of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology yesterday that changes in the size, complexity and cost of modern research had endangered traditional scientific ethics.
Addressing the 1,773 graduates and their 8,000 relatives and guests attending M.I.T.'s 125th commencement, Dr.
Massey said: "Scrupulous attention is especially important now. Growing competition for funds, tenure and acclaim; increasing chances of financial conflicts of interest among researchers; even the scope of intellectual ferment -- with disciplinary boundaries breaking down and new ideas and techniques challenging traditional paradigms -- all these conditions make science and engineering more vulnerable to falsehoods."


Modest Price Rises Posted In Dollar and Gold Trading
The dollar moved moderately higher yesterday on expectations that United States interest rates would remain firm amid signs that the economy is recovering.
Gold prices also posted modest gains.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold picked up $1.60 to close at $363.00 a troy ounce.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $362.00, up 70 cents.


Tax Incentive Plan For United Airlines
United Airlines appears likely to be offered a big tax benefit to build a maintenance plant in Denver.
The Colorado Legislature and the Denver City Council are expected to vote soon on offering the airline the tax incentives, which the Denver Chamber of Commerce valued at between $228 million and $318 million.


Report on Unocal
The Unocal Corporation, a Los Angeles oil and gas company, said it had no comment on a report by Prudential Securities Inc. that said the company might soon release details of further asset sales.
Prudential said it had upgraded its Unocal rating, based partly on the expectation of continued restructuring moves.
Unocal's shares rose 87.5 cents on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, to $26.125.


Chip Pact Set by U.S. And Japan
Negotiators from the United States and Japanese agreed today to extend for at least three years a set of rules covering bilateral trade in computer chips, a participant in the talks and trade experts said.
The new agreement is to be signed Tuesday, if officials in Tokyo approve it tonight.
Approval of the pact is considered almost certain because it results partly from negotiations late last week in Tokyo between a senior Commerce Department official and Japanese officials, some officials said.


Percy Marcus, Executive, 78
Percy Marcus, a New York trucking industry executive, died on Sunday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 78 years old and lived in Miami Beach and Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
He died of cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Sailor Files Lawsuits in Blast on Battleship
A former sailor has filed lawsuits against the Navy and NBC News for reports about the 1989 explosion on the battleship Iowa that killed 47 seamen, his lawyer said today.
The lawyer, Kreig Brusnahan of Cleveland, said in a telephone interview that he filed a $10 million claim against the Navy and a suit for more than $50,000 against NBC on behalf of Kendall L. Truitt, a former Petty Officer 2d Class.


Hewlett Prices Cut
The Hewlett-Packard Company cut the American prices on its Vectra personal computers by up to 10 percent and on its mass-storage products by up to 33 percent.
The company also said it had reduced the American price of the Scanjet Plus Scanner to $995, from $1,595.
Hewlett said the reductions were possible because of a drop in the cost of the machines' components.


Oil Rig Count Down
The number of working oil and gas rigs in the United States dropped by 22 this week, to 824, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
The rig count in Texas dropped by 17, and several other leading oil-producing states posted modest declines, the Houston-based company said.
A year ago this week, the count stood at 983.
Last week, 28 rigs were added to the national count for a total of 846.
The count represents the number of rigs actively exploring for petroleum and natural gas, not those producing oil and gas.
Of the 824 rigs working this week, 435 were exploring for oil, 352 were looking for gas and 37 were listed as miscellaneous.
Texas lost 17 rigs, followed by Kansas, which showed a five-rig drop, and Calfornia, which was down by three.


Appeals Court Orders Return of Suspect in Evers Slaying
Byron de la Beckwith must be returned to Mississippi to stand trial a third time in the 1963 slaying of the civil rights leader Medgar Evers, the Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals ruled today.
Mr.
Evers, a field secretary with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, was shot to death outside his home in Jackson, Miss.
Both of Mr.
Beckwith's earlier trials ended in hung juries.
Charges were dropped in 1969, and he moved to Tennessee.
Mr.
Beckwith, 70 years old, was indicted again last fall, and he has been held in Chattanooga, Tenn., without bond since Dec. 31.


3-Pointer Redirects Lakers' Spotlight
The time appears ripe for Magic Johnson &amp; Friends to extend to Sam Perkins membership in the exclusive games of H-O-R-S-E that precede most Los Angeles Lakers' practices.
The principal players in the low-budget long-distance shooting contest are Johnson, Byron Scott, the club's best outside shooter, and Coach Mike Dunleavy, who earned his H-O-R-S-E reputation in gymnasiums and playgrounds of Brooklyn.
"After the shot Sam hit Sunday, he well may want in," a smiling Johnson said of Perkins after today's Laker practice at Chicago Stadium.
"And we might want him."


Panel to Urge U.S. to Make Huge Investment in Children
A bipartisan Federal advisory panel is planning this month to call for a huge new investment in children, including a Federal tax credit of $1,000 for each child in the United States.
But Republican members of the panel will dissent from its call for a sweeping new program of "universal health insurance for children and pregnant women."


On My Mind; The Soviet Solution
Look at these people -- politicians, economists, diplomats and journalists in the West.
See how hard they work, to ignore the one overriding need of the people of the Soviet Union: the need for a brand new government.
Everywhere else that Communism has collapsed, the West has understood that the first thing the people wanted, and the starting point for any hope of real change, was to get rid of the collection of bureaucrats, policemen, wardens and propagandists that made up the failed, hated government -- particularly the Communist political leaders who had perched for so many brutal years atop the whole corrupt apparatus.


BRIEFS
*
Carolina Power and Light Co., Raleigh, N.C., said the Nuclear Regulatory Commission had said it would likely be fined $87,500 for three violations at the Brunswick Steam Electric Plant near Southport, N.C.
The company has 30 days to pay the penalty or appeal. *
Georgia-Pacific Corp., Atlanta, sold 49,000 acres of timberland in Washington state to Trillium Corp. for about $48 million.


From Washington Heights to Pros
Manny Ramirez, the baseball hope of Washington Heights, was selected yesterday by the Cleveland Indians in the first round of the amateur draft.
Ramirez, the star third baseman for George Washington High School in upper Manhattan, was the 13th player drafted over all.
"I have never seen a high school kid who can swing a bat like that," said Joe DeLucca, the area scouting supervisor for the Indians, who has been in the business 30 years.
"We think he's probably the best hitter in the draft. And he's a nice kid."


Oracle in Venture With Japanese
The Oracle Systems Corporation, a software company that has been experiencing financial management difficulties, said it would receive $200 million in long-term financing from the Nippon Steel Corporation as part of a new venture.


Police Release Sketch In Screwdriver Attacks
A composite sketch of a suspect wanted in a series of screwdriver attacks on women as they left IRT subway stations in Greenwich Village and SoHo was released yesterday by the police.
The suspect was described as a heavyset black man about 25 years old, 5 feet 10 inches tall and weighing about 225 pounds.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on May 27 titled "Two Major Coffee Producers," about the exports of Brazil and Colombia, misstated the unit of measurement and incorrectly labeled the scale.
The chart showed the countries' exports in billions of pounds, not trillions, and the scale should have been labeled from 0.0 to 3.0 billion, not from 0 to 30 trillion.
In addition, the article misstated Brazil's 1990 coffee exports.
Brazil sold 16.6 million 60- kilo bags (each equaling 132 pounds), not 16.9 million.


Hartford Foe Of New Tax On Income Now Backs It
The majority leader in the State Senate, who only four days ago stood before his colleagues to nail down why Connecticut should reject an income tax, proposed a steep wage tax of his own today.
The leader, Senator Cornelius O'Leary, Democrat of Windsor Locks, said the reality of the state budget crisis was permanently altered when Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. vetoed the legislature's plan without an income tax on Friday night.
The sooner lawmakers start accommodating themselves the better, he said.


Chip Technology's Friendly Rivals
It is one of the computer industry's nastiest rivalries, fraught with name-calling and accusations.
The winners could well make the chip that will come to dominate the business.
On one side stands a group of companies led by MIPS Computer Inc. and inspired by John L. Hennessy, a computer scientist at Stanford.
On the other side, a band of companies, led by Sun Microsystems Inc., that follow David A. Patterson, a computer scientist at Berkeley.
Each group has its own chip, and each denounces the rival design as inadequate.


Critic's Notebook; Spoleto: Family Feud Or Haute Finance? (Or a Bit of Both?)
Scenario No. 1: Father Knows Best.
Gian Carlo Menotti discovers that teen-age children are a pain in the neck.
Conceived 15 years ago, nursed through childhood frailty, taught culture on his father's knee, made to grow strong and tall, Mr.
Menotti's offspring, Spoleto, (middle names: "Festival U.S.A., Inc.") starts to wriggle under the parental hand.
Thanks, Dad, says young Spoleto.
You taught me a lot, and your name is going to be a big help.
But I think I'll go off on my own for a while.
Like hell, says Dad, you're still mine.


Rifle Group Fights Public Housing Gun Ban
The National Rifle Association is challenging local public housing officials over a policy barring residents from keeping guns.
The Chicago Housing Authority's gun ban has been on the books for 20 years but was not enforced until 1989.


Q&amp;A
Strong Perfume
Q.
Why do some perfumes smell stronger and last longer than others?


The U.N. Today
Economic and Social Council
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, GOVERNING COUNCIL -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, GOVERNING COUNCIL, BUDGETARY AND FINANCE COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, STANDING COMMITTEE FOR PROGRAM MATTERS -- 3 P.M.


Beijing University Students Mark the 1989 Crackdown
In a bold protest against China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, students at Beijing University early this morning smashed nearly 100 glass bottles to mark the second anniversary of the military crackdown here on the democracy movement.
Shortly after midnight, students began clapping, cheering and throwing bottles outside three graduate dormitories where policemen were patrolling, a witness said.
In Chinese, "xiao ping," meaning "little bottle," is a homonym for Mr.
Deng's given name, and protesters often express their feelings about Mr.
Deng by shattering bottles.


Beyond X-Rays
It may eventually be possible to use ordinary light rather than harmful X-rays to obtain images of bones and organs within living beings, several groups of scientists have reported.
In reports published by the British journal Nature last week and presented at a recent conference on lasers and optics, physicists showed that the faint light that penetrates animal tissue can reveal underlying details, if it is carefully controlled.


Roche in European Deal For Sara Lee Drug Line
The Sara Lee Corporation said yesterday that it had sold its European antacid and pain reliever business to Roche Holding, the Swiss pharmaceutical giant, for $821 million, a rich price that surprised some analysts.
The buyer, formerly F. Hoffman-La Roche &amp; Company, the world's 12th-largest drug company, is based in Basel, Switzerland.
The businesses Sara Lee sold, known as the Nicholas non-prescription line, involve several European and Australian cough, stomach and headache remedies, the largest of which are Rennie, an antacid, and Aspro, a pain reliever.


Urban Ill: Trauma Disorder In Adults
A Study of 1,007 young adults has found surprisingly high levels of post-traumatic stress disorder.
The findings suggest the disorder may be one of the most common psychiatric illnesses among young adults in cities, the researchers said.
The study, by scientists from the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor and Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit, involved 1,007 adults between the ages of 21 and 30 who were seeking medical attention at a health maintenance organization in Detroit.
About 40 percent of the participants reported such experiences and 9 percent had developed the disorder.


New Steps to Limit Building on Beaches
Legislation that could sharply restrict development along the nation's shoreline has been passed by the House of Representatives and is believed to have a good chance of passage in the Senate.
The measure comprises amendments to the Federal Flood Insurance Program.
The program covers hundreds of thousands of buildings along seacoasts and riverbanks, but the changes are expected to have the most impact on seacoast properties.
The changes would restrict insurance coverage to reflect the fact that coastal property is threatened not just by sporadic flooding but also by long-term erosion.


More Babies Being Born to Be Donors of Tissue
At about 8 o'clock this morning, doctors at the City of Hope Medical Center in Duarte, Calif., plan to transplant bone marrow into Anissa Ayala, a 19-year-old girl who is dying of leukemia.
The marrow will come from her baby sister, Marissa.
Their parents say they conceived Marissa to provide bone marrow to save Anissa's life.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about Kuwaitis accused of collaborating with Iraq referred incorrectly to the status of the trials.
They were not interrupted for two weeks.
Further developments are reported today on this page.


New Tool to Assure Ideal Screen Display
Displaymate is a remarkable new utility program for I.B.M.
PC's and compatibles that can help a computer user select the best monitor for the money, adjust it for optimum performance and identify any problems that can lead to eye strain, loss of productivity or costly repairs.
People who use a personal computer at work typically spend between 200 and 2,000 hours a year staring at the screen.
It is curious that many of these intensive computer users rarely give a conscious thought to the computer display that is staring them in the face all day, even though they may agonize over choosing just the right microprocessor, the optimum memory configuration, the fastest disk drives and other facets of the system they will never see.


Strawberry Set to Play In a Weekend Series
After a Magnetic Resonance Imaging examination on Sunday night showed no major damage to the left shoulder of DARRYL STRAWBERRY, the Los Angeles Dodgers announced yesterday that the former Mets right fielder would probably return to action in a four-game series beginning Friday against the Cubs in Chicago.
Dr.
FRANK JOBE, who performed the examination, said the shoulder had been very sore since Strawberry crashed into the right-field fence at Dodger Stadium on May 15. . . .
KEVIN MITCHELL of the San Francisco Giants, another former Met outfielder, was placed on the 15-day disabled list yesterday and is scheduled for orthoscopic surgery on his left knee today.
He has been bothered by a strained knee ligament since May 21. . . .
Pitcher KEN HOWELL, still bothered by pain in his repaired shoulder, will go home for 10 days of rest, the Philadelphia Phillies said.
The right-hander, who has been on a rehabilitation program since surgery on his pitching shoulder in March, had been expected to travel to Atlanta with the team, but was sent home instead.
Also going home yesterday was Oakland catcher TERRY STEINBACH, who was discharged from a hospital in Chicago, two days after being beaned by White Sox pitcher BOBBY THIGPEN.
Manager TONY LA RUSSA said Steinbach still felt uncomfortable and would be held out for a few days. (AP)


Yankees' Pitching Is Strictly Guesswork
The Yankees are not sure who is pitching for them tomorrow.
Or Friday.
Or Saturday.
They are pretty certain about Thursday, which is an off day.
The club had won 8 of 10 games before opposing Toronto last night, but the starting rotation has become as confusing as trying to figure out Pascual Perez.


Construction Spending Up 0.8% in April
Spending on new construction projects rose eight-tenths of a percent in April from March, the largest gain in 14 months, the Commerce Department said today.
Analysts said the strong rise was a sign that some parts of the building industry might be climbing out of the economic doldrums.


India Papers Pick Top Editor Who Backs Pro-Hindu Party
India's largest English-language newspaper chain, The Indian Express, has picked a new editor who is regarded as sympathetic to the militantly pro-Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party, which is bidding for power in the Indian general elections.
Last week, the chain, whose nine dailies have a combined circulation of more than 1.4 million copies, announced that Prabhu Chawla, an editor at a centrist political magazine, would run the editorial sections of the papers as executive editor.
The chain's owner, Ramnath Goenka, has backed the Bharatiya Janata Party for years.


Sides Swap Barbs and Count Votes on Rights Bill
Civil rights groups and the Bush Administration traded increasingly hostile attacks today on the eve of House action on civil rights legislation intended to make it easier for victims of job discrimination to sue and collect damages.
John E. Jacob, president of the National Urban League, said the Administration's argument that the bill would lead employers to use quotas showed that "cynical political leaders are trying to turn a civil rights issue into a political issue that plays on irrational fears and latent racism."


Shakespeare Is Given an Outing in Washington
"I know Ella Fitzgerald can fill this house; we'll see if Shakespeare can," said Michael Kahn, looking out over 4,000 empty seats in the Carter Barron Amphitheater in the capital's lush Rock Creek Park.
It was the second day of rehearsals under a punishing sun for members of the Shakespeare Theater at the Folger, who will be performing "The Merry Wives of Windsor" in the park for two weeks of free performances starting on Tuesday.
Mr.
Kahn, the company's artistic director, wore a pink baseball cap and umbrella, while Paul Winfield, who plays Sir John Falstaff, was dressed for comfort in polka-dot Bermuda shorts.


Now, Kuwaiti Battle Is in Consumer Market
Undaunted by expensive rooms with cold showers, sales representatives from more than 100 American companies are packing the battle-scarred Kuwait International Hotel for an export bazaar where everything from Scotch tape to armored cars is on display.
Although the image of business opportunities in Kuwait is one of ravaged oilfields and burnt out buildings, for many companies the real opportunities are in the consumer sector, according to American government and business people involved in the show.


James Brindle, 83, Health Insurance Plan Leader
James Brindle, an advocate of prepaid medical group practice and health maintenance organizations, died on Thursday in Burlington County Hospital in Mount Holly, N.J.
He was 83 years old and lived in Medford, N.J.
He died of heart failure, his son, David, said.


Fewer Companies Halting Dividends
THE number of companies omitting dividends has fallen to its lowest level in more than a year, perhaps providing another indication that the economy is beginning to recover.
"We're seeing clear signs of a turn," said Arnold Kaufman, the editor of Standard &amp; Poor's Outlook newsletter, which compiled the figures.
"This is consistent with the bottoming of the economy that everybody is talking about. It is still in recession, but showing signs of a turn in the not-too-distant future."


Steinbrenner Lawsuit Gets the Thumb
George Steinbrenner suffered another legal setback yesterday in his ongoing effort to reverse his ouster as the Yankees' managing partner.
Judge Robert W. Sweet of United States District Court in Manhattan dismissed Steinbrenner's lawsuit against a court stenographic firm that, the owner contended, altered transcripts of depositions taken during the investigation of him last year by Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent.


CHRONICLE
RICHARD PRYOR, the actor and comedian, was released from the University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center yesterday after undergoing a triple heart bypass operation last Wednesday.
The surgery was performed after Mr.
Pryor complained of chest pains earlier in the week.


At a Kurd Homecoming: Never Again
After two months in a refugee camp in Turkey, Mustafa and his brother Emad are back at their split-level home here, enjoying family life and tending the prize roses that enclose their well-tended front lawn.
They welcomed an American visitor to lunch today, and spoke for several hours of their ordeal and their determination never to flee again.
But as Kurds in Iraq, they cannot be fully free of fear, and to protect themselves against reprisals from agents of President Saddam Hussein they asked that their family name not be published.


Ban on Abortion Funds Stands
The High Court refused to hear a challenge to abortion-related limits on Federal family planning grants to overseas organizations.
Page B8.


3 Reported Killed as Crowd Storms Party Office in Iraq
At least three people were killed and several others injured when demonstrators stormed an office of President Saddam Hussein's Baath Party in the American-occupied town of Dohuk on Sunday night, witnesses said today.
No American or allied soldiers were believed to have been present when violence broke out on Sunday.


Bridge
One of the two major team finals played on Sunday at the Gotham Club in Manhattan was one-sided, but the other was a cliffhanger.
At the end of the day the Grand National Team title was won by a margin of 4 imps.
The winners were Bob Jones, Auburndale, Queens, Rick Zucker, North Tarrytown, N.Y., Jim Krekorian and Bjorn Fallenius, both Manhattan, who advance to national playoffs in Las Vegas in July.
The losers were R. Jay Becker, Ira Herman, Greg Woods, John Rengstorff, Glenn Milgrim, all Manhattan, and Jared Lilienstein, Flushing, Queens.


3 I.R.A. Guerrillas Are Killed By British Troops in Ulster
British commandos killed three Irish Republican Army guerrillas today, firing on their car as the guerrillas prepared to ambush Protestant workers, the police, witnesses and news reports said.
The commandos fired up to 200 bullets into the guerrillas' stolen vehicle.
It burst into flame, burning the men beyond recognition, the police said.


Striking Gold and Fear in S. Carolina
People laughed a decade ago when geologists started poking holes in the pine forest at the edges of the South Carolina Piedmont looking for gold.
But they stopped laughing when mining companies started buying up huge chunks of land, when a mining giant began gouging out cavernous pits for one of the nation's largest gold-processing operations, and when South Carolina suddenly became the only non-Western state among the 10 largest gold producers.


Does Israel Want Dialogue or to Dictate?; Uses of a Conference
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb's May 15 column "A Thunderclap . . ." is a welcome addition to the discussion of peace in the Arab-Israel-Palestine theater.
Why indeed should legitimate world interests be held hostage to either Arab or Israeli intransigence?
If the United States and Soviet Union (or the United Nations Security Council, to generalize a bit) can agree that the international interests in peace and justice demand a well-attended conference, then let it be.
Mr.
Gelb does not, however, go far enough.
If peace or justice is to be achieved (and, despite his magnificent leap forward, Mr. Gelb is still trapped in the curious United States mind-set that excludes any consideration of justice), international force will be needed not only to secure attendance at the conference but to secure an acceptable result as well.


Eva Le Gallienne, Actress, Is Dead at 92
Eva Le Gallienne, who as an actress, producer, director, translator, writer and teacher was for many decades one of the grand figures of the American stage, died late Monday night at her home in Weston, Conn.
She was 92 years old.
The cause of death was heart failure, said a friend, Anne Kaufman Schneider.


Beyond 'Yuck' for Girls in Science
Some call it the "eek and yuck factor," the aversion many schoolgirls have to science, especially the biological and mechanical varieties that dirty their hands with things like formaldehyde or axle grease.
But for many girls, once they are encouraged to move beyond their initial resistance, science becomes fascinating.
For that to happen, girls need more opportunities and more adult support in exploring science, technology and mathematics, according to a study to be made public today by Girls Inc., a national youth service organization formerly known as Girls Clubs of America.


Judges in Turner Award Dispute Merits of Novel Given a $500,000 Prize
A dispute broke out yesterday among the judges of the Turner Tomorrow Award over whether the first-place winner, a novel by Daniel Quinn titled "Ishmael," was worth the $500,000 top prize.
The futuristic novel is about philosophical discussions between a man and a great ape.
"It was the best of the 12 manuscripts we were asked to judge," said William Styron, the novelist, "but we didn't feel it was worth anything remotely like $500,000."


Striking Gold and Fear in S. Carolina
People laughed a decade ago when geologists started poking holes in the pine forest at the edges of the South Carolina Piedmont looking for gold.
But they stopped laughing when mining companies started buying up huge chunks of land, when a mining giant began gouging out cavernous pits for one of the nation's largest gold-processing operations, and when South Carolina suddenly became the only non-Western state among the 10 largest gold producers.


Industrial Nations Agree To Push for Trade Accord
The industrial world's finance and trade ministers have resolved to give stalled trade talks a big push forward this summer as they agreed today to try to complete the four-and-a-half-year round of negotiations late this year.
At the annual meeting of ministers of the 24-nation Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, American, European and Japanese officials said they would seek to make substantial progress this summer in narrowing differences in numerous trade areas, including financial services and subsidies to farmers.


Bavaro Not Back in Giant Picture Just Yet
Coach Ray Handley, wrapping up the Giants' rookie mini-camp today, said he was not counting on veteran tight end Mark Bavaro for this season.
Bavaro is recuperating from bone-graft surgery performed on his left knee three months ago.
"I would never count him out," Handley said.
"But I don't think it would be very intelligent on my part to count him in."


Gandhi's Killing Becomes the Stuff of Politics
The assassination of Rajiv Gandhi turned into an emotional political issue today as lawmakers charged the Government with "criminal negligence," a "whitewash" and serious security lapses in the protection of the former Prime Minister.
After a period of shock and national mourning, the first public debate in Parliament on Mr.
Gandhi's security was marked by screaming, raised fists and accusations that the political leader's security was "comical" when he visited southern India and was killed in a bomb explosion less than two weeks ago.
Seventeen people died when an unidentified woman, apparently carrying a plastic explosive loaded with pellets around her waist, bowed before Mr.
Gandhi and detonated the bomb.


Britain Plans to Cut Its Army by One-Fifth
Defense Secretary Tom King announced today that the British army would be cut by more than one-fifth, to 116,000 soldiers by the mid-1990's.
He told Parliament the cuts were in line with estimates in a cost-saving defense review made public last year.


The Media Business; Newsletter on Congress
National Journal Inc., a unit of the Times Mirror Corporation, began publishing a daily newsletter this week covering Congress.
The newsletter, to cost $1,197 a year, is being transmitted by facsimile machine to 500 trial subscribers.


Ritalin Is Safe for Hyperactive Children
To the Editor:
As a child psychiatrist involved in research financed by the National Institute of Mental Health at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons, I found Dr.
Carl L. Kline's May 22 letter about the dangers of the drug Ritalin misleading, incorrect, vague and upsetting to families whose children have severe behavior problems.
Dr.
Kline suggests Ritalin is unsafe for children.
Contrary to his viewpoint, I believe that Ritalin's safety, relatively low cost and high effectiveness have allowed this medication to become the most frequently prescribed psychoactive medication for children in the United States.
Surveys of practicing doctors show that Ritalin prescriptions account for between 95 percent and 99 percent of psychoactive medications given to children.
It is estimated that 250,000 to 300,000 American children take Ritalin daily.
This level of use suggests that Ritalin is an unusually safe medication.


Company News; Upjohn to Pay $600,000 Fine
The Upjohn Company will pay a record $600,000 fine and change the way it markets drugs after allegations that the pharmaceutical giant kept poor records of samples given to physicians, Federal prosecutors said today.
Riley J. Atkins, an assistant United States attorney, said the settlement would be the largest ever collected under the 1971 Federal Controlled Substances Act.
He said investigators from the Drug Enforcement Administration had documented record-keeping problems involving samples of the drugs Xanax and Halcion in Oregon, Florida, Ohio, Michigan and Puerto Rico.


Girl Scouts to Keep Main Office in New York
The Girl Scouts have decided to keep their headquarters in New York City, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday.
He said that the scouts had been considering a move to Baltimore, St.
Louis, Atlanta or Cleveland, but that a coalition of government and private agencies formed by Deputy Mayor Sally Hernandez-Pinero persuaded them to stay, keeping 400 jobs in the city.


Raphael L. Gould, Bookseller, 71
Raphael L. Gould, longtime director of the American Library Service, an out-of-print and rare book concern, died on Thursday in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 71 years old.
He died after a series of strokes, his family said.


Businessland Endorses Takeover for $54 Million
Businessland Inc., once the mightiest computer retailer in the nation but now on the brink of bankruptcy, agreed today to be sold to a New York company that installs heating, ventilation and electrical systems.
The buyer, JWP Inc. of Purchase, N.Y., began as a water utility serving Queens and entered the computer business only in 1988.
The acquisition of Businessland, for $54 million plus assumed debts, promises to catapult the company into one of the nation's largest retailers of personal computers.


'The Ultimate Capitalist': Robert Schwarz Strauss
After he graduated from the University of Texas Law School in 1941, Robert S. Strauss took a job as an F.B.I. agent "watching out for Communists," as he puts it.
"I would catch a spy nearly every other day," he jokingly recalled today about his F.B.I. postings in Washington, Ohio, Iowa and Texas.
"I would come home at night and my wife, Helen, would say, 'Did you catch any spies today, dear?' "


CABINET RESIGNS IN ALBANIA STRIKE
Bowing to the pressure of a general strike and renewed street demonstrations, the Communist Cabinet of Albania resigned today.
The departing Prime Minister, Fatos Nano, said a nonpartisan caretaker cabinet would be appointed to prepare for new elections.
The leader of the opposition Democratic Party, Sali Berisha, hailed the action as "a very important step toward real democracy."


Blue Jays' Carter Enjoying A Rare View From the Top
Joe Carter is happy to be back in the American League.
He is happier about playing for Toronto.
He would be even happier if the Blue Jays remained in contention for the rest of the year.
He would be happiest if they finished first.
It is not difficult to figure out why his priorities are listed in that order.
The 31-year-old Carter labored six years in Cleveland and the team never climbed above fifth place.
He was traded to San Diego last year and the Padres finished tied for fourth.


Sports People: PRO BASKETBALL; Holzman Joins Knicks
Don't take it as a knock on the Knicks' new coach, PAT RILEY , but when you're trying to transform a lackluster team into a true contender, even the most accomplished coach could use some high-level help.
If so, Riley is going to get it.
The Knicks announced yesterday that they had hired as "basketball consultant," one WILLIAM (RED) HOLZMAN , the very man who led the Knicks to their only two N.B.A. championships, in 1970 and 1973.
With Riley still working in the NBC broadcast booth, the 70-year-old Holzman, who stepped down in 1982 after 14 seasons as the Knicks' coach, will begin his consultancy next week at the N.B.A. pre-draft camp in Chicago.


Tape Shows Nixon Feared Hoover
Richard M. Nixon chose in 1971 not to remove J. Edgar Hoover as head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in part because he feared that Mr.
Hoover would "bring down the temple" by releasing damaging information about him, according to newly released transcripts of the former President's White House tape-recorded conversations.
The transcripts, made public today by the National Archives, show that Mr.
Nixon based that judgment on an unflattering psychological profile of Mr.
Hoover that had been prepared by G. Gordon Liddy, a former F.B.I. agent who was then on the White House staff.


Pope John Paul Assails 'Free Love' in Poland
Pope John Paul II took his moral crusade to Poland's rural heartland today, assailing legislatures that permit abortion and inveighing against "debauchery" and "free love."
Sharpening his criticism of Poland's Parliament, which declined to approve a church-sponsored ban on abortion two weeks before his arrival, the Pope compared abortion to the Nazi death camps on Polish soil where millions of Jews, gypsies and Poles were put to death during World War II.


Kenneth A. Roe, 75, Engineer and Chief Of Consulting Firm
Kenneth Andrew Roe, a mechanical engineer and chairman of Burns &amp; Roe Enterprises, a New Jersey-based engineering and consulting firm, died on Monday at Broward County Medical Center in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 75 years old and had homes in Palm Beach, Fla., Greenwich, Conn., and Nantucket, Mass.
He died of heart failure, a family spokeswoman said.


Mattingly Returns With a Bang and Yankees Win


Mystery of Bermuda Triangle Remains One
Just as the skeptics were about to claim a logical explanation, the legend of the Bermuda Triangle today was declared to be alive and well and vexing off the coast of South Florida.
The undersea explorers who announced last month that they might have discovered five Navy planes that vanished mysteriously in 1945, laying a foundation for the myth of a craft-swallowing Caribbean twilight zone, said that on closer inspection, the planes they found turned out not to be those of the fabled "Flight 19."


Weather and Soviet Aid Lag Are Factors in Soybean Drop
Soybean futures prices fell moderately yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade, reflecting favorable crop weather and disappointment over the lack of a Soviet food aid package.
Soybean futures settled 4 1/2 cents to 7 1/2 cents lower with the contract for delivery in July at $5.79 1/4 a bushel.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Airgas Inc., Radnor, Pa., an industrial gas concern, acquired certain gas operations in New Orleans and Mobile, Ala., from a unit of Union Carbide Corp., Danbury, Conn.
Terms were not disclosed.  *
Conoco Inc., Houston, a unit of DuPont Co., will sell its 11 percent stake in the North Sea's Caister field to its other owners.
The price was not disclosed.


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALLNational Basketball League NEW YORK KNICKS -- Named Red Holzman consultant.United States Basketball League LONG ISLAND SURF -- Signed Carl Davis, center; Herman Alston, guard; and Curtis Middleton, forward.FOOTBALLNational Football League KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Patrick Allen, cornerback, and Michael Harris, guard.Arena Football League COLUMBUS THUNDERBOLTS -- Signed Darryl Gard, wide receiver-defensive back.
Waived Gerald Harris, wide receiver-defensive back.
DETROIT DRIVE -- Signed Dwayne Dixon, wide receiver-defensive back.
Placed Larry Hargrove, wide receiver-defensive back, on injured reserve.Canadian Football League BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Howard Huckaby, wide receiver, and Jon Volpe, running back.
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Signed Pat Mahon, offensive lineman; Jeff Jackson, linebacker; Bryan Keys, running back; and Jason Garrett, quarterback.HOCKEYNational Hockey League BOSTON BRUINS -- Named Rick Bowness coach.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Announced that Al Arbour, coach, will return for the 1991-92 season.


Wives of Prison Guards Protest in Wake of Hostage-Taking


No Manslaughter Charge for Suspect in Baby's Death
The driver accused of dragging an 18-month-old boy to his death at an East Harlem intersection was not charged yesterday with the most serious offense he might have faced, vehicular manslaughter.
Instead the suspect, 46-year-old Pablo Linares, was accused of leaving the scene of an accident, a less serious felony, and driving without a license, a misdemeanor.
He was ordered held on $15,000 bail at an arraignment in Criminal Court.


Gorbachev's Pitch May Be Biggest Yet
When President Mikhail S. Gorbachev won the Nobel Peace Prize last October, a Soviet Government spokesman, Gennadi I. Gerasimov, joked that he wouldn't have stood a chance to win the prize for economics, with the Soviet economy in such bad shape.
The economy will be in no better condition on Wednesday, when Mr.
Gorbachev belatedly makes his Nobel acceptance speech in Oslo.
The speech may be his strongest pitch yet for large-scale, permanent Western assistance to the Soviet Union's economy, based on a new restructuring plan endorsed by 9 of its 15 republics.


14-Year-Old Boy With AIDS Plans to Wed Neighbor, 16
The parents of three hemophiliac boys infected with the AIDS virus say one of them, 14 years old, is engaged to marry a 16-year-old neighbor.
The boy, Ricky Ray, plans to marry Wenonah Lindberg on Dec. 13 with the blessing of both sets of parents, Ricky's mother, Louise Ray, told The Sarasota Herald-Tribune.


About New York
"Good afternoon, family," said the leader.
"Good afternoon," three dozen men and women answered in unison.
The leader took a deep breath, then said what needed to be said: a much-liked counselor named Belinda had been found to have cocaine in her urine and was dismissed.


Cuomo Says Legislature's Budget Is Not Balanced, and Plans Vetoes
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that the budget passed by the Legislature early this morning was not balanced and that he would trim spending by vetoing parts of it by Friday.
Mr.
Cuomo's announcement, delivered at an Albany news conference full of strong oratory, suggested a new phase in the long and tortuous process of producing this year's budget.


Comptroller Did Not Violate Ethics Rule, Treasury Says
The Treasury Department said today that Robert L. Clarke, the Comptroller of the Currency, did not violate any Government ethics rules by investing in stocks and high-yield bonds and also borrowing money from a bank that later came under the jurisdiction of his office.
A report by Jeanne S. Archibald, the general counsel of the Treasury Department, found that Mr.
Clarke's investments "may give rise to an appearance of a conflict" of interest but that Mr.
Clarke had taken appropriate steps to avoid such an appearance by deciding last month to put his holdings in a blind trust.
The report added that Mr.
Clarke had properly disclosed his investments when they were made.


Parade and Fireworks
The ticker-tape parade welcoming home veterans of the war in the Persian Gulf and honoring all veterans will take place Monday.
It will begin at 11:30 A.M. in Battery Park and go north along Broadway to Worth Street.
More than 24,000 are expected to march.
Organizers expect it to last unitl 4 P.M.
Beginning at 9:30 P.M., there will be a fireworks display over the East River in the South Street Seaport area.


Businessland Endorses Takeover for $54 Million
Businessland Inc., once the mightiest computer retailer in the nation but now on the brink of bankruptcy, agreed today to be sold to a New York company that installs heating, ventilation and electrical systems.
The buyer, JWP Inc. of Purchase, N.Y., began as a water utility serving Queens and entered the computer business only in 1988.
The acquisition of Businessland, for $54 million plus assumed debts, promises to catapult the company into one of the nation's largest retailers of personal computers.


Company News; Go Grants License
The Go Corporation, which recently introduced the first operating system software for pen-based computers, said it had licensed its prototype hardware design to Phoenix Technologies Ltd., of Norwood, Mass.
Phoenix will modify the design to be compatible with Go's operating system, Penpoint, and the Microsoft Corporation's competing product, Pen Windows.
Phoenix will sell the design to computer hardware manufacturers to incorporate in their products a part of GO's Penpoint system, the Intel Corporation's 386SL microprocessor and Phoenix's BIOS, or basic input output operating system.


Man Sets Himself on Fire
A man poured gasoline on himself and set himself ablaze today in front of the Alamo, fire officials said.
The man suffered burns over 80 percent of his body but survived.
Sal Gomez, a tourist from New Mexico, videotaped the incident, believing it was a stunt.
"He just kept walking around in flames," Mr.
Gomez said.
"Finally some kids jumped in and got him on the ground." Fire Lieut.
Tom Woytasczyk, said: "He was probably a religious fanatic. He said he baptized himself with fire."


Business Technology; Satellite System Helps Trucks Stay in Touch
Until recently, some trucking companies used index cards to keep track of drivers and shipments.
Between the times a trucker called in, he was virtually unreachable, his whereabouts at best a guess.
Now, more and more companies have found a way to stay in constant touch with their drivers, and check their locations automatically.
About 15,000 trucks are linked to their headquarters through a communications system that bounces signals from a satellite.
Industry experts expect the network to eventually include 300,000 trucks.


Stocks Fell in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices declined today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was off 267.29 points, or 1.05 percent, to 25,289.57.


School Districts Reeling In Weakened Economy
After years of stretching meager budgets, the Central Falls School Department this school year pinched the last penny it could.
The district, chronically poor because of a limited tax base, had trimmed expenses by using textbooks so long they were falling apart, by turning basements into classrooms and by purchasing $300 used cars.


Founder of Brokerage To Shift His Focus
Randall D. Smith Jr., one of the best-known traders of securities of troubled companies, is reorganizing the brokerage firm he founded so that he can focus on his own investments, the firm announced yesterday.
Mr.
Smith did not return a phone call yesterday to his home in Short Hills, N.J., and calls to his downtown New York office were referred to his brother Jeffrey A. Smith, who also did not return them.


Breaking New Ground And Finding the Grotesque
At least in the abstract, E. Elias Merhige's wordless black-and-white film "Begotten" is an imposing work.
Mr.
Merhige, who is a painter and performance artist (and the founder of Theater of Material, members of which appear in the film), means to re-envision primitive myths in visceral, monstrously immediate terms.
He cites as influences Bosch, Goya, Munk, Eisenstein and Bunuel, among others.
He has employed such painstaking cinematographic processes in making "Begotten" that 10 hours' work have gone into rephotographing each minute of film.
"Whatever happened to Search and Discovery in the arts today?" Mr.
Merhige is quoted (in production notes for his film) as asking.
That's always a good question, but "Begotten" is not the answer that many viewers will have had in mind.


ATTACKS IN ULSTER CLOUD PEACE TALKS
An ambush by British commandos that cut down three Irish guerrillas in a rain of bullets on Monday has inflamed tensions among rival political groups in Northern Ireland and cast deepening shadows over peace talks now under way in Belfast on the future of Ulster.
The attack by an undercover unit of the British Special Air Service commandos, coming two days after an Irish Republican Army bomb killed three Ulster Defense Regiment soldiers, has also reignited a longstanding debate about whether the British are employing "shoot to kill" tactics against suspected terrorists in Northern Ireland.


Drama in Review
Troubadour  Ubu Repertory Theater 15 West 28th Street Through August 3 Directed by D. J. Maloney; music by Bert Draesel; lyrics, John Martin; book by Mr.
Martin and Mr.
Draesel; set, Tom Cariello; lighting, Curt Ostermann; costumes, Daniele Hollywood; production stage manager, Barry Ravitch.
Presented by Beech Knight Productions, in association with the Ubu Repertory Theater.
WITH: Sarah Downs, Steve Gilden, Christopher Howatt and William R. Park.


Results Plus
GOLF McCumber Among 7 Qualifiers Seven players on the PGA Tour joined three professionals from the metropolitan area and five others from various parts of the country in qualifying yesterday at the Canoe Brook Country Club in Summit, N.J., for the 91st United States Open next week at Hazeltine in Minnesota.
Mark McCumber and Tom Purtzer were among the leading qualifiers with a total of four-under 140 for 36 holes on Canoe Brook's North and South courses.
Darrell Kestner of Deepdale, Rick Vershure of Quaker Ridge and Bruce Zabriski of Oyster Bay were the three metropolitan club professionals to make it.
Jim McGovern of Oradell, N.J., a rookie on the PGA Tour, also qualified.
TENNIS Lendl Wins in England Top-seeded Ivan Lendl, returning to action after a hand injury, beat Britain's Jonathan Haycock, 6-2, 6-4, yesterday in the Beckenham grass court tournament in England.
The loss sent No. 8 Fresno State home with a 42-23 record.
Florida (51-20) will meet No. 4 Louisiana State (53-18) in one of today's semifinal games. (AP) Creighton 13, Long Beach St. 4: Steve Hinton's three-run homer capped a nine-run second inning as Creighton eliminated Long Beach State.
The victory sets up a rematch in today's other semifinal between the seventh-seeded Bluejays (51-21) and No. 3 Wichita State (65-12).
The 49ers end their season 45-22. (AP)


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on May 29 about restaurant hot lines and newsletters misidentified the manager of Souen Restaurant in Manhattan.
She is Janet Sala-Tahiraj.


THORNBURGH PLANS TO LEAVE CABINET TO RUN FOR SENATE
President Bush announced today that Attorney General Dick Thornburgh would resign from the Cabinet by the end of July to run for the Senate from Pennsylvania.
The decision, which had been expected, reflects the importance that the White House attaches to retaking a Senate seat long held by Republicans but which shifted to the Democrats after Senator John Heinz was killed in an airplane crash on April 4.


IRAQ'S WAR TOLL ESTIMATED BY U.S.
The Defense Department has estimated that 100,000 Iraqi soldiers were killed and 300,000 wounded during the Persian Gulf war, the first official attempt to fix the Iraqi death toll in what military officials said was a "tentative" exercise based on "limited information."
Responding to a Freedom of Information Act request from the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group, the Defense Intelligence Agency issued a heavily qualified estimate, which was immediately challenged.


CHRONICLE
OSCAR PETERSON, that piano-playing Canadian, is to be the next Chancellor of York University in Toronto for a three-year term beginning July 1.
Mr.
Peterson, 66, has in recent years spent more time composing than performing in public.
An adjunct professor of music at York since 1986, Mr.
Peterson replaces LARRY D. CLARKE , the chairman and chief executive of Spar Aerospace Ltd.


Israeli Air Strikes Kill 7 in Lebanon
Israeli military aircraft mounted large-scale raids yesterday against Palestinian and Lebanese guerrilla bases east of the port city of Sidon, killing 7 people and wounding 36 others, including 12 schoolchildren, the police said.
Israeli radio said the strikes were the most extensive in nine years, with 12 F-4's, A-4's and F-15's dropping bombs and rockets for two hours.
The radio said that all planes returned safely to base. (Associated Press)


Tarkanian Is Expected To Leave After '91-'92
Officials at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas have tentatively accepted an arrangement by which Coach Jerry Tarkanian will resign after the 1991-92 season, said a person with knowledge of deliberations between the coach and the school.
Robert Maxson, the university president, and the University of Nevada Board of Regents accepted the arrangement on Monday during a five-hour closed door personnel session, said the source.


Food Notes
Specializing in Spices
Linda Godlove, a casting director who lives on the Upper West Side, walked into Adriana's Bazaar , a new food shop at 2152 Broadway (75th Street) and asked for Bermuda sherry peppers to season a fish soup.
No problem.
Rochelle Zabarkes, the owner, plucked a bottle of Outerbridge brand off the shelf.
Ms.
Godlove said she had been looking for a place to buy the peppers for years.
Adriana's Bazaar opened in May and specializes in spices and hard-to-find dried, canned and bottled ingredients, mostly for Latin American, Caribbean, Asian and Middle Eastern cuisines.
The store is named after Ms.
Zabarkes's daughter.
You won't find 10 different olive oils on the shelves, although there is a mellow one called Saifan from Lebanon ($6.40 for 20 ounces).
But you will find 10 kinds of soy sauce, six types of harissa sauce from North Africa, fresh lime leaves for Thai cooking, a dozen different whole dried chilies and close to 200 spices.
Prices are reasonable.
For example, a 21-ounce bottle of Silver Swan imported light soy sauce is $2.
A 12-ounce bottle of Kadoya sesame oil is $4.10.
This week there is a 10 percent discount on all purchases.
Ms.
Zabarkes, who was a television producer for 18 years, has wisely seen to it that her stock complements rather than competes with what is available at the nearby Fairway Market and Zabar's.
She also offers copies of recipes that use the ingredients she sells, and will search for ingredients that she does not carry.
A small selection of freshly prepared foods from restaurants including Gaylord, Nusantara, Rosa Mexicano and Soup Kitchen International are available daily after 1 P.M.
Cookware and serving dishes enhance the decor and are for sale.
The shop is open 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Monday to Saturday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. on Sunday.
Credit cards are accepted; (212) 877-5757.Tropical Flavors
Fans of ice cream and other frozen desserts now have more choices than ever.
In the ice-cream department, Goya Foods has introduced ice cream in tropical flavors like coconut, banana chip and mango-vanilla.
There are also vanilla, strawberry and butter pecan.
The ice cream is about $1.99 a pint at Pathmark, Waldbaum and Sloan's supermarkets.
It is also sold in Hispanic grocery stores.
Goya has also introduced ice-cream bars, including one covered in coconut.
At Duane Park Cafe, 157 Duane Street (near Hudson Street) in Manhattan, the pastry chef, John Dudek, is making sorbets in 100 flavors at a rate of about 10 flavors a week.
The sorbets, in such exotic flavors as banana-rum, watermelon-Campari, pomegranate, rose-geranium, honeydew, sour cherry, ginger-lime, spearment-tea and muscat grape, are $5 for a three-scoop serving with cookies, at the bar or with lunch or dinner.
The sorbets are also sold to go, at $4 for eight ounces.
Free Lectures
The Greater New York Dietetic Association is sponsoring a free one-hour lecture, "Dive Into Good Eating," about smart eating strategies in summer.
The lecture will be given by Bess Schaeffer, a registered dietitian and nutritionist, tomorrow at noon and 1 P.M. at the Mid-Manhattan Library, 455 Fifth Avenue (40th Street).
On June 12 at 6 P.M., the lecture will be given by Maureen Ternus, a registered dietitian.
For more information: (212) 889-1801.
Julia Child, Star and Guest
Julia Child is to star in a benefit for the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven.
On June 27 at 7:30 P.M. and on June 28 at 2 P.M., she will give cooking demonstrations at the theater's Newton Schenck stage.
Tickets are $35 each.
On June 26 at 6 P.M., Mrs.
Child will be the guest of honor at a dinner at the theater with the theme of Monet at Giverny, which will also benefit the theater.
Tickets start at $150 each and include a $10 discount for one of the cooking demonstrations.
In addition to benefiting the theater, these events, sponsored by Cook's Bazaar , a cookware store, and Perrier , inaugurate the Connecticut chapter of the American Institute of Wine and Food, a nonprofit educational organization.
To order tickets: (203) 787-4282.
Help for Professionals
The Culinary Institute of America has just come out with "The New Professional Chef" ( Van Nostrand Reinhold , $49.95), the fifth edition of its cookbook.
The last one, called "The Professional Chef," was published in 1974.
Much of what is in the nearly 900 pages of this hefty illustrated tome would be worthwhile for the nonprofessional.
Even the material about food safety, written with professional kitchens in mind, is compelling.
Chapters that cover ingredients, giving descriptions and handling, are encyclopedic, with some of the clearest illustrated instructions in print on how to fillet different fish.
Basic preparations are comprehensive.
All the recipes are written clearly, with ingredients given in both metric measure and in traditional measures of spoons, cups and pounds.
About Green Markets
For a free schedule of the city's green markets and a map showing the locations of those in Manhattan, call the Council on the Environment of New York City, (212) 566-0990.
There are two errors in the schedules: the Inwood market will not open, and the one at Grand Army Plaza in Brooklyn is open all year.
Dangling Cutlery
Culinary chimes would make a lovely summer house gift for someone who likes to cook, or to eat.
Made from old silver-plated flatware, the chimes consist of forks and flattened spoons dangling on plastic thread.
They clink softly in a breeze.
They are $30 plus $3 for shipping.
Donna Haverstock, who sells them through her company, Mother Ocean Notions in Key West, Fla., will also make them to order, using a customer's flatware.
To order: (800) 323-6637.
Credit cards are accepted.
WHAT TO DO, IN A HURRY
IF you have a question about the safe handling of meats, poultry and eggs in summer, you can call the meat and poultry hot line of the Federal Department of Agriculture, (800) 535-4555, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
For questions about seafood, there is the American Seafood Institute's hot line, (800) 328-3474, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Today and tomorrow, from 9:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M., the American Dietetic Association is operating a hot line for men to discuss their nutritional concerns.
In a telephone survey among 506 men conducted for the association in March by RH Bruskin Associates, 82 percent of the respondents said they were concerned about nutrition but only 53 percent said they had made changes in their diets because of it.
The margin of sampling error was plus or minus 4 percentage points.


New U.S.-Japan Chip Pact Approved
United States and Japanese negotiators here initialed a new agreement today on American access to the Japanese market for semiconductor chips, provoking criticism in Congress.
The agreement settled the last big single-industry dispute pending between the countries.
A different team of negotiators reached an agreement on Saturday in Tokyo to expand American access to the Japanese public construction market.


CHRONICLE
Washington got its first look at VIKTOR G. KOMPLEKTOV , the new Soviet Ambassador, on Monday night at a recital of "Peter and the Wolf" held at the Soviet Embassy at a benefit for the Capital Children's Museum.
The narrator was NATALYA SATS , the 88-year-old director of the Moscow Children's Musical Theater, which she founded in the 1930's.
It was she who suggested the idea for the symphonic fairy tale by Prokofiev.
She was the narrator at its premiere in 1936, and she has since narrated it more than 300 times, but never before in Washington.


INSIDE
Communists Out in Albania
Facing a general strike and renewed demonstrations, Albania's Government resigned, ending more than 46 years of Communist rule.
Page A15.
Emergency in Algeria
President Chadli Benjedid of Algeria declared a state of emergency to quell Muslim protests and postponed parliamentary elections.
Page A15.
Le Gallienne Dies at 92
As actress, producer, director, writer and teacher, Eva Le Gallienne was one of the grand ladies of the American stage.
Page B6.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about I.B.M.'s Japanese operations referred incorrectly in some editions to the staff of IBM Japan Ltd.
Its 25,000 employees are almost all Japanese, not American.
But the IBM Asia-Pacific Group, which coordinates all Asian operations from a Tokyo office a few blocks from IBM Japan, is headed by a small group of Americans.


Shedding Pounds
To The Living Section:
It is especially lamentable that Marian Burros, usually our most insightful food commentator, has swallowed, apparently whole, the notion that people with a tendency to put on weight (like me) can shed pounds without cutting the intake of calories  [ Eating Well, May 22 ] .
Ms.
Burros cites a study conducted at Cornell University that demonstrated how lowering the fat content of one's diet can be as effective as reducing the overall quantity of food consumed.
The news is supposed to be that perhaps "genetics is not the culprit."
The flaws in the study are readily apparent.
First, the sample of subjects was random.
While this is usually considered to be an incident of "scientific" methodology, it proves nothing about genetics.
It would have been a far different story if every one of those tested had fat parents and fat grandparents.
Second, most of us who are genetically fat have already cut as much fat as we could have from our diets.
Finally, and most egregiously, the people involved in the experiment did without fat for all of 11 weeks.
Eleven weeks!
Most any fatty I know can go without anything for 11 lousy weeks.
The truth is that as we get older, we continue to need the same amount or more nutrients, but the body actually needs fewer calories.
Thus, if obesity is in the genes, and we want to stay thin, we have to go hungry much of the time.
That's all there is (pacem Ethel Barrymore), there isn't any more.
HARVARD HOLLENBERG  New York, N.Y.


Candy Jernigan, 39, A Multi-Media Artist
Candy Jernigan, a painter, sculptor and set designer, died on Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City.
She was 39 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of liver cancer, said a friend, Jed Wheeler.


Company News; Toshiba Fine Seen
The European Commission is set to fine Toshiba Europe about $2.4 million for illegally controlling sales to keep prices higher, commission officials said.
The European arm of the Toshiba Corporation of Japan had ordered distributors in many countries of the European Community not to sell goods for export to other community states where it was offering the same goods at higher prices, the officials said.
Toshiba ended the sales limits in 1988, after the commission began investigating the case but had been controlling distributors for nearly a decade beforehand, the commission officials said.


Ex-Brokerage Officials Accused of Stock Manipulation
The Securities and Exchange Commission filed civil securities fraud charges yesterday against three former top officials of the defunct brokerage firm Moore &amp; Schley, accusing them of manipulating the prices of two stocks.
The charges, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, were an outgrowth of an investigation into the trading of the Chase Medical Corporation's stock.
The S.E.C. had previously said that shares of the small Florida health-care provider were "cornered" in late 1988 by two Moore &amp; Schley brokers, whose clients had purchased all of the available shares.


For Cone, the Mound Is Safer Than the Dugout
Voices were raised, hands were raised and so when Manager Bud Harrelson's angry, physical dugout confrontation with pitcher David Cone tonight was over, serious questions were raised.
*Is Harrelson, the manager of the Mets, in full control of his team?


Louis Fares, Syrian Journalist, 48
Louis Fares, a Syrian journalist who was a correspondent for The Associated Press in Damascus for 20 years, died of a heart attack today.
He was 48 years old.
Mr.
Fares complained of severe chest pains and then collapsed in his office.
He died as he was being taken to Al-Shami Hospital.


Fence Installed Near Site of Fatal Accident Is Vandalized
A day after New York City's Parks Department installed temporary fencing along railroad tracks in Washington Heights where a 3-year-old boy was killed by an Amtrak train last weekend, someone tore a large hole in the wooden-slat fencing.
Parks Commissioner Betsy Gotbaum said last night that a repair crew had mended the hole and that the city would inspect the fencing on a daily basis and repair it if necessary.
Amtrak has said it has no plans to install a new fence.
Page B4. (Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Republic New York Corp. is offering $100 million in 9.3 percent 30-year subordinated notes at 99.643 to yield 9.335 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The notes are noncallable through maturity and are rated A-1 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P.


F.D.A. to Ban Product Labels That Mislead on Fat Content
The Food and Drug Administration Commissioner says he intends to ban the use of what he considers misleading fat percentage claims on food packages.
The move is part of an effort to strengthen the agency's regulatory role.
The commissioner, David A. Kessler, plans to make the announcement Thursday in a speech before the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a nutrition advocacy group, at the group's 20th anniversary conference in Washington.
Targets: Ice Cream and Yogurt
"A product that says it is 97 percent fat free but has 50 percent of its calories from fat is misleading," Dr.
Kessler said in an interview Monday.
"The ones that are the most misleading are the ones with the highest liquid content. This is a marketing gimmick and I'd like to see all of them gone."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.86
5.96
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.59
7.71
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.71
5.71
7.61
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.98
7.99
8.48
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.33
8.33
8.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.40
9.40
9.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.18
7.17
7.50
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Personal Health
DESPITE all the attention and concern given to breast cancer in the last decade, as well as significant strides in treatment, there has been no decline in the breast cancer death rate.
An important reason is that most women still do not take advantage of their single most potent weapon against the disease: early detection through regular screening that includes a mammogram and physical breast examination.


Sports People: FOOTBALL; Hebert a Saint Again
Disgruntled quarterback BOBBY HEBERT a year and a half year holdout and signed a contract with the New Orleans Saints.
Hebert, who sat out the entire 1990 season after demanding to be traded in January, signed a two-year contract with no option.
He left the Saints practice facility on Jan. 3, 1990, and said he would never sign another contract with the team. (AP)


100 Killed in Blast at Ethiopian Depot
A huge explosion at a major munitions depot leveled a shantytown here today, leaving scores dead.
Government officials blamed a grenade attack launched by stragglers from the dissolved Ethiopian Army.
Officials of the interim Government and some diplomats said the blast, which could be heard across this city of three million people, killed more than 100 people living in a highly congested neighborhood adjoining the arms storage center.


Company News; Airbus Gets Order
Airbus Industrie, the European jet aircraft maker, said that the Japan Air System Company had converted four of its seven options for A300-6PPR Airbus jets to firm orders.
Airbus, a consortium of Aerospatiale of France, British Aerospace P.L.C. of Britain, CASA of Spain and the Deutsche Airbus unit of Daimler-Benz A.G. of Germany, said the conversion had brought to 13 the number of jets ordered by Japan Air.
The Japanese carrier will take delivery of the planes, which will be equipped with Pratt &amp; Whitney engines, by early 1994.


Futures Trade Indictments
Three commodities traders and their companies were indicted yesterday by a Federal grand jury in Manhattan, which charged them with conspiring to cheat customers in gold and silver futures trades.
Preston H. Semel, 41 years old, of Armonk, N.Y.; Charles E. Federbush, 47, of Manhattan, and Michael Renner, 37, of Brooklyn were charged with breaking Commodities Exchange Act regulations by making trades that directly benefited them at their customers' expense.
They were also charged with adjusting trading tickets to conceal their actions.


Review/Television; Some Scattershooting On the Gun Control Bill
Tonight's edition of "48 Hours" takes aim at the lobbying over the gun control bill that was passed by the House of Representatives last month.
The so-called Brady bill, which would put a seven-day waiting period on buying handguns, now faces a similar fight in the Senate.
"Showdown," at 10 P.M. on CBS , presents the issue as one between victims, led by James S. Brady, who as Ronald Reagan's Press Secretary was severely wounded in the 1981 assassination attempt on the President, and hunters, mobilized by the National Rifle Association.
Both sides are seen rallying their forces and making nice to Representatives.


Morning Blaze Snarls Traffic
Rush-hour traffic was blocked on West End Avenue between 70th Street and 72d Street for several hours yesterday morning because of a smoky underground fire in a Con Edison transformer.
A spokeswoman for the utility said work crews cleaned up a small amount of oil on the sidewalk shortly after the fire, which began at 6:45 A.M. and was extinguished at about 8:10 A.M.
She said PCB levels in the oil were below the level considered dangerous.
The fire did not result in any power interruptions, Con Ed said.


BUSH NOMINATES A TOP DEMOCRAT AS SOVIET ENVOY
President Bush named Robert S. Strauss, a close friend, Democratic doyen and master of the political and business deal, as Ambassador to Moscow today, moving to cement his ties to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and foster business contacts at a pivotal moment in Soviet-American relations.
The announcement came as the United States and the Soviet Union were completing plans for a summit meeting in Moscow, probably late in June.


Striking Gold and Fear in S. Carolina
People laughed a decade ago when geologists started poking holes in the pine forest at the edges of the South Carolina Piedmont looking for gold.
But they stopped laughing when mining companies started buying up huge chunks of land, when a mining giant began gouging out cavernous pits for one of the nation's largest gold-processing operations, and when South Carolina suddenly became the only non-Western state among the 10 largest gold producers.


No Thanks, Detroit
To the Editor:
As one of the customers Detroit has lost (I'm 28 years old), I found Rob Bell's letter (May 21) to be yet another excuse for the ills of American auto makers.
Just watch the television: Japan pushes value and quality (often the price isn't even mentioned), while the American companies push rebates and discounts.
The United States can't expect to shake its image if it promotes its product through giveaways.


21 CONTINUE FAST AGAINST PRETORIA
In what is turning into the longest such protest in South African history, 21 convicts were reported today to have completed the fifth week of a hunger strike begun on May 1 to force their release as political prisoners.
The 21 are among 40 prisoners continuing to fast in jails across South Africa, according to the Human Rights Commission, an independent body that monitors civil rights from the perspective of the anti-apartheid movement.
Of the 40, it said today, 31 have been convicted of crimes and nine others are awaiting trial.


Stock Retreat, With the Dow Down 7.38
Stock prices edged lower yesterday for the first time in seven trading sessions.
But drug stocks, a big drag on Monday's action, bounced back a little.
After a six-day advance that lifted the Dow Jones industrial average almost 128 points, or 4.5 percent, the blue-chip index slipped 7.38, to 3,027.95 -- still well above the supposedly mystical 3,000 level.


Iraqi Plea on Exports Rejected at OPEC Talks
OPEC today rejected a request by Iraq for a letter addressed to the United Nations asking for an end to sanctions barring Iraqi oil exports.
The request was made by the Iraqi Oil Minister in what turned out to be the shortest meeting in more than a decade of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.


Corrections
An article on May 12 about scandals in South Carolina misstated the link between Laidlaw Environmental Services Inc., a toxic-waste disposal company, and State Representative John I. Rogers 3d.
Mr.
Rogers was charged with having extorted money from an independent lobbyist who worked on behalf of Laidlaw; Laidlaw was not accused of having paid bribes to Mr.
Rogers.


Hilliard Dubrow, 79, An Obstetrician, Dies
Hilliard Dubrow, an obstetrician and gynecologist, died Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old.
Dr. Dubrow died of a heart attack, his daughter, Heather, said.


MEXICO TO COMBAT POLICE CORRUPTION
Intensifying a broad crackdown on corruption in federal law enforcement agencies, Mexico's new Attorney General announced a nationwide reorganization of the Federal Judicial Police today, including the creation of special anti-corruption and internal affairs units.
Declaring that the Government is committed to rooting out the corruption and abuses that have long tainted Mexican law enforcement efforts, the Attorney General, Ignacio Morales Lechuga, said all federal police units would be reorganized and placed under the direct, strengthened control of a civilian Deputy Attorney General appointed by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.


Review/Dance; Paying Tribute to Graham in Her Own Medium
Martha Graham died on April 1 at the age of 96, but her spirit, for want of a better word, will live on through the works she choreographed and danced.
The proof, as if any were needed, was dramatized on Monday night at the City Center when the Martha Graham Dance Company offered a performance in tribute to its founder.
The house was packed, the atmosphere alternating between intense emotion and roaring ovations.
The entire event, with free admission, had the kind of communal cathartic effect that Graham's following so obviously required.
She had stipulated that there be no funeral.
To offer no respect to Graham at all, however, would be unacceptable and the outpouring on this occasion was telling.
The dance field was there in force: Paul Taylor, Jerome Robbins, Mikhail Baryshnikov, Eliot Feld, Lar Lubovitch, Anna Sokolow, Pearl Lang, Dan Wagoner and Pauline Koner were among the choreographers and dancers.
Like so many Graham masterworks, the program had a theme of rebirth, of crisis resolved, of a new beginning.
The first section, entitled "To the Future," consisted of a classroom demonstration by 32 smiling and exuberant children in white leotards from the Graham school.
There was also a recent film clip, showing Graham, in September, rehearsing her last complete work, "Maple Leaf Rag."
The last of the four Graham dance pieces on the program was the 1931 classic, "Primitive Mysteries," with its own theme of resurrection, a haunting amd spare vision of the adoration of the Virgin in the American Southwest.
When the all-female corps exited to the sound of its own footfall, the stage was left bare.
The curtain did not come down.
The Southwest, with its Indian and Mexican heritage, was an important influence on Graham's dances.
Her ashes were scattered in the mountains of New Mexico on May 1 by Ron Protas, who is now, with Linda Hodes, the company's co-artistic director.
Mr.
Protas organized the program, which, a program note stated, was Graham's "wish of a gift to you."
The entire Graham canon was distilled onstage.
The children shouted out that they loved the sun, the earth and the world they lived in.
Maher Benham had rehearsed them perfectly without smothering their eagerness.
Some of the same leaps were performed by the adult professional dancers in "Acts of Light," Graham's 1981 three-part piece to Carl Nielsen's music.
Christine Dakin and Donlin Foreman offered a chaste view of the "Conversation of Lovers" duet, thankfully playing down the usual passion.
Indeed, one emotional peak was enough and it came in the subsequent "Lament" section, performed with burning intensity by Terese Capucilli.
The third part, "Ritual to the Sun," equates the daily sunrise and sunset with a dancer's day.
The company, led by Kenneth Topping and Maxine Sherman, was magnificent in this theatricalized Graham technique class.
Mr.
Camacho was also the frisky minotaur figure menacing Miss Dakin's poetic and fierce struggle with fear in the 1947 Graham-Menotti masterpiece, "Errand Into the Maze." As for "Primitive Mysteries," it was danced by members of the junior ensemble (Elizabeth Auclair, Lone Kjaer Larsen, Sheron Lynne Neverson) and the senior company.
Suitably, Joyce Herring made the young woman who is identified with the Virgin warm and human.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 31 Y May 24 Y June 1 Q 1991 Y 1991 Y 1990 Q Gasoline production, daily Y 7.2 Y 7.1 Y 6.7 Q Distillate production, daily Y 3.0 Y 2.9 Y 3.0 Q Gasoline stocks Y 213.2 Y 209.8 Y 216.5 Q Distillate stocks Y 107.4 Y 103.1 Y 104.0 Q Crude imports, daily Y 6.2 Y 6.3 Y 6.1 Q Product imports, daily Y 1.7 Y 1.8 Y 2.5 Q Crude stocks Y 349.6 Y 347.2 Y 384.4 Q Crude production, daily Y 7.4 Y 7.4 Y 7.3 Q Refinery utilization (%) Y 89.6 Y 87.0 Y 88.2 X
( Source: American Petroleum Institute )


Broker Gets Year in Jail
A former director and vice president of the now-defunct Wall Street firm Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc. has been sentenced to a year and a day in jail and fined $10,000 for insider trading.
In a plea bargain in April, the broker, Charles Howard, 45 years old, pleaded guilty to one count of conspiring to obstruct an inquiry into insider trading by the Securities and Exchange Commission.


This Wise Old Earth Spirit Is No Bear
To the Editor:
While I am sure all New Yorkers are delighted to have Katherine the koala as our guest of honor at the Bronx Zoo, having known many a koala, I suspect that she is a bit miffed because the caption appended to your wonderful May 24 photo of her refers to her as a koala bear.
Koalas are not bears!
They are marsupials, and therefore they carry their young in pouches and are in no way related to bears.
They are one of the oldest animals left on our planet and are seriously endangered by the destruction of their eucalyptus habitat.
If readers want additional information about koalas, we will provide it free in response to a note or a call to our toll-free number, 1 (800) 989-KOALA.


The Burgundy Long Forgotten in a Closet
SOMEHOW, that bottle of 1962 Meursault-Perrieres remained unnoticed in the wine rack long after we had been given it by a generous dinner guest.
We discovered it in 1982, at the ripe old age of 20.
Ripe might even be wishful thinking because this white wine had been sitting for as many as 12 or 15 years in a closet in our New York apartment.
Not a climate-controlled closet, I might add.


The Cake Box From Heaven (Brooklyn, of Course) Is Back
The Box is back.
Pale green with brown crosshatching, the Ebinger's cake box is stacked on the shelves of New York City supermarkets.
Shoppers have gasped and paled at its resurrection.
For them, after nearly two decades in an Ebingerless desert, The Box is manna.
The good old days are back!
Maybe. . . .


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
The S.E.C. proposed to make it easier for foreign companies to raise money in the U.S. by exempting them from many Federal securities regulations.  [ Page A1. ]
The industrial world's finance and trade ministers agreed to try to complete their round of negotiations late this year.  [ D1. ]


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about product placements in movies referred incorrectly to a promotion sponsored by American Airlines and Nestle.
The two companies joined to promote the release of the film "Home Alone" in theaters, not the home video release.


Real Barbecue
To The Living Section:
I read the article in which some sang the praise of New York City barbecue  [ "New York Has One True Barbecue and Here Are All Eight of Them," May 22 ] .
Alas and alack!
I
must
protest.
No self-respecting Midwesterner could read such an article without feeling down in the mouth and sad at heart.
I greatly respect two of the contributors (Sylvia's and Rusty's).
In fact, I am somewhat of a regular at both establishments, but take it from a Chicagoan who knows his way around a pig: it ain't really barbecue -- not what you get in any backyard or open lot on the South Side of Chicago.
On a warm summer's day, Chicago's South Side is one big open pit.
The aroma of succulent pig is everywhere, and it is all very, very good.
One of these places is sufficient to squelch the bravado that was so shamelessly displayed in your article: Lem's.
I will say no more, except to invite your wannabes to avail themselves one summer's evening of the Real Thing at Lem's (75th Street, near King Drive).
DEMAREE BARNES  White Plains, N.Y.


Yanks Are Suddenly Sentimental Favorite
The New York Yankees are not the New York Mets, and that was not always such a good thing, especially for most of the 80's, when one team atrophied while the other blossomed into a perennial contender.
Like so many success stories from Wall Street to Hollywood in the 80's, however, something of the glitz seems to have worn off the Mets.
Carping, crying and generally being constantly discontented tends to do that to one's image.


What 'Little People'?
To The Living Section:
In the article on office etiquette  [ "Dos and Don'ts of Office Etiquette: Has Rudeness Gotten Out of Hand?" May 29 ] , Letitia Baldrige undoes with a single word all the good advice she gives elsewhere in the article.
"Remember to thank the little people," she says.
What "little people"?
The secretary who rushes from office to class so she can become an elementary-school teacher?
The telephone operator who maintains a level of accuracy that would put her manager to shame?
The cleaning staff, dusting and polishing and trying to make order out of chaos while "not touching anything" on anyone's desk?
There are no "little people." Perhaps that's the first rule of etiquette in the office or outside it.
MIRIAM HECHT  New York, N.Y.


Equity Elects President
Ron Silver has been elected president of the Actors' Equity Association, a spokesman for Equity, Dick Moore, said yesterday.
Mr.
Silver, who ran unopposed, was elected to a three-year term, effective immediately.
He succeeds Colleen Dewhurst, who has been president for six years and did not seek re-election.


CHRONICLE
DR.
P.
KENT CULLEN received the Great Comebacks Award on Saturday at a luncheon at the Grand Hyatt in New York for the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation of America, which used to be called the National Foundation for Ileitis and Colitis.
A surgeon specializing in colon surgery, Dr.
Cullen was himself struck with ulcerative colitis and has undergone multiple ostomy surgery.
He has a surgical practice in Santa Barbara, Calif., where he also fishes and plays tennis.
"It was diabolical, but this illness brought a keen understanding to my practice," said Dr.
Cullen, 60.
"Now, the best encouragement for my patients is myself. I'm relatively unlimited in what I can do."


Market Place; Shearson Gives Itself a Face Lift
ALMOST a year after it became a wholly owned subsidiary of the American Express Company, Shearson Lehman Brothers is prettying itself up.
The brokerage house -- the nation's second largest, after Merrill Lynch -- is negotiating deals to shrink its exposure to potential loan losses, Wall Street executives said yesterday.
The moves are intended in large part to reassure the bond market, upon which Shearson depends for billions of dollars in financing, that the firm is moving toward better financial health.


New York Urged to Broaden Handicapped-Parking Rights
Harry Katz, 81 years old, has a hip disability, a New Jersey license plate that gives him special parking privileges, and a gripe with New York City.
While shopping in Brooklyn last fall, he received a ticket for parking -- and not paying -- at a curbside meter.
He paid a $20 fine to the city's Parking Violations Bureau under protest, wrote an angry letter to Mayor David N. Dinkins, and began a one-man crusade of sorts (with a little help from his Congressman, Robert G. Torricelli) to seek broader parking rights for the disabled in New York City.


Does Israel Want Dialogue or to Dictate?
To the Editor:
Michael Bar-Zohar, a member of the Knesset, speaks in his May 16 letter ("Old P.L.O. Demands") of Israel's "substantial contribution to the peace process." His rejection of negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization and of Palestinian self-determination is evidence of lip service rather than substance.
And his intimation that most Israelis share his views is, at best, debatable.
Imagine for a moment that the Palestinians had managed finally to produce a representative who was "acceptable" to both Israel and the United States.
Let that hypothetical representative declare that Palestinians are willing to negotiate with Israel, but not the Shamir Government or anyone appointed by it, on the ground that this Government comprised "racist haters of our people."


Merck Gives $1 Million For Newark Arts Center
The New Jersey Performing Arts Center has received another $1 million donation for its proposed arts complex in Newark.
The Merck Company Foundation, the philanthropic arm of Merck &amp; Company of Rahway, N.J., announced the donation on Thursday.
The donation, the largest Merck has ever given to the arts, is the fourth of $1 million or more received by the project.
The others were given by the Samuel I. Newhouse Foundation, A.T.&amp;T. in Basking Ridge, N.J., and the Prudential Insurance Company of Newark.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 5


Corrections
A report on May 26 about the marriage of Suzanne Ingram and Eric Schaefer referred incorrectly to the bridegroom's mother.
She is Mrs.
Samuel H. McIver; she lives with the bridegroom's stepfather in Cazenovia, N.Y.


Metro Datelines; Mob Boss Is Set Free Because of Illness
A Federal judge yesterday ordered the release of Philip Rastelli, a convicted mobster, saying he is gravely ill and is expected to live only for days.
The 73-year-old Mr.
Rastelli, who was convicted in 1986 as the boss of the Bonanno crime family, was serving a 12-year prison sentence on racketeering charges.
He is being released from the Federal prison hospital in Springfield, Mo.


Investment Firm Head Widens Insurance Role
Donald H. Rundlett has always liked the insurance industry.
And with the decision of the firm he heads, Private Capital Partners Inc., to rescue the healthy life insurance subsidiary of the troubled Monarch Capital Corporation, he has thrust himself into the industry's spotlight.
Mr.
Rundlett, who has worked as a broker, a commercial banker and an investment banker, is the chairman and chief executive of Private Capital, in Purchase, N.Y..
The private investment banking group said late Monday that it was forming the Old Bay State Life Insurance Company to acquire the stock of the Monarch Life Insurance Company of Springlfield, Mass.


Woman Gets Marrow From Her Baby Sister
A 19-year-old woman with leukemia received a transplant of bone marrow cells today from her baby sister, who was conceived in an attempt to save the young woman's life.
The woman, Anissa Ayala, completed chemotherapy to destroy her cancerous bone marrow.
Healthy marrow, the source of new blood cells, was then drawn from a hip bone of her 13-month-old sister, Marissa Ayala.


When Governor's Out, Who's In?
As far as Gov.
John Ashcroft is concerned, a governor is a governor, whether he is here in Missouri or halfway around the world.
To Lieut.
Gov.
Mel Carnahan, absent means absent, and he should be acting governor any time Mr.
Ashcroft leaves the state.
Their quarrel is more than semantic.
Mr.
Ashcroft, a Republican who is nearing the end of his second term, has taken the issue to the State Supreme Court, which heard arguments in April.
He wants the justices to declare that in an age of supersonic jets, cellular telephones and fax machines, being away is as good as being there, and sometimes better.


Drama in Review
Humanity  The Living Theater 272 East Third Street Through June 23 By Walter Hasenclever; directed by Elena Jandova and Martin Reckhaus; produced by Hanon Resnikov and Judith Malina; composers and musicians, Patrick Grant and Philip Brehse; lighting, Tony Angel and Gary Brackett.
WITH: Alan Arenius, Philip Brehse, Joanie Fritz, Laura Kolb, Chris Maresca and Pat Russell.


Student Given Term in Drug Raid
A University of Virginia student was sentenced on Monday to 13 months in prison for selling drugs in a fraternity house seized by Federal authorities in a crackdown on drug dealing on college campuses.
The student, Ernest Brown Pryor, 19 years old, pleaded guilty to two counts of drug distribution near a school.


Business Technology; Satellite System Helps Trucks Stay in Touch
Until recently, some trucking companies used index cards to keep track of drivers and shipments.
Between the times a trucker called in, he was virtually unreachable, his whereabouts at best a guess.
Now, more and more companies have found a way to stay in constant touch with their drivers, and check their locations automatically.
About 15,000 trucks are linked to their headquarters through a communications system that bounces signals from a satellite.
Industry experts expect the network to eventually include 300,000 trucks.


Kidnapped 4-Year-Old Girl Is Released After a Week
A 4-year-old New Jersey girl who was kidnapped eight days ago from her home by two gunmen posing as New York City police officers was found unharmed last night on a street in upper Manhattan, the police said.
The girl, Kelly Gonzalez, was left outside a small grocery store at 35 Sherman Avenue in Inwood by two men in a car about 10:30 P.M., said Sgt.
Edward Burns, a police spokesman.


C.I.A. Report on Japan Economy Creates Furor at Institute
A draft report on the Japanese economy prepared for the Central Intelligence Agency, describing the Japan as an "immoral, manipulative and controlling culture," has shaken the Rochester Institute of Technology and has led its president to suspend ties with the agency.
"I think the institution is more important than that tie," M. Richard Rose, the president of the private 13,000-student institute, said last week.


Gunman Kills 2 at an Electronics Company
A laid-off employee of an electronics manufacturing company entered the building today, set off small bombs and opened fire with a shotgun, killing two executives, the police said.
The assailant rode away on a bicycle, with a shotgun and a bandoleer of shells slung over his back, but surrendered three hours later at a sheriff's substation about 75 miles away, Lieut.
Dan Berglund said.


Books of The Times; 2 Collections of Views on America's Recent Wars
Panama: The Whole Story By Kevin Buckley 304 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster $21.95.
The March to War Edited and Introduced by James Ridgeway 244 pages.
Four Walls Eight Windows. $9.95.
Thus far, President Bush has gone to war twice during his first term.
Both wars had code names attached to them: the war against Panama in 1989 was called Operation Just Cause and the war against Iraq in 1991 was called Operation Desert Shield (it received a verbal battlefield promotion when the shooting started to Operation Desert Storm).


Company News; Stanford Is Sued By Nutri/System
Nutri/System Inc. filed a countersuit here against Stanford University, charging defamation because of the university's suit to block Nutri/System from using the Stanford name in advertising its weight-loss products.
The Nutri/System suit also names the Healthline Publishing Company, of Menlo Park, Calif., its magazine, Healthline, and Paul Insel, the magazine's editor in chief.


Topics of The Times; An Invitation to Death
Amtrak denies responsibility.
So does New York State's Department of Transportation, which signed off on the railroad's plan to route high-speed passenger trains through three heavily used parks in upper Manhattan without requiring fencing along the tracks.
Tell that to the family of Justin James Rodriguez.
The 3-year-old boy was struck and killed on Saturday after he wandered away from his mother and onto the tracks, which run through busy Fort Washington Park, along the Hudson River.


A Victory Deployment Meets Capital Red Tape
The Persian Gulf war is history, but the battle over the parade here rages on.
The commotion all started when organizers of the homecoming celebration set for Saturday trumpeted plans for a parade the likes of which the capital had not seen since the end of World War II: 10,000 troops, 100 aircraft, bands playing, flags flying, floats floating, the works.


New York Feels Pinch of Slump In U.S. Tourists
Although foreign visitors continue to find New York City an attractive destination, a steady decline in the number of Americans coming to the city is limiting tourism's ability to help lift New York out of its economic doldrums this summer.
Reservation clerks at several Manhattan hotels say bookings have picked up since the end of the Persian Gulf war in February but are still 5 to 10 percent below the level of last summer, which was also down from the year before.


A Thousand Kuwaitis Attend Protest
In the first public protest since the Persian Gulf war, about 1,000 Kuwaitis gathered at a mosque tonight to call for faster democratic changes and to reject the Government's recent decrees as unconstitutional.
The opposition gathering was illegal, but uniformed policemen did not appear, and the Government did nothing to interfere with the meeting, which had been advertised by word of mouth.


The Media Business; Paramount Reports a Loss; Revenues Increase by 7.6%
Paramount Communications Inc. yesterday reported a loss of $55 million for the second quarter, in contrast to a profit of $21.2 million, or 18 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenues rose 7.6 percent, to $869 million, from $811 million a year earlier.
Included in the loss was a net charge of $35.4 million, primarily related to write-downs of certain motion picture charges, television developent commitments and entertainment personnel reorganization costs.
The charge also included the settlement of a lawsuit brought by Frank Mancuso, the former chairman of Paramount Pictures.


Company News; I.B.M. in Zale Deal
The International Business Machines Corporation said that a subsidiary had signed a 10-year contract to provide computer services and general business consulting to the Zale Corporation, the nation's largest retail jeweler.
John Clark, an I.B.M. spokesman, said the contract was worth "hundreds of millions of dollars." Under the "outsourcing" deal, the Integrated Systems Solutions Corporation, an I.B.M. subsidiary formed last month, will run Zale's data center and provide consulting on the retail industry, Mr.
Clark said.


Correction
A recipe for graham cracker cake in The Living Section last Wednesday misstated the quantity of honey.
Here is a corrected version:  Graham Cracker Cake (Adapted from the Kids Cafe II)
Total time: 30 minutes
12 graham crackers (to yield 2 cups crumbs)
1/2 cup butter, plus butter for greasing pan  2 eggs
1/2 cup honey  1 1/2 teaspoons baking powder
1/2 teaspoon baking soda
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 cup milk.
1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees.
2.
Put the graham crackers in a brown paper bag, and smash them up.
Squish and pound vigorously.
Sitting on the bag insures very fine crumbs.
You should end up with about 2 cups.
3.
Melt the butter in a large pan over low heat.
Stir the eggs and honey in a bowl with the melted butter.
4.
In another bowl mix the graham cracker crumbs, baking powder, baking soda and salt.
Pour half the graham cracker mixture into the honey mixture and stir well.
Add the milk to the honey mixture, and stir again.
Add the rest of the crumbs, and mix well.
5.
Grease a 9-inch square baking pan, and pour in the batter.
Bake for 20 minutes or until the cake is nicely browned.
Yield: 8 servings.


Tonys' Ratings Rise, Halting 4-Year Decline
After setting record lows for three years, the ratings of the Tony Awards broadcast on CBS Sunday night went up for the first time since 1986.
The nearly 2-hour-20-minute show, from 9 until just before 11:20 P.M., got an 8.9 rating and a 16 share, up from a 7.6 rating and a 13 share in 1990.
Each rating point represents 931,000 homes; the share is the percentage of sets in use.
The 8.9 was still the second lowest score in the show's 25 years on television.


Drama in Review
Five Women in a Chapel  St.
Peter's Church Lexington Avenue and 54th Street By Arto Seppala; directed by Oeyvind Froeyland; translated by Philip Binham; adapted by Kevin Kane; set design, Edith Stylo; lighting, Paul Palazzo; costumes, Deborah Rooney; choreography, Amy Berkman; musician, Falkner Evans; production stage manager, Mary-Susan Gregson; company manager, James Boglino.
Presented by Northern Lights Theater, Inc.
WITH: Betty Aberlin, Shami Chaikin, Diane Kagan, Geraldine Singer and Reenie Upchurch.


Review/Dance; Children and Guests in Homage to India
In the beginning, there was silence.
Out of silence came sound, and out of sound came movement and dance.
So went the Indian cosmological myth told in "Chakra: A Celebration of India," which the National Dance Institute presented on Monday night at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
"Chakra" was the 15th annual production by the institute, which was founded by Jacques d'Amboise, a former principal dancer of the New York City Ballet, to offer dance classes in New York City and New Jersey public and private schools.
Students from these classes filled the stage to tell the story of how a brother and sister, played with great dramatic conviction by Ryan McCormack and Trudy Chan, journeyed through India -- and, metaphorically, through life.
Along the way, they learned much about human compassion and respect for nature.


How House Members Voted On Version of Civil Rights Bill
Following is the roll-call vote of 266 to 162 by which the House of Representatives defeated a Republican alternative, supported by President Bush, to the Democratic leaders' civil rights bill.
A "yes" vote is a vote to approve the alternative.
Voting yes were 146 Republicans and 16 Democrats.
Voting no were 246 Democrats, 19 Republicans and one independent.
Y is a "yes" vote.
N is a "no" vote.
X denotes those not voting.
There are three vacancies in the 435-member House.
ALABAMA
Democrats -- Bevill, N; Browder, N; Cramer, N; Erdreich, N; Harris, N.  Republicans -- Callahan, Y; Dickinson, Y.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about France's announcement that it would sign a treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons referred incorrectly to the accord's effective date.
While it was signed in 1968, it took effect in 1970.


Metro Datelines; Agency Is Criticized On Armory Leasing
A state military agency violated state law in its leasing of a Manhattan armory to a theatrical company, State Comptroller Edward Regan said yesterday.
The Comptroller's auditors sharply criticized the State Division of Military and Naval Affairs for being shoddy in its management of the 76 armories it operates across the state.
Mr.
Regan said the way armories are leased to the public when the military is not using them leaves open the possibility of fraud and does not earn the state as much money as it should.


The Pop Life
Luther Vandross, His Way
"I'm big on subtlety," Luther Vandross said recently.
"I'm not one who is going to bring a bed out on the stage and roll around on it."
The pop-soul singer, songwriter and producer was explaining why he has virtually ignored such musical trends as rap, hip-hop and the new jack swing that have flourished since he became a star 10 years ago.


Louisiana Anti-Abortion Sent to Governor
Louisiana Senators today sent a strict anti-abortion bill to Gov.
Buddy Roemer, who vetoed similar legislation last year.
This year's proposal, however, passed both the House and the Senate with more than the two-thirds' majority needed to override a veto.


60-Minute Gourmet
YEARS ago when I was a restaurant chef, nutrition was not foremost on my mind.
My generation strove for flavor, texture and appearance, but not necessarily the best blend of vitamins and minerals.
We promoted balanced meals, but balance was largely based on our instincts and traditions.


Morris Rokowsky, 89, Real-Estate Executive
Morris Rokowsky, a real-estate executive, died on Monday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.
He was 89 years and lived in Monsey, N.Y.
Mr.
Rokowsky, who suffered from cancer, died of kidney failure, a family spokesman said.


PGA Rejects Instant Replay
After less than three months, the PGA Tour has discontinued the use of television instant replays to assist in enforcing rules during tournament play.
Commissioner Deane Beman announced that the tour's 10-member policy board voted unanimously at a meeting today to stop using replays, beginning this week at the Buick Classic at the Westchester Country Club here.


Bush Threatens a Veto Of 'Baby Bell' Measure
The Bush Administration threatened today to veto legislation that would allow the seven regional Bell companies to manufacture equipment.
Although the White House supports the bill's goal, it objects to a provision that would require the companies to carry out the manufacturing in the United States.
The threat came as the Senate began considering the legislation.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Two New Defections at Levine, Huntley
LEVINE, HUNTLEY, VICK &amp; BEAVER received more bad news yesterday when two of the agency's top media executives left to join a media buying service.
Ed Ronk, senior vice president and director of media services, and Andrew Donchin, vice president and director of national broadcast, left to join Media Buying Services International Inc. of New York, effective yesterday.
They are senior executives at Media Buying Services, with titles to be announced.


Dollar Ends Mostly Down; Gold Prices Little Changed
The dollar closed mostly lower yesterday as profit taking eroded recent gains.
Gold prices were little changed from late Monday's levels.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold fell 50 cents, closing at $362.50 an ounce.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $362.00, unchanged from Monday.


Phone Deregulation: Premature
The Senate is scheduled to vote today on a bill that would allow the seven regional telephone companies to manufacture equipment, a practice now banned.
The bill's sponsors believe that injecting the seven companies, the Baby Bells, into competition with existing manufacturers will hasten innovation and drive down prices.
That might sound right to Americans who have reaped the benefits of deregulation in trucking, energy and long-distance phone service.
But in this situation, deregulation can do harm.


Business Technology; Putting Pollen to Good Use: The Delivery of Drugs
At this time of year, few allergy sufferers need any reminder of pollen's ability to enter the body.
Pollen inhaled, touched or eaten can cause eyes to itch and sinuses to clog.
Now a Southern California company is working on a technology to deliver drugs by substituting them for the natural allergens in pollen grains.
Amer Particle Technologies Inc., based in Montecito, Calif., said its method could be an alternative to injection of protein-based drugs, like those created by the biotechnology companies.
Because they are large molecules, proteins defy delivery through the nose or skin; because they are digested, they are not effective taken through the mouth.
Amer believes its method would allow patients to take the drugs in skin creams, pills or nose sprays.
Pollens could also be used for the controlled release of conventional drugs.


A-Plant Closure Urged Over Safety of a Weld
A crucial weld in the oldest commercial nuclear reactor operating in the United States has become so brittle from years of radiation that it is in danger of cracking, according to an analysis of Government documents by a nuclear watchdog group.
The group, the Union of Concerned Scientists, issued the results of its analysis yesterday and called on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to shut the 31-year-old Yankee Rowe plant immediately.


The Media Business; Booksellers Cheered Up By Convention Crowds
Record attendance and brisk business at the convention of the American Booksellers Association lifted the mood of a publishing industry made gloomy by recession.
The association said in a statement that 35,869 people attended the four-day meeting at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, compared with 24,650 at the convention in Las Vegas, Nev., last year.


Get the Right Grip on Foreign Aid
Can there be a stable and just new world order in the wake of the cold war?
Not unless social conditions and economic prospects improve markedly in the third world, where most of the planet's people live.
That will take money, but not in unthinkable amounts.
What is needed is a sharp shift in priorities, among donor and recipient countries alike.
Major givers like Japan, Germany and the World Bank press for sensible changes.
But there's little sign of that spirit in Washington, where Congress is now considering the new foreign aid budget.
It and the Bush Administration act oblivious to the momentous changes that have swept the world.


1,000 Removed As Propane Gas Leaks in Queens
A small amount of propane gas leaked from a freight car in Queens yesterday afternoon, clogging traffic, disrupting subway and Long Island Rail Road service and forcing the evacuation of at least 1,000 people.
Fire officials said the leak was apparently caused when a valve atop the car was jarred while the freight train was being coupled.
If the valve had been jarred harder the propane could have exploded and devastated the surrounding area, said Lieut.
James Oliveri, who commanded the Fire Department's Hazardous Materials Unit at the scene.


Washington State Awards Bonds
The State of Washington awarded $155 million in general obligation bonds yesterday through competitive bidding to a group of underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
Of the financing, $150 million included various-purpose bonds, with a long-term issue due in 2016 priced to yield 6.9 percent.
Shorter-maturity serial bonds were offered with yields that ranged from 5 percent in 1993 to 6.7 percent in 2007.


SHUTTLE IS READY FOR LIFTOFF TODAY
The space shuttle Columbia, overcoming mechanical problems that have twice kept it earthbound within a day of launching, is scheduled to soar into space Wednesday with a medical laboratory and a cargo of human and animal patients.
The mission, to examine the medical aspects of space flight, was pronounced ready for flight today by controllers at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Kennedy Space Center here.
Fueling began at 11:40 tonight.


Fannie Mae Offers $1.4 Billion Issue
The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is offering $1.4 billion in debentures divided into 5-year and 10-year maturities.
Half the financing includes $700 million in 8.05 percent debentures due 1996 that are priced at 100 to yield about 26 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Vehicle Sales Decline, but Hope Is Seen
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks dropped 10 percent in May from a year earlier, but on a seasonally adjusted basis car sales alone were slightly stronger than in the previous month, leading to some hope that the automotive recession may have bottomed out.
Car sales, a barometer of economic health, are being closely watched for signs that a recovery may be under way.
But statistics from a single 10-day period or just one month are often misleading, as they were in January and February when many analysts thought the bottom of the automotive downturn had been reached.
Subsequent sales reports in March and April were weak, squelching the optimism.


Carroll Raj Partner Resigns
Robin Raj is leaving his partners at Carroll Raj Stagliano, New York, just two years after the agency was founded.
Mr.
Raj will continue as a creative consultant to the agency during the summer before announcing his future plans.
The agency's client list includes Citibank, Guinness Import and Mohawk Paper.
"This is a reasonable decision for all parties that places the best interests of the agency first," Mr.
Raj said.
"Nonetheless, it's also an emotional one."


Accounts
*
McNeil Consumer Products, Fort Washington, Pa., a subsidiary of Johnson &amp; Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J., to Lintas New York for two new pieces of business: Imodium A-D, a diarrhea medication, and Lactaid products for lactose intolerance.
Billings were not disclosed.


How House Members Voted On Version of Civil Rights Bill
Following is the roll-call vote of 266 to 162 by which the House of Representatives defeated a Republican alternative, supported by President Bush, to the Democratic leaders' civil rights bill.
A "yes" vote is a vote to approve the alternative.
Voting yes were 146 Republicans and 16 Democrats.
Voting no were 246 Democrats, 19 Republicans and one independent.
Y is a "yes" vote.
N is a "no" vote.
X denotes those not voting.
There are three vacancies in the 435-member House.
ALABAMA


Man Who Taped Beating Seeks Payment
The amateur cameraman who shot the widely publicized videotape that captured the police beating of a black motorist three months ago wants hundreds of television stations around the country to pay him for broadcasting it.
The lawyer for the cameraman, George Holliday, the general manager of a plumbing supply company, on Monday described the tape as "the most-played video in the history of this country," and added, "Over 900 letters have gone out to every television station we can get a name and address for, plus networks and their affiliates, demanding payment."


A Not-So-New Order
The "new world order" projected by President Bush to grow out of the Persian Gulf war is looked upon by third-world spokesmen with skepticism, suspicion and doubt that it will really bring anything new to their relations with the developed world.
That's a conclusion that seemed warranted after an international conference sponsored here by the International Press Service Council on Information and Communication.


Sports People: Hockey; Arbour Plans to Return
AL ARBOUR , the N.H.L. leader in victories among active coaches, announced yesterday that he would return to coach the Islanders next season.
It will mark the fourth season in Arbour's second stint as head coach of the Islanders since he replaced TERRY SIMPSON on Dec. 8, 1988.
For two seasons before that he served as the team's vice president of player development.
In his first stint, from 1973 to 1986, he won the Stanley Cup four consecutive seasons, from the 1979-80 season through the 1982-83 season. (AP)


EXECUTIVES
*
American International Group Inc., New York, an insurance organization, appointed E. Michael Joye senior vice president and general counsel.
He replaces Wayland M. Mead, who becomes special counsel. *
Budd Co., Troy, Mich., a unit of Thyssen A.G., Dusseldorf, Germany, that makes auto supplies, named Robert G. Siefert president of its stamping and frame division.
He succeeds James S. Roth, who is retiring.


Clark and Giants Put an End To Pirates' Nine-Game Streak
Will Clark broke out of a slump by going 3 for 5 with a three-run homer and four runs batted in and the San Francisco Giants beat Pittsburgh, 5-3, to end Pirates' nine-game winning streak tonight.
Clark ended Pirate starter Zane Smith's 16-inning scoreless streak with a homer in the first inning, then drove in the go-ahead run with a single in the fourth after Barry Bonds's two-run homer in the third inning tied the score.
Clark was 3 for 36 entering the game.


J. Marion Magill, Music Professor, 69
J.
Marion Magill, a professor emeritus of music education at Teachers College of Columbia University, died on Sunday at his home in Greenville, S.C.
He was 69 years old.
Dr.
Magill, who earned graduate degrees in music at Teachers College in 1953 and 1957, was a professor and chairman of the music department at the college from 1970 until his retirement in 1981.
Before that, he had directed music education in Baltimore's public schools from 1963 to 1970 and had taught music in South Carolina.
In retirement, he was chairman of the South Carolina Governor's School of the Arts until 1985.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Status on Mitchell
KEVIN MITCHELL is expected to miss at least four weeks of playing time, the San Francisco Giants announced yesterday after the star outfielder underwent arthroscopic knee surgery.
Dr.
GORDON CAMPBELL , who performed the surgery at a medical center in Palo Alto, reported that he found no cartilage damage to Mitchell's left knee but did find some loose ligaments.
Mitchell hurt the knee May 21 while sliding in a game at Cincinnati, was held out of eight games and then returned to start two games late last week. (AP)


New Jersey Primary, With No Statewide Race and Few Contests, Attracts Few Voters


Vandals Damage Fence Installed Along Tracks Where Child Died
A day after parks workers installed temporary fencing along railroad tracks in upper Manhattan where a 3-year-old boy was killed by an Amtrak train last weekend, someone tore a gaping hole in the wooden-slat fence.
"After this terrible, terrible accident, why would anyone in their right mind want to tear another hole in this fencing," the Parks Commissioner, Betsy Gotbaum, said.


Panel Says Courts Are 'Infested With Racism'


Suicide of Jiang Qing, Mao's Widow, Is Reported
Jiang Qing, the widow of Mao and herself a leader of China during some of its most tumultuous years, has committed suicide, the Government announced tonight.
She was 77 years old.
Ms.
Jiang was serving a life prison sentence for her role as leader of the Gang of Four.
That name was given to the group of radical Communist leaders whose closeness to the all-powerful Mao enabled them to speak in his name and carry out what they said were his policies during the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976.


Company News; UAL Asks Boeing To Study Big Jet
The UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, said it had asked the Boeing Company to study making a new 650-seat jet that would be the world's largest commercial airplane.
Boeing, based in Seattle, has talked about developing a new jumbo jet for the last year.
If the new jet were built, it would be for delivery by 1998.


U.S. Securities Are Little Changed
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed and interest rates were stable in quiet trading yesterday.
Barring some big surprise, market participants said activity would remain slow until Friday, when May employment figures are released.
"People seem to be positioned the way they want to be in front of the employment data," one government bond trader said.


Southern Baptists Re-elect a Fundamentalist
Without opposition, fundamentalists retained the presidency of the Southern Baptist Convention today, taking undisputed control of the nation's largest Protestant denomination.
With little dissent, Morris H. Chapman, who is 50 years old and pastor of the First Baptist Church of Wichita Falls, Tex., was re-elected president after urging the convention to "just say no" to those who do not believe in the literal truth of the Bible.


Atlantic City Gaming Off
Atlantic City's casino revenues fell 3.2 percent last month, the result of competition and government restrictions, the Casino Association of New Jersey said today.
Atlantic City's 12 casinos had unofficial gross revenues of $255.5 million for the month, down from $263.9 million a year earlier, the group said.
The biggest losers in percentage terms were two casinos owned by Donald J. Trump, the Trump Plaza and the Trump Castle.


John Burns, 65, Dies; Advertising Executive
John V. Burns, an advertising and marketing executive, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
He was 65 years old and lived in Naples, Fla.
He died of cancer, his family said.


The Media Business; New Satellite TV Venture
Hughes Communications Inc. and Hubbard Broadcasting Inc. have formed a venture for a direct-broadcast satellite television service that is to be available by 1994, Stanley S. Hubbard, the president of Hubbard Broadcasting, said yesterday.
The investment for the project will total more than $100 million, he said.
Mr.
Hubbard said the satellite, which will be built by Hughes, will carry 16 "transponders" -- satellite transmitters -- each capable of carrying several television channels.
He said his company would own five of the transponders.
Hubbard Broadcasting and Hughes will broadcast separate programming but will jointly market their services, Mr.
Hubbard said.


Keen, Cool and Classic Hale Irwin
Last year just about this time, Hale Irwin had a dream in which he won his third United States Open.
The only person he told was his wife, Sally.
Most anyone else, he knew, would have had a lot of reasons to think, or even to say, "Dream on."
At 45, Irwin carried most of the symptoms of a former great in the limbo years of professional golf.
Although he had 17 career victories, he had not won since he was 39.
He was heavily into golf architecture, even dabbling with the idea of becoming an analyst on network golf telecasts.
After better than two decades of being considered one of the game's most obstinate competitors, Irwin seemed to be taking a well-deserved coast until he was ready for the Senior Tour.


Baker Might Go Back to Mideast If Plan for Peace Talks Is Accepted
Bush Administration officials said today that Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d would consider returning to the Middle East over the weekend if the Syrians and Israelis, to whom President Bush wrote last week, signaled a willingness to accept Mr.
Bush's compromise proposals for a peace conference.
Last weekend President Bush dispatched personal letters to the leaders of Israel, Syria, Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia, emphasizing his "personal commitment" to Middle East peacemaking and spelling out what he considered to be a fair compromise of everyone's conditions for peace talks.
The letters made clear to Israel, Jordan and Syria, in particular, that Mr.
Bush would have a hard time understanding if they chose to spurn his compromise framework.


Economic Scene; Are Low Rates Always Good?
IT is an article of faith in financial markets that lower interest rates are good for the economy and higher rates are bad.
But goodness and badness depend on the financial condition of the beholder.
Households, particularly retired people who are most likely to have large savings, could logically conclude that lower rates are bad and higher rates good.


Bulls' Season Rides on Leaving Chicago Even
Because Michael Jordan has never been on a team that won a National Basketball Association championship, Wednesday night's game here is the most important of his pro career.
If the Chicago Bulls lose Game 2 at Chicago Stadium, they will be two games down in the four-of-seven- game championship series, with the next three games in California.
And no N.B.A. team has ever won a championship series after losing the first two games at home.


Books of The Times; 2 Collections of Views on America's Recent Wars
Panama: The Whole Story By Kevin Buckley 304 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster $21.95.
The March to War Edited and Introduced by James Ridgeway 244 pages.
Four Walls Eight Windows. $9.95.


The Third Woman of 'Thelma and Louise'
One day in late 1987, Callie Khouri, a producer of pop-music videos who had never written a film script, picked up her notebook and wrote: "Screenplay idea: two women go on a crime spree. They're leaving town, both leaving behind their jobs and families. They kill a guy, rob a store, get hooked up with a young guy."
The odds were stacked against her, but Ms.
Khouri's initial jottings found their way to the screen as "Thelma and Louise," starring Susan Sarandon and Geena Davis as a pair of Arkansas women on the lam from the law and the men in their lives.
Giving a feminine twist to a pair of all-too-familiar Hollywood genres, the road picture and the buddy picture, the film has received outstanding reviews and quickly become an audience favorite, earning $12 million in less than two weeks.


Bridge
The "King of Bridge" for 1991 will be crowned today at Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School, 5 West 93d Street, Manhattan.
The title, which carries with it a $1000 scholarship, is awarded annually by the American Contract Bridge League to the graduating senior with the best tournament bridge record in North America.
The winner is Andrew Moss, 18 years old, who owns more than 400 master points, nearly all of them won in major events.
When he was 15 he won the non-Life Master Swiss Teams in Salt Lake City, becoming one of the youngest national champions ever.
A year later, in Chicago, he was a member of the winning team in the inaugural National Youth Team Championship, and a year ago he placed third in the prestigious Goldman Pairs in New York City's Eastern Regionals.
Three days ago, he was a runner-up in an equally important New York event, the Reisinger Knockout Teams.


For 700 Students, French Cuisine 101
MOST of the 11 New York City high school students dining at L'Ecole restaurant yesterday had never eaten in a French restaurant before, and until three months ago, they had certainly never cooked a French meal.
But since February, they have been part of a new program that has initiated 700 home economics students into the mysteries and near-surgical skills of French cooking.
And they were reaping their rewards, only partly in the form of escalopes of codfish and pommes dauphine prepared for them by a kitchen supervised by a former chef to Charles de Gaulle and a former chef at Le Cirque.


Company News; Qantas to Cut 3,651 Workers
Australia's Qantas Airlines said today that it would cut its work force by almost a fifth and make other cost reductions in hopes of saving $185 million a year.
The airline said $122 million of the savings would come from staff cuts, which would reduce the work force by 3,651, to 17,138.


U.S. May Ease Rules Affecting Foreign Stocks
The Securities and Exchange Commission today proposed to make it easier for foreign companies to raise money in the United States by exempting them from many Federal securities regulations.
The companies instead would need to comply only with the securities rules of their home countries.
The proposed changes, which have widespread support at the commission and are expected to be adopted by the end of the year, mark the third regulatory move by the agency in the last two weeks to attract more trading to the major American markets as global investing increases.


Algeria Declares Emergency and Postpones Voting
The President declared a state of emergency in Algeria early today, and armored cars rolled into the capital to quell nearly two weeks of violent protests by a Muslim fundamentalist party.
President Chadli Benjedid also postponed parliamentary elections scheduled for later this month and announced the resignation of his Prime Minister.


Bridge
The "King of Bridge" for 1991 will be crowned today at Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School, 5 West 93d Street, Manhattan.
The title, which carries with it a $1000 scholarship, is awarded annually by the American Contract Bridge League to the graduating senior with the best tournament bridge record in North America.
The winner is Andrew Moss, 18 years old, who owns more than 400 master points, nearly all of them won in major events.
When he was 15 he won the non-Life Master Swiss Teams in Salt Lake City, becoming one of the youngest national champions ever.
A year later, in Chicago, he was a member of the winning team in the inaugural National Youth Team Championship, and a year ago he placed third in the prestigious Goldman Pairs in New York City's Eastern Regionals.
Three days ago, he was a runner-up in an equally important New York event, the Reisinger Knockout Teams.


Company News; Cost Cuts at CMS
The Consumers Power Company, a unit of the CMS Energy Corporation, said it would cut annual operating costs by about $40 million through operating changes and fewer staff activities.
The changes will eliminate about 500 jobs in the utility's headquarters staff, although about half the reductions are expected to come from an early retirement program, the company said.
Last month, CMS Energy said cost-cutting was needed to retire debt and improve capital structure.
The company said the reductions would not occur in areas that would affect power production or customer service.


People
*
John Shannon of Grey Advertising has been chosen to succeed Andre Bernard of Lintas as president of the European Association of Advertising Agencies.*
Robert K. Gray has been named chairman of the board of Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc., succeeding Richard E. Chaney, now chairman emeritus.
Mr.
Gray is chairman and chief executive of Hill &amp; Knowlton U.S.A. and president and chief executive of Hill &amp; Knowlton Public Affairs Worldwide.


A Political Pro for Moscow
President Bush's nomination of Robert Strauss as U.S.
Ambassador in Moscow is an inspired choice.
By turning to a formidable Texas Democrat, Mr.
Bush gives bipartisan resonance to U.S. diplomacy at a critical moment in Soviet-American relations.
Mr.
Strauss is a superb negotiator with sensitive political radar.
Those talents could be extremely useful as the Administration seeks to reconcile sensitive differences with Moscow over nuclear arms and economic aid.


Democrat Wins Election to Fill Conte Seat
State Senator John Olver, a Democrat, narrowly defeated his Republican opponent today in a special election to succeed the late Representative Silvio O. Conte.
Mr.
Conte, the flamboyant and independent-minded Republican who held the seat since 1958, died in February.
Both Mr.
Olver and the Republican candidate, Steven Pierce, a former State House Minority Leader, invoked his name in their campaigns.


Rhode Island Bonds Priced
The Rhode Island Depositors Economic Protection Corporation initially priced $150 million in tax-exempt special obligation bonds yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
A bond due in 2021 was priced at 100 to yield a maximum of 7.25 percent, while another similarly priced issue due 2018 yields 7.1 percent.
Another bond due in 2014 was priced to yield 7.05 percent at the call date in 2003.


Topics of The Times; Retaking Tompkins Square
Thanks to strong action by the Dinkins administration, Tompkins Square Park in New York City's East Village may once again be a park.
It hasn't been that for many years, not since drug dealers, self-styled anarchists and the homeless took it over and turned it into a dangerous encampment that scared away neighborhood residents.
The Koch administration failed to reclaim the park, and until now so had Mayor David Dinkins's City Hall.
Finally, yet another disturbance meant that even the patient Mr.
Dinkins had had enough.
The park was cleared and closed on Monday for renovation.


Company News; T.C.I. Alters Plan For Cable Billing
Telecommunications Inc., the nations largest operator of cable television systems, cancelled plans to to bill customers automatically for a new pay movie channel after the practice was criticized by consumer groups and made the subject of lawsuit by state attorneys general in Florida, Iowa, Texas ans Washington.


Facing Iran, an Army With Resolve and Day Care
At the age of 34, Saddieghah Hosseini is a graduate in mathematics and the mother of a 7-year-old daughter.
She has also learned to drive the Soviet-made T-55 battle tank in combat against the Revolutionary Guards of Iran, taking a glancing blow in March from a rocket-propelled grenade.
"Being a tank driver," she said, "is a full-time job."


Recession Puts Summer Job Market in Doldrums, Youths Find
Only a few years ago employers were searching desperately for students who would fill the traditional jobs of summer -- at the beach, at amusement parks, at resort hotels.
But seasons change and so do economic cycles.
And this year it's the young people who are going begging.


Shunning Bush Alternative, House Set to Pass Rights Bill
The House of Representatives tonight defeated President Bush's civil rights bill and set the stage for approval of the Democratic leadership's version, a measure Mr.
Bush calls "a quota bill."
The Bush proposal was defeated, largely on party lines, by a vote of 266 to 162.
Only 19 Republicans abandoned their President while just 16 Democrats voted with him.


Metro Datelines;
Three men robbed an armored car of about $2.5 million as it was stopped at a bank in Queens yesterday, the police said.
No one was injured in the robbery of the Hudson Armored Car Company vehicle at about noon.
Two of three guards were in the Columbia Federal Savings Bank at 91-20 Atlantic Avenue in the Woodhaven section, said a police spokesman, Detective Joseph Gallagher.


McCann-Erickson
McCann-Erickson Worldwide yesterday announced changes among executive vice presidents in charge of some overseas operations.
Max Cusnir, 58 years old, and Michael Sennott, 49, will become joint regional directors of McCann-Erickson Europe after the retirement later this year of Gianni Cottardo, 56.
Mr.
Cottardo currently is joint regional director along with Michael Ferrier, 54, who will become regional director of McCann-Erickson Pacific after the previously announced retirement of Graham De Villiers.


Company News; Zitel-Unisys Talks
The Zitel Corporation said that, because of disappointing results, it had begun talks with the Unisys Corporation on ending their co-marketing relationship involving Zitel's disk products designed for use with Unisys's mainframe computers.
The company said it did not expect its net sales in its third quarter, which ends on June 30, to be as high as those of the first and second quarters.
In the first quarter, Zitel's sales totaled $11.4 million; second-quarter sales were not available.
The company's shares lost $2.50 today, to $6, a 29.4 percent drop that was the fourth-largest in percentage terms in over-the-counter trading.


Microwave Cooking
LIKE Russian grand dukes and madmen, we now eat strawberries all year round.
But they are so much better in this, their natural season.
They are also much cheaper.
With a microwave oven it is possible to resurrect the old-fashioned pleasure of making strawberry preserves.
And preserves made with a microwave oven are better than those made on a stove because the shorter cooking time retains more of the fruit's color and flavor.


Does Israel Want Dialogue or to Dictate?; Jordan and Palestine
To the Editor:
There is a vast difference between Jordan and Palestine, as anyone who has spent any time in the Middle East knows ("Mideast Geography Lessons," A. M. Rosenthal's column, May 17).
Jordan is desert-pastoral, Palestine agricultural-pastoral.
There are marked cultural and linguistic differences between the two peoples.
Jordan has a strong and proud Bedouin tradition; Palestine has a large population of farmers and, with many more cities than Jordan, a developed, educated middle class.
Of the Palestinians who left Palestine in 1948, the middle class spread throughout the world, while the farmers wound up in refugee camps, mostly in Jordan.


Hearns, Gives Ageless Show
Late Monday night, Virgil Hill must have thought he was fighting a Thomas Hearns impersonator.
At 32, Hearns was supposed to be too old to handle a young champion like Hill.
Yet for 12 rounds, Hearns -- a man frequently referred to as a shot fighter -- drove one long-armed jab after another into Hill's face, a steady tattoo that preceded the hammering left hooks and occasional rights he used to keep the 27-year-old Hill bewitched, bothered and, in the end, bereft of his World Boxing Association light-heavyweight title.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-17
The next Ambassador to Moscow will be Robert Strauss, an old friend of President Bush from Texas, a Democratic doyen and master of the political and economic deal, the President announced.
Page A1
Man in the news: Robert Strauss is a legendary businessman and deal maker, and that made him an attractive choice to President Bush at a time when fostering commercial relations with the Soviet Union is high on the President's agenda.
A1


Quotation of the Day
"It ain't an easy job and it's not comfortable surroundings, but the President and Jim Baker talked me into it, and I'm going to give it the best shot I got." -- Robert S. Strauss, named ambassador to Moscow.  [ A1:5. ]


Metro Datelines; Man Admits Rape Of a Cousin, 12
A Brooklyn man pleaded guilty yesterday to the statutory rape of his 12-year-old cousin, who dropped their newborn baby into a trash compactor two months ago.
Clarence Perry, 21, pleaded guilty in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn to having sex with a female less than 14 years old.


Sports of The Times; The Champ Takes a Bus Into Past
HE dozed for much of the ride, sitting in the next-to-last seat of the chartered bus.
Around him, his old friends and his old riders gabbed away, telling stories of the past and present.
For most of this bus ride, Muhammad Ali was the most tranquil of passengers, but he was also the reason 50 people were riding from New York on a cool spring morning.
They were taking a bus ride down memory lane, also known as Interstate 78, toward his old training camp, for a day in the country, amidst memories, most of them expressed by others.


Wine Talk
THERE are signs -- just signs, mind you -- that the revolution has begun.
Take, for example, this quote from a newsletter called The Wine and Food Companion: "Is it a good wine? Definitely. Is it worth its price tag? Definitely not."
The comments refer to a Pouilly-Fume, a so-so white wine from the Loire Valley with the name Baron de L. It's packaged in a special bottle and sold for -- get this -- $49.


Business Technology; Satellite System Helps Trucks Stay in Touch
Until recently, some trucking companies used index cards to keep track of drivers and shipments.
Between the times a trucker called in, he was virtually unreachable, his whereabouts at best a guess.
Now, more and more companies have found a way to stay in constant touch with their drivers, and check their locations automatically.
About 15,000 trucks are linked to their headquarters through a communications system that bounces signals from a satellite.
Industry experts expect the network to eventually include 300,000 trucks.


2d Opinions: New World for Patients
"WHO shall decide when doctors disagree?" wondered Alexander Pope more than two centuries ago.
Today the old quandary has taken on new urgency as difficult medical decisions once left to the doctor are increasingly falling to the patient.
Either because their insurance requires it or because they want another view of their options, more and more patients are seeking second opinions.
At the same time, dramatic developments in medical care give patients more and more choices that doctors are increasingly ready to discuss.
In the process patients are discovering to their dismay that medicine rarely offers cut and dried answers.


Congress Is Pressured to Retain the Space Station
The Bush Administration told Congress today that scuttling the space station Freedom could have serious economic and diplomatic results and could deprive the nation's youth of a major source of inspiration.
The White House message was amplified by Japan, Canada and the European Space Agency, partners in the project, whose officials warned that abandonment by the United States of the multibillion-dollar project would jeopardize future international scientific ventures.


Broadway Attendance Is Off, But Happy Face Is Still On
Broadway ended its 1990-91 season with a decline of nearly 6 percent in ticket sales and 9 percent in attendance but with statements that looked on the bright side.
"We find it remarkable that the season was as strong as it was in the context of the economy," Harvey Sabinson, executive director of the League of American Theaters and Producers, said yesterday.


Company News; 32 Stores Shut By Highland
Highland Superstores Inc., one of the nation's largest electronics retailers, said today that it had stopped paying its creditors and was closing 32 stores in Texas, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Rhode Island to stave off a bankruptcy court filing.
It closed 10 stores in Minneapolis-St.
Paul and upstate New York in April and expects to take $70 million from earnings to cover reorganization costs in the second quarter.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Robinson's New Post
FRANK ROBINSON, who was dismissed as manager of the Baltimore Orioles on May 23, has agreed to become an assistant general manager for the team, according to the Orioles and ED KEATING , Robinson's agent.
"We're obviously pleased that Frank will continue to be an important member of the Orioles family," said ROLAND HEMOND , the executive vice president and general manager.


The Old Trickster
Richard Nixon is up to his old tricks again -- totally distorting the views of his opponents for the good of America and world peace.
This time he descends from Mount New Jersey to warn against two groups dealing with Soviet policy.
One is "U.S. policy makers" who "separate the issue of economic reform from broader political and strategic questions." The other he variously defines as "many analysts" and "some" (read the Grand Bargainers) who urge "the West to foot the bill -- to the tune of $100 billion or more -- to help Moscow" do the right thing.


Book Notes
Slightly New Name
When "Blue Highways" was published in 1983, the author's name appeared on the cover as William Least Heat Moon.
When the author's name appears this fall on the cover of his new book, "PrairyErth," his last name will be hyphenated: Heat-Moon.


Ioan Tipu, Romanian Official, 53
Ioan Tipu, Romania's Agriculture Minister, died on Monday as he was being rushed to a hospital for treatment of a bleeding ulcer, the Government said.
He was 53 years old.
A Government spokesman, Bogdan Baltazar, said the ulcer was apparently complicated by a liver ailment that led to internal bleeding.


Education Cannot Become Casualty of New York's Budget Ax
To the Editor:
The School Administrators Association of New York State is deeply concerned about the budget crisis.
The impact is devastating to our schools and the programs offered to our children.
Notwithstanding, another, more serious issue is now emerging.
In an attempt to balance the budget, the Regents Scholarship Program has been suspended.
The Regents Scholarship Program, with its $250 award, is not about money, but about rewarding achievement and encouraging high standards.
Even to allow the program to become part of the economic political debate demonstrates a lack of understanding by our elected leaders relative to the only symbolic statewide recognition of excellence.


Computer Said to Be The Fastest
Thinking Machines Inc. said today that it was reclaiming its title as maker of the world's fastest supercomputer by introducing a machine that as many as 100 scientists or engineers could use simultaneously.
The Thinking Machines CM-200 supercomputer is almost twice as fast as the company's previous model, the CM-2, which once held the speed record.
And the new machine is slightly faster than an Intel Corporation supercomputer that was installed last week at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif.


Samuel Bograd, Furniture Retailer, 85
Samuel Bograd, a Paterson, N.J., furniture retailer, died on Sunday at Barnert Hospital in Paterson.
He was 85 years old and lived in Hackensack, N.J.
Mr.
Bograd came to the United States from the Soviet Union in 1922 and graduated in 1928 from the New York University School of Commerce.
In August 1930, he and his brother, David, opened Bograd Brothers Furniture Store on Market Street in Paterson and in 1935 moved to Main Street.
The brother died in 1973 and Mr.
Bograd retired in 1986.


Lawrence Nirenstein, Lawyer, 60
Lawrence Nirenstein, a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke, died on Saturday at his home in Great Neck, L.I.
He was 60 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


200 Million Hawaii Offering For Airport System Priced
A $200 million issue of airport system revenue bonds from the State of Hawaii was initially priced yesterday through a group of underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The maximum yield offered was 7.2 percent for a bond with a 7 percent coupon that was priced at about 97.572.
Underwriters said the issue was covered by an insurance policy from the Financial Guaranty Insurance Company that covers interest and principal payments, giving the bonds a triple-A rating by both Moody's Investors Service and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Bank Funds And C.D.'s Still Falling
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts, which have been declining for more than three months, were down again for the week ended yesterday.
At the Treasury Department's weekly auction on Monday, average discount rates jumped to their highest levels in more than a month.


CHRONICLE
REGIS PHILBIN and KATHIE LEE GIFFFORD are in, and GARY COLLINS and PHYLLIS GEORGE are out, as the hosts of the Miss America Pageant to be broadcast Sept. 14 on NBC .
"There was a joint decision that Gary had been doing it for almost a decade, and we really felt that we were trying to accomplish some things where he didn't fit in as well," said LEONARD HORN , the chairman and chief executive. of the Miss America Organization .
"We're trying to bring some sponaneity back into the show and have some fun with it." He added that Ms.
George was being dropped as well.


Iraqi Town Remains Calm
The streets of this American-occupied town were calm today after an outburst of violence Sunday that left at least five dead, and Kurdish leaders here said they expected no further trouble.
There are no longer any Iraqi police officers or civilian agents of the Saddam Hussein Government in Dohuk.
All fled after Sunday's attack, in which two officials of the ruling Baath Party were beaten to death inside their headquarters.


Three Survive Of Gang of Four
Jiang Qing is the first of the Gang of Four to die.
The four, who said they were following Mao's orders to wage continuous revolution, presided over the Cultural Revolution of 1966-76, during which millions of Chinese were persecuted.
None of the four have been seen in public since their trial in 1980-81.
The surviving three reportedly remain in prison or in detention, but in announcing Ms.
Jiang's suicide at age 77 the Government acknowledged that she had been allowed to leave prison for medical reasons in 1984.


New Campaigns
*
Chiat/Day/Mojo, New York, offers three softly lit spots as its first television commercial campaign for Shearson Lehman Brothers, starting today.
In the spots, clients tell what they want to use Shearson's investment expertise for: for instance, quitting work and attending cooking school in France.
The theme is, "You can get there from here."


When Life Isn't Simply Black or White
WHEN Lia Langworthy was a child, her mother used melting Neopolitan ice cream to show how a white mother and a black father produce a child who has a unique color and character.
Seeing the blending of chocolate, strawberry and vanilla helped her understand that she is biracial.
But when she went to college, other students at the University of California at Berkeley pressured her to pick one race, white or black.
"Close friends came down on me like an ax, saying 'decide now,' " said Ms.
Langworthy, a 21-year-old senior.


Metropolitan Diary
THE time: An evening at the end of a three-day weekend.
The place:
The elevator in an Upper East Side apartment building.
Dramatis personae:
Two luggage-toting young women, both obviously returning from the shore or country.
Woman One:
So how're the French lessons coming along?
Woman Two:
O.K., I guess.
Last week I learned to say "Thank you, I'd love to go to East Hampton" and also "I'm very good at husking corn."
Woman One, confidingly:
I really don't think you can count on that getting you beyond July.
. . .


Sports People: Hockey; Bruins Select Bowness As Team's Next Coach
RICK BOWNESS , the coach of the Maine Mariners of the American Hockey League for the last two seasons, yesterday was named head coach of the Boston Bruins.
He replaces MIKE MILBURY , who gave up the coaching chores last week to concentrate his energies as assistant general manager to HARRY SINDEN .
Bowness, 36 years old, coached 21 of the 39 Bruins who played this season during his two seasons with Maine, where he posted a 65-72-23 record.
"He's got a tremendous background already," Milbury said.
"But he also has a tremendous presence. The players look up to him."


Mattingly Returns And Helps Yanks Roll
The days and nights seemed to pass slowly.
Don Mattingly came to Yankee Stadium, changed into his uniform, watched batting practice and then sat.
And sat.
But last night, after having spent a week on the bench with an injured little finger on his right hand, Mattingly returned to the lineup and regenerated a Yankee team that had failed to produce much more than an occasional pop fly.


Becker Runs Past Chang; Sabatini Gets Even
Power, some of it physical, some of it mental, was the password in the quarterfinal round of the French Open today.
Andre Agassi, Boris Becker, Monica Seles and Steffi Graf simply overwhelmed their opponents.
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, who has never seen a ball she wasn't compelled to chase down, out-scurried her adversary.
And in the most intriguing match of the day, Gabriela Sabatini played a combination of Houdini and opossum against Jana Novotna, who sent her away from Paris in tears after last year's fourth round.
That upset provoked Sabatini not only to change her coach, but to also revamp her game.
Once stigmatized as being one-dimensional and a non-fighter, the Argentine is no longer.


Books of The Times; 2 Collections of Views on America's Recent Wars
Panama: The Whole Story By Kevin Buckley 304 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster $21.95.
The March to War Edited and Introduced by James Ridgeway 244 pages.
Four Walls Eight Windows. $9.95.


Death Toll Exceeds 30 in Eruption Of Volcano in Southwest Japan
More than 30 journalists, scientists, farmers and emergency workers died in a volcanic eruption in southwestern Japan on Tuesday, military officials said today, virtually all of them in a village that was burned away in a torrent of lava and stone.
Soldiers who tried to enter the hardest-hit area, called Kita-Kamikoba, in armored cars and tanks said they had counted 28 bodies before they were driven away by explosions that gained intensity this afternoon.
Only four bodies were picked up, and none of the 28 were positively identified.
Five other people have died in hospitals, mostly from breathing the superheated, asphyxiating gases.


Drug Shows Promise Against Migraines
DOCTORS are using a new kind of drug to treat migraines, a chemical that directly affects the brain receptors thought to be responsible for these debilitating headaches.
Migraine remedies now in use to quell the symptoms are not reliably effective and often produce side effects, like sedation and nausea.


Extradition Ordered in Medgar Evers Death
The man who was twice tried but never convicted in the 1963 slaying of the civil rights leader Medgar Evers has lost a round in his extradition fight, but his lawyer says there will be an appeal.
The Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals ruled on Monday that the suspect, Byron de la Beckwith, 70 years old, must be extradited to Mississippi to stand trial a third time.


School Bridge Plan Ends Up In Hot Water in City Council
It wasn't the waters under a proposed footbridge to the new Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan that were troubled.
It was the fact that there was no water that roiled a City Council hearing.
Three members and a borough president at the hearing on Monday wondered why, when New York City is trying to resolve grave fiscal problems, it was necessary to adorn a school with a $9.4 million pedestrian bridge that would traverse only the hazards of the West Side Highway, not any river or stream.


Cheney Says U.S. Plans New Arms Sale to the Mideast
In the second major weapons deal since President Bush pledged last week to curb the Middle East arms race, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said today that the United States would sell attack helicopters to the United Arab Emirates.
Pentagon officials said the United States planned to sell 20 Apache gunships to the United Arab Emirates and 8 to Bahrain.
They would be the first gulf nations to buy the Army's most advanced attack helicopters.


Bill to Check Executive Pay
Salaries of corporate executives are "spiraling out of control," Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, said today as he introduced legislation to give shareholders a larger voice in setting the pay of top company officers.
The bill would allow stockholder votes on salaries and other compensation of chief executives and directors.
It would also require broader disclosure of pay packages.


Gloomier Forecast on Ad Outlays
Recent economic data may suggest that the worst of the recession is over, but a respected advertising industry forecaster has slashed his predictions of how much advertisers will spend in the United States this year.
Ad spending in 1991 will reach $132.6 billion, up only 3.1 percent from $128.6 billion in 1990, which itself was revised downward, the forecaster, Robert J. Coen, senior vice president at McCann-Erickson U.S.A., said yesterday in New York.


Education Cannot Become Casualty of New York's Budget Ax; Governor on Aid
To the Editor:
In "A Fairer Shake for Poorer Schools" (editorial, May 15), you discuss the efforts of certain Long Island school districts to challenge the constitutionality of New York State's school financing system, and you assert of school aid that "Albany needs to get serious about giving a larger, fairer share to the state's least fortunate children."
The Governor couldn't agree more.
And we have acted to implement fairness.
For example, in the first budget proposed by the Governor, for the 1983-84 fiscal year, he recommended that the school aid formula take into account the average income of each district, in an attempt to direct more aid to low-income districts.
The Legislature adopted that proposal in 1984.
In addition, the Governor has repeatedly sought the reduction or elimination of "flat grant" aid, which guarantees some state aid payments to even the wealthiest districts.


Goodyear Gets New Chairman
Stunning the tire industry, the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said yesterday that Tom H. Barrett, its chairman and chief executive for the last two years, had resigned.
His successor is Stanley C. Gault, a Goodyear director who retired one month ago as chairman and chief executive of Rubbermaid Inc.
Many in the tire industry viewed the change, which became effective yesterday, as a response to Goodyear's dismal financial performance in recent quarters.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.86
5.96
8.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.62
5.58
7.70
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.71
7.61
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.04
7.98
8.48
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.38
8.33
8.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.44
9.40
9.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.20
7.18
7.50
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
A bill to allow the "Baby Bells" to manufacture equipment was passed by the Senate, 71 to 24.
Although the measure faces an uphill battle in the House, the vote is an important first step toward rewriting the A.T.&amp;T. breakup decree.  [ D1. ]
The Time Warner board reportedly met to consider a proposal to raise $3 billion in equity through an unusual form of stock offering that would involve as many as 30 million new shares.  [ D1. ]


Marion Husid Is Wed To William S. Stone 2d
Marion Husid, a daughter of Mrs.
Morris Kessler of Morristown, N.J., and the late Philip Husid, was married yesterday to William S. Stone 2d, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Roger P. Stone of Hingham, Mass.
Rabbi Harvey S. Goldman performed the ceremony at Temple Sharey Tefilo-Israel in South Orange, N.J.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is an independent art historian and a researcher in New York.
She graduated from New York University where she also received a master's degree in art history.


WEALTHY NATIONS WARY ON OFFERING SOVIETS QUICK AID
Most key officials at a gathering of the industrial world's finance ministers said today that Western nations should not grant large-scale economic aid to the Soviet Union until Moscow first demonstrates its commitment to substantial economic reform.
At the two-day meeting of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady and other finance ministers all but ruled out quick action on a large-scale aid program for the Soviet Union.


Housing Fight In Brooklyn Is Settled
A housing discrimination suit that was part of a long-simmering feud between Hispanic and Hasidic groups in Brooklyn was settled yesterday when the New York City Housing Authority agreed to accept only black or Hispanic applicants for vacancies over the next several years in three projects in the Williamsburg section.
The housing settlement, signed in April by Judge Charles H. Tenney of Federal District Court in Manhattan and made public at a news conference yesterday, marks the end of a long battle that centered on ethnic balance in the Williamsburg projects, where 68 percent of the residents are Hasidic Jews.


5 Publishers Are Seeking Schwarzkopf's Autobiography
Five publishing houses -- Bantam, HarperCollins, Alfred A. Knopf, William Morrow &amp; Company and Random House -- have each bid $2.5 million to $5 million for the life story of Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf, sources in the publishing business have said.
The amounts bid depend on the rights the publishers seek.
But even those amounts are likely to rise, since the "finalists," as one publisher in the running called the five houses, are reworking their bids to resubmit by tomorrow.
The wide difference in bids results from the fact that General Schwarzkopf's agent, Marvin Josephson, invited three types of bids, for world rights, English-language rights (which includes the United Kingdom and Australia) or North American rights.


Pop in Review
Jerry Gonzalez's Fort Apache Band  The Village Gate
Modern Latin jazz groups are often underpowered hybrids that provide neither the sheer funky power of a salsa orchestra nor the pleasures of good jazz improvisation.
One of the exceptions showed up in a Salsa Meets Jazz concert Monday, in the form of Jerry Gonzalez's Fort Apache band.
Mixing Miles Davis-influenced jazz from the 1960's with deep Afro-Cuban percussion, the band has come up with something immensely dramatic, music that constantly shifts angles and approaches.
One suite combined scraps of John Coltrane's "Love Supreme" with Mr.
Davis's "Milestones," as the rhythm section moved from sleek swinging to dirty and percussive latin rhythms.


Debt Update From Trump
Donald J. Trump has told state gaming regulators that he has resolved his casino's debt problems and that his banks are reviewing the situation.
Mr.
Trump must keep the New Jersey Casino Control Commission updated on his progress in reorganizing the billion-dollar debt of his three casinos in order to keep them licensed.
The casinos -- the Trump Castle, Trump Plaza and Trump Taj Mahal -- are the subject of a financial stability hearing on June 17 before the commission.


Hard Rock Cafe Venture
The founders of the Hard Rock Cafe plan a $75 million hotel and casino here that will be "a walk on the wild side," with guitar-shaped gaming tables and memorabilia to draw some new gamblers.
"We did a lot of marketing studies," Peter Morton, Hard Rock's founder. said today.
"Everything gave us an extremely strong indication that there are a lot of 30-year-olds in America who go to Bruce Springsteen concerts and like to gamble."


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL Amercian League CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Signed Scott Ruffcorn, pitcher.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Signed Anthony Banks, outfielder; Shawn Miller, David Sartain and Dennis Sweeney, pitchers.
Assigned Miller and Banks to Fort Myers of the Gulf Coast League and Sartain and Sweeney to Elizabethton of the Appalachian League.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Christopher Stynes, third baseman; Louis Benbow, shortstop; and Roger Doman, Andrew Dolson, and Steven Sinclair, pitchers.
National League  NEW YORK METS -- Signed Al Shirley, outfielder, and Frank Jacobs and John Kiraly, first basemen.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Signed Tommy Eason, catcher; John Mallee, shortstop; Tom Bilet, outfielder; and John Whisonault, pitcher.
BASKETBALL Continental Basketball Association RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Named Eric Musselman coach and general manager.
United States Basketball League LONG ISLAND SURF -- Released Troy Bowers, forward.
Signed Elmer Anderson, guard.
NEW HAVEN SKYHAWKS -- Released Kevin Calhoun, forward.
Activated Chris Watts, guard.
Named Mike Weild trainer and Matt Melisi strength and conditioning coach.
World Basketball League SASKATCHEWAN STORM -- Waived Robby Metcalf, forward.
YOUNGSTOWN PRIDE -- Signed Steve Mitchell, guard.
Placed Terry Connolly, center, on the taxi squad.
FOOTBALL National Football League SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Wayne Dickson, linebacker; Tom Whelian, kicker; Ruben Rodriguez, punter; and Mike Withycombe, tackle.
Arena Football League ALBANY FIREBIRDS -- Signed Rod Ferguson, lineman.
Activated Dave Jakob, fullback-linebacker, and Myron Jefferson and John Chaney, wide receivers-defensive backs, from injured reserve.
Placed Alvin Blount, fullback-linebacker, and Garland Rivers, Steve Thonn and Keith Henry, wide receivers-defensive backs, on injured reserve.
DALLAS TEXANS -- Signed Ben Bennett, quarterback.
Placed Anthony Dailey, lineman, on injured reserve.
DENVER DYNAMITE -- Signed Mitch Young, lineman.
Placed Tim Adams, lineman, on injured reserve.
DETROIT DRIVE -- Activated Steve Slay, lineman, from injured reserve.
Placed Greg Fitzpatrick, wide receiver-defensive back, on waivers.
ORLANDO PREDATORS -- Signed Quinton Knight, lineman.
Placed Dwight Bingham, lineman, on waivers.
Canadian Football League BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Steve Vaipulu, linebacker.


U.S. Approves Pipeline Plan
The Government today approved a natural gas development project that will allow six companies to build pipelines to tap a huge supply in southern Alabama.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission approved the project, under which 152 miles of onshore and offshore pipeline would be built for about $188.3 million.


Currents; Les Jardins Of East 57th Street
THIS exhibit of renowned French gardens won't replace a trip to Versailles or Villandray, but it does make for some dazzling store windows.
The third Colbert Promenade opened last night at 16 stylish French shops -- Christian Dior, Chanel, Baccarat, Givenchy, Guy Laroche and Lalique among them -- along Madison and Fifth Avenues and East 57th Street.


Space Yes; Space Station No
What a mess!
After seven years and $5.6 billion, NASA's proposed space station faces sudden death.
The House of Representatives will vote today on an appropriations bill to eliminate virtually all the station's funding.
Late as it is for this decision, the station deserves to go.
The grandiose project, designed to be the next centerpiece of the ailing space program, has become ever more pinched in scope and vision, yet it remains dreadfully costly.
Termination is probably the only cure.


New Campaigns
*
Two television commercials for Perrier, the imported sparkling water, are being imported, too.
The spots, featuring a face-off between a woman and a lion, and a cosmic dance of computer-animated planets, were created by Ogilvy &amp; Mather, Paris. *
Korbel champagne sells itself as the summer bubbly in the latest installment of its "We have so much to celebrate" campaign, created by FCB/ Leber Katz Partners, New York.


If You Want To Brew Tea, Use a Tea Bag
THIS is the week to commune with contemporary teapots at museums in and around New York.
A good number of these teapots were never intended to brew chamomile, but they are bound to cause constant comment among viewers.
They have loose lids, these pots.
"What's nice about some of the teapots here is that they deny their function," Garth Clark, a ceramic historian, was saying as he strolled through an exhibition and sale of 250 teapots, cups and accessories, which runs through Sunday at the American Craft Museum at 40 West 53d Street in Manhattan.


CHRONICLE
Lawyers for CHIPS MOMAN, a record producer, went to the Georgia Supreme Court Tuesday demanding more money from RINGO STARR.
Last year a Georgia judge awarded $74,354 to Mr.
Moman for the collapse of an album deal between the two men, The Associated Press said.


Eisenhower Letters Hint at Affair With Aide
A previously unknown collection of wartime letters from Gen.
Dwight D. Eisenhower to his driver, Capt.
Kay Summersby, appears likely to stir renewed debate over whether the two were lovers during the last year of World War II.
Both General Eisenhower, who was married, and Captain Summersby initially denied the long-rumored romance.
But in 1976, as she was dying of cancer, Miss Summersby published a second book of memoirs of the war years, "Past Forgetting: My Love Affair With Dwight D. Eisenhower," in which she described a passionate but frustrating affair with the Supreme Allied Commander.


Taxpayer Ire Not Evident in New Jersey's Primary
New Jersey's two major parties got through Tuesday's primary elections without rebuke from an angry electorate that many political leaders had feared was bent on making changes.
Only two incumbent legislators, both Democrats, were denied nominations for new terms.
But the losses by Senator Thomas H. Paterniti of Edison and Assemblyman George J. Otlowski of Perth Amboy were ascribed to local issues and not to broad voter unrest over taxes.


U.S. Grants 3 Airlines Routes to Soviet Union
The Transportation Department yesterday selected two established airlines and a new one to serve the Soviet Union from New York and Chicago.
The awards would mean a large increase in service between North America and the Soviet Union, which are now served by Pan American World Airways Inc. and Aeroflot, the state-owned Soviet carrier.


Pippen Performs Magic on Defense
It was Showtime, Chicago style, tonight.
And it featured all the Bulls, rather than just Michael Jordan.
Chicago's 107-86 rout of the Los Angeles Lakers in Game 2 of the National Basketball Association Finals was in sharp contrast to Game 1 on Sunday.
During that game, Jordan was a one-man offensive machine, Scottie Pippen shot poorly and Bill Cartwright, Horace Grant and John Paxson were non-factors, combining for a total of 18 points.


Bulgaria Presses Inquiries Into the Communist Past
In an effort to put the Communist past to rest, the Bulgarian authorities are conducting sweeping investigations into allegations of crimes by the former Government ranging from corruption to the attempt on the life of Pope John Paul II.
Since February the Government has been trying the nation's former leader, Todor Zhivkov, on corruption charges, and looking into the transport of tens of thousands to prison camps under the Communists.


Bridge
The most popular bridge event in the world is the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest.
A year ago there were 87,000 participants, and the organizers are hoping to close in on six figures when it is played for the sixth time tomorrow night.
Games in the New York metropolitan area will be at the following clubs:


Export Agency's Offering of Notes
The Private Export Funding Corporation, which makes loans to foreign borrowers to finance purchases of United States capital goods, yesterday priced $100 million in 8.15 percent notes due 1997 through underwriters led by Citicorp Securities.
The notes were offered at a price of 99.778 to yield 8.195 percent, or about 37 basis points over the Treasury five-year note.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


U.S. Coal Production
American coal companies are expected to match last year's record production of 1.35 billion tons this year, but flat demand will probably leave millions of tons in stockpiles, the head of an industry group said.
"While production will be at record levels, we may have to be a little innovative as far as exports to make sure that it disappears," said John A. Knebel, the president of the American Mining Congress, which is holding its annual meeting here this week.
Mr.
Knebel said the gap between supply and demand had put pressure on the industry to find new markets, especially abroad, or face possible mine closings and job losses.


Voters End Tradition of 98 Years In Sending Democrat to Congress
For almost a century, voters in the hills of western Massachusetts have defied this state's Democratic tradition and sent a Republican to Washington to represent them in Congress.
But this year, despite campaign appearances by President Bush and his wife, Barbara, and by the newly elected Republican Governor, William F. Weld, voters in the 1st Congressional District have had a change of heart.


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices fell today, with the Nikkei index of 225 issues closing below the 25,000 mark for the first time since Feb. 12.
The Nikkei dropped 305.45 points, or 1.21 percent, to 24,984.12.


Corrections
An obituary by The Associated Press last Thursday about Eugene Lourie, a movie art director, misstated his connection with the film "The Beast From 20,000 Fathoms." He directed it; the special effects were by Ray Harryhausen.


Thomas A. Hannan, Entertainer, 40
Thomas A. Hannan, an actor and singer who was a founder of Community Research Initiative and of the People With AIDS health group, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 40 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his companion, Carl Goodman.


90's Candidate: Raising Money to Raise Profile
Forget about name recognition.
Representative Robert J. Mrazek, the Long Island Democrat trying to unseat Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, doesn't even have name pronunciation.
When a partner in a law firm here recently introduced the five-term Congressman to his colleagues as "Bob Meer-AY-sick," Mr.
Muh-RAZ-ick didn't even wince.
"It's O.K.," said the grandson of Czechoslovak immigrants.
"I accept five different pronunciations of my name."


Council Passes Civil Rights Bill For New York
The New York City Council approved a civil rights bill yesterday that gives the city one of the strongest laws in the nation prohibiting discrimination in housing, employment and public accommodations.
The bill reaches much further than existing city law to protect New Yorkers from discrimination and offer them legal and financial remedies.


FNN Holders File Lawsuit
Stockholders of the troubled Financial News Network and Infotechnology Inc. have sued Deloitte &amp; Touche, contending that the accounting firm conspired to mislead investors about the companies' financial condition.
Infotechnology, a venture capital firm based in New York, owned 46 percent of FNN.
The cable channel was bought by NBC last month after it filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy earlier in the year.


Productivity Rise Revised Downward
Businesses outside the farming sector were less productive in the first quarter than originally estimated, the Government said today.
The report was evidence that the recession's drag on manufacturers was more severe than previously feared.
The Labor Department said nonfarm productivity rose at only a three-tenths of 1 percent annual rate in the first three months of the year, instead of the 1 percent increase previously reported.
Non-farm productivity had fallen at a seven-tenths of 1 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 1990.


President Is Quitting At Santa Fe Railway
Two years after his promotion to president and chief operating officer of the railway unit of the Sante Fe Pacific Corporation, Michael R. Haverty said yesterday that he planned to resign and "pursue new challenges."
Santa Fe's corporate staff of more than 400 was reduced to fewer than 100 late last year after the company transferred ownership of its real estate and energy operations to shareholders, with railroad staff taking over most functions.


Gorbachev, at Nobel Ceremony, Appeals for Help From the West


A Gulf Parade With Six Tons of Ticker Tape
Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf may have won praise for his leadership in the Persian Gulf war, but it takes a seasoned New Yorker to get 1,000 troops to advance to their rendezvous point via the No. 1 downtown.
Even seasoned New Yorkers may be taken aback on Monday as the city welcomes Gulf war veterans with a ticker-tape parade.
Some will be hooking up to subway straps with troops that would rather be airborne.
Others, if pessimistic predictions come true, may be hit by some of the dumbest bombs in the world: out-of-date phone books flung from highrises by offices workers too impatient to tear them up for confetti.


British Government Offers Bill to Neuter Pit Bull Dogs
The Government proposed today that owners of dangerous dogs be required to have their pets neutered, but backed off from a stricter plan.
The Government said it would not seek the immediate destruction of the 10,000 American pit bull terriers in Britain, as it proposed earlier.
Instead, owners of dogs bred for fighting would be required to have them neutered, obtain a permit, hold third party insurance, and keep their dogs muzzled and on a leash in public.


Review/Television; Norman Lear's Sitcoms, Past and Present, on CBS
Norman Lear's past and present are bumping up against each other on CBS these Sunday evenings and the past is winning hands down.
Mr.
Lear's new series, being shown at 8, is "Sunday Dinner" and, with autobiographical overtones, it's all about a successful businessman and father who marries a successful professional woman considerably younger than himself.
Mr.
Lear's old series, at 8:30, is "All in the Family" and it's all about . . . well, no need to go into that.
Everybody knows the Bunkers.
And despite years of multiple reruns for "All in the Family" in syndication, the episode shown last Sunday on network prime time -- the show's very first episode -- ended up among the week's Top 10 ratings.
And that series just gets better.


Like Father, Like . . .
BRETT HULL of the St.
Louis Blues became part of the first father-son team to win the Hart Trophy when he was named the National Hockey League's most valuable player at the league's award ceremony in Toronto last night.
Hull, son of Hall of Famer BOBBY HULL, beat out scoring champion WAYNE GRETZKY of the Los Angeles Kings and Chicago rookie goaltender ED BELFOUR, who won two other awards, in the balloting by selected members of the Professional Hockey Writers Association.


Review/Theater; A 1964 Success Story Returns, But How the World Has Changed
Though the date was 1964, it seems a lifetime ago that "The Subject Was Roses" was Broadway's little play that could: a three-character drama that opened at season's end with no stars, a tiny budget and a tinier advance sale ($165) but that miraculously built an audience that led to an 832-performance run and the Pulitzer Prize.
In the theater, perhaps, "Roses" really was a lifetime ago.
Such fairy tales don't happen on Broadway anymore -- unless they are manufactured with an infusion of capital and hype.
And people don't really write plays like this one anymore, either, in which a plain-spoken Mom, Dad and Son settle every score once and for all, neatly, directly, in two acts that leave no psychological threads untied.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Avantek Inc., Santa Clara, Calif., a microwave electronics company, said it cut its worldwide work force by 225 employees, or about 10 percent. *
Dart Group Corp., Landover, Md., said Shoppers Food Warehouse, of which Dart owns half, would acquire seven Basics supermarkets in the Washington area from Super Rite Foods Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.


Calendar: The Look Of City And Lawn
Shaping the City  New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West at 77th Street; (212) 873-3400.
"McKim, Mead &amp; White's New York," an exhibition of 60 drawings and photographs of the Brooklyn Museum, the old Pennsylvania Station and other buildings designed by the firm, starts Wednesday and runs through Aug. 18.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tuesday through Sunday.
Admission: $4.50; $3 for those 65 and older and students; $1 for children 11 and younger.


2 Drafted at C. W. Post
JIM RUOCCHIO and JOHN FRASCATORE, members of the C. W. Post team that won the Diamond Conference championship this season, were among the players selected on Monday in the major leagues' amateur draft.
Ruocchio, a senior third baseman, was chosen in the 24th round by the California Angels after batting .436 with 18 home runs and a school record 65 runs batted in in 43 games this season.
Ruocchio, who hit safely in his last 25 games, played at Cardozo High School in Bayside, Queens, then played three years at Long Island University in Brooklyn before transferring to C. W. Post.


Limits Placed on United's Frequent Fliers
United Airlines Inc. and the First Chicago Corporation, operators of one of the nation's largest frequent-flier programs, said yesterday that they planned to curb the largest awards.
A few customers, they said, have been earning free flights without paying interest charges on First Chicago credit cards linked to the program.
Starting next Jan. 1, participants will be able to earn a maximum of 10,000 frequent-flier miles per 25-day billing period and 50,000 miles a year.
Cardholders are being notifed in letters being mailed this week.


Review/Music; A Master Of Guitar Makes a Rare Appearance
There's a searching quality to Barney Kessel's guitar improvisations: modern, cool harmonies slide in next to perfectly shaped be-bop phrases, which seem tame compared to the wild effusions that come next.
Southwestern blues phrases, dry and cynical, punctuate the solos, and rhythms pile on rhythms.
At age 67, Mr.
Kessel, who will be performing through Sunday at the Village Vanguard in his first New York appearance in nearly a decade, is a master, and in his hands a good part of American music and culture become audible.
One of the first modern jazz guitarists, Mr.
Kessel has performed with everyone from Art Tatum to Liberace, but he started his professional career in 1937 as a 14-year-old guitarist in Ellis Ezell's band in Muskogee, Okla.
That in itself would not be so unusual, except for the fact that Mr.
Kessel was a white teen-ager working in a black dance band in black clubs in Oklahoma.


People
*
Lori Spano has been named president of Advertising Women of New York.
She is president of Ackerley Airport Advertising, New York.


Topics of The Times; The Boom in Books
Americans are TV watchers, it is said, not readers.
But then it is hard to explain two striking statistics: Since 1980, the number of bookstores has grown by a robust 76 percent, to 17,620, outpaced among specialty stores only by fast-food restaurants.
And since 1986, bookstore sales have jumped from $4.9 billion to an estimated $7.9 billion this year.
A facile explanation is that these figures reflect weightless fiction and celebrity biographies.
But that's not what reporters heard this week at the American Booksellers Association's convention.
The vendors attribute climbing sales to demand for general non-fiction, children's books, travel, reference works and "midlist fiction" -- novels that cater to adult readers.


Large Foot in Board-Room Door
As chief executive of the nation's largest public pension fund, Dale M. Hanson is an investor with an attitude.
Under Mr.
Hanson, the California Public Employees Retirement System, as the pension fund is formally known, recently assailed the ITT Corporation for the $30 million in compensation it gave its chairman, Rand V. Araskog, during the last four years when ITT's shares fell 10 percent.


Street Scene in Prague: Drugs and Money
To the Editor:
In "The New Prague Spring" (Editorial Notebook, May 13), Jack Rosenthal describes scenes in Prague and Bratislava, an area to which I have traveled recently, focusing on the economic optimism of Czechoslovaks since the fall of the Communists in 1989.
He mentions that a darker side of capitalism has also evolved, and that crime and pornography have increased in Czechoslovakia.
The rising crime rate can be partly attributed to increasing drug consumption and addiction.
The latest entrepreneurs are the drug dealers.


Kidnapped Girl and Family Reunited
Four-year-old Kelly Gonzalez, who the police feared had been killed by kidnappers who abducted her eight days ago, stood with her mother before a battery of television cameras in the Police Chief's office today, tugging at a white stuffed duck and smiling shyly.
At 10:30 Tuesday night Kelly was found crying outside a bodega in northern Manhattan, eight days after gunmen posing as police officers took her from her Hackensack apartment.
And now she was the centerpiece of a happy portrait with her mother and baby brother and the cause of a moment of deep relief for the police officers and Federal agents around them.


Setting Up a Pond, And Picking the Plants
"ALTHOUGH the best location for a water garden is a sunny spot, it's more important to place it where it looks the nicest," said Robert W. T. Scherer, the fourth generation of aquatic nurserymen at S. Scherer &amp; Sons in Northport, L.I.
"Many water species need four hours minimum. But there are also a number that manage with less."
Once the site and choice of pool material is made and the pond is installed and level, it should be filled three-quarters full.
This leaves room for the water to rise when potted aquatic plants are added.


200 Ethiopians Trapped in West Bank
While Israel has promised not to settle any of its new Ethiopian immigrants in the occupied territories, nearly 200 Ethiopians from the last airlift, in 1984, say they have been trapped against their will for seven years here in the West Bank's most militant Jewish settlement.
As soon as the 14,100 new immigrants stepped off the planes late last month, Simcha Dinitz, the nation's most senior immigration official, said all of them "are going to be housed in our 100 absorption centers, and none of them are in the territories."


Ford Continues Rebates
The Ford Motor Company said today that a new buyer-incentive program took effect today that continued or increased cash rebates on most cars and trucks.
The program, which ends July 30, replaces one that expired on Tuesday.
The rebates are being offered on 14 car models and five truck lines and they range from from $500 to $1,600.


Gorbachev, in Oslo, Links World Peace to Perestroika
Bidding for more support from the West, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev warned today that the failure of his campaign to restructure the broken Soviet economy would cost the world its best chance yet for a new era of peace.
Mr.
Gorbachev, delivering the traditional lecture as winner of the 1990 Nobel Peace Prize, appeared to borrow a line from President Bush when he said that the best chance of building "a new world order" would be with the success of his efforts to change the Soviet system.


Adoptive Father Faces Excess Force Charge
The Harlem man who is charged with sexually abusing one of the 35 children he adopted will also be accused of using excessive corporal punishment on the teen-ager, a lawyer for New York City's Human Resources Administration said in a court hearing yesterday.
The lawyer, Maria Peralta, told Judge Edward M. Kaufmann in Manhattan Family Court that a report from Bellevue Hospital, where the girl was examined, will be introduced to support the punishment charge.


Charles Schwab In an Acquisition
The Charles Schwab Corporation signed an agreement to acquire Mayer &amp; Schweitzer Inc., a market maker in over-the-counter securities, for approximately $28 million in cash.
The transaction is expected to be completed in July, subject to regulatory approval and other conditions.


RIGHTS BILL PASSES IN HOUSE BUT VOTE IS NOT VETO-PROOF
The House of Representatives today passed a major civil rights bill intended to make it easier for victims of job discrimination to sue and collect damages, but the vote fell well short of the veto-proof margin the Democratic leadership had hoped for.
The vote was 273 to 158, and the number in favor was the same as a very similar bill received last Oct. 19.
Critically, the total was 17 short of the 290 votes needed to a override a veto if all 435 Representatives vote.
President Bush has said he would veto this measure, as he did last year's, calling it a "quota bill."  [ Roll-call, page B10. ]


Farm Credit Banks' $330 Million Issue
The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation priced a $330 million consolidated systemwide bond issue yesterday through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
It brought the total amount of Government agency debt priced this week to about $2 billion.
Farm Credit officials said the two-year bonds had a 6.9 percent coupon and were offered to investors at a price of 100.
According to traders outside the selling group, the yield spread over a Treasury security with a similar maturity was about 10 basis points.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Uniroyal-Goodrich
The Uniroyal-Goodrich Tire Company will close up to three plants in Canada.
The company, owned by Groupe Michelin of France, said it would close its tire-cord manufacturing plant in Lindsay, Ontario, on Aug. 30, and would close one or both of its tire factories in Kitchener, Ontario.
The Lindsay plant, with 74 employees, is the least efficient of its tire-cord operations, the company said.
As for the Kitchener plants, Uniroyal-Goodrich cited overcapacity as its reason for the cutback.
The three plants have already had layoffs and work-sharing programs.
In January, the company said it would cut 1,350 jobs at operations in Eau Claire, Wis.


CHRONICLE
The youngest member of the singing Osmond family, JIMMY OSMOND, is to be married tomorrow to MICHELLE LARSON at the Mormon Temple in Salt Lake City.
About 100 friends and family members will be there, with another thousand people invited to a reception, according to a statement from the family.
Mr.
Osmond, 28 years old, met Ms.
Larson, 24, in Salt Lake City.


CHRONICLE
Golf doesn't appear dangerous, but PRINCE WILLIAM landed in the hospital in London for two days this week after being hit in the forehead with a golf club.
Buckingham Palace said the 8-year-old son of PRINCE CHARLES and PRINCESS DIANA returned home to Kensington Palace yesterday after being operated on at the Great Ormond Street Hospital for a fracture.
The accident occured at his school in Wokingham, west of London.


MILITARY RESTORES ORDER IN ALGIERS
A military show of force restored calm to the Algerian capital today after a wave of violent protests by Muslim fundamentalists prompted President Chadli Benjedid to declare a state of emergency and postpone the country's first multiparty parliamentary elections.
President Benjedid, who has pledged to lead Algeria to democracy, also dismissed the Government of Prime Minister Mouloud Hamrouche amid speculation that the long-ruling National Liberation Front might form a coalition with other parties opposed to the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front.
Later today, The Associated Press reported, the President named former Foreign Minister Sid Ahmed Ghozali to head a new government, whose ministers are to be announced on Thursday.


The 'New' Ballesteros Pulls Up In Good Company for Buick Classic
The Buick Classic, which begins on Thursday at the Westchester Country Club, boasts one of the strongest fields of the year on the PGA Tour, tall trees and deep rough that make it an ideal tuneup for next week's United States Open, and America's first look at the renovated Seve Ballesteros.
Only a few of the world's top players are skipping this year's event, most notably Masters champion Ian Woosnam and the tour's leading money winner, Corey Pavin.
Otherwise, the 156-man field will include names like Nick Faldo, Greg Norman, Jose-Maria Olazabal and Paul Azinger, as they prepare to peak for the Open at the Hazeltine National Golf Course in Chaska, Minn., next week.


What's the Hurry in Antarctica?
Antarctica: remote, forbidding, unspoiled and, except for some scientists, tourists and fishermen, uninhabited.
Environmentalists would like to keep it that way -- forever.
Others, tempted by the possibility of oil and mineral deposits, are loath to rule one-tenth of the earth's surface off limits to commercial exploitation.
Two months ago in Madrid, the 26 voting members of the 30-year-old Antarctic Treaty, including the U.S., tentatively settled on a compromise.
It would prohibit mining for 50 years, after which the ban could be lifted only if all present members of the treaty concurred.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Dow Capital B.V., a wholly owned subsidiary of Dow Chemical Canada, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a $500 million shelf offering.


Where Celebrities Live And Dine in Manhattan
Larry Horwitz came to New York from his native Toronto, Canada, a little more than a year ago and has been bumping into the rich and famous ever since.
One result: a map, "Movie Stars' Homes -- New York City," which was introduced this week at the American Bookseller's Association show at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center.


Tarkanian to Decide Soon On 'Retiring' at U.N.L.V.
Jerry Tarkanian, who met with Nevada-Las Vegas president Robert Maxson for 90 minutes yesterday, said he would announce within the next two days whether he will remain or resign as the school's basketball coach.
According to a source close to the program, Tarkanian will resign.
But the source, who asked that he not be identified, said the word "retirement" would probably be used instead.


Public &amp; Private; The Heart's Reasons
Your child is dying.
This is the most important thing.
The doctors say there may be a way to save her life.
It is relatively simple and will also, in the long run, be satisfying and enjoyable.
The question is whether you are willing to do it or not.
The answer seems to me rather obvious.


Robert Terwilliger, 73, An Episcopal Bishop
The Rev.
Robert Elwin Terwilliger, the retired Suffragan Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Dallas, died Monday at a nursing home in Hurst, Tex.
He was 73 years old and lived in Dallas.
He died of a stroke, said a spokeswoman for the family.


National League Expansion Vote Delayed
Even though National League officials have apparently completed their selection of sites for two new franchises, the league announced yesterday that it was postponing a vote of approval by major league owners that had been scheduled for next Wednesday.
"Although the committee has essentially completed their task, the information to be reviewed by the ownership committee is extensive and will take more time than anticipated," said Douglas Danforth, president of the Pittsburgh Pirates and chairman of the expansion committee.
The ownership commitee is made up of four owners from each league.


Pop in Review
Michael Carvin  Condon's 117 East 15th Street Through Sunday
The drummer Michael Carvin's first set at Condon's on Tuesday night sputtered a bit, only catching fire on the last tune, a radically reworked version of "A Night in Tunisia." Mr.
Carvin started the piece by savaging his high-hat cymbal with persistent blows, punctuated by bass and piano exclamations.
The horns -- Roger Byram on tenor saxophone and Claudio Roditi on trumpet -- spread dots of melody over the separate rhythms of the band, and suddenly charged into the second strain of the melody and into improvisations.
Where the music had wobbled, it suddenly became taut and streamlined.


Currents; To Pay Off This Loan, Just Water
MUSEUMS lend their treasured works, so why can't an arboretum?
The request for a "permanent loan of trees" came from the Friends of Post Office Square, a civic group in Boston.
It seemed perfectly plausible to Dr.
Robert Cook, the director of the Arnold Arboretum in Jamaica Plain, Mass.


Lawyers Ask Trial of Hussein Before War Crimes Tribunal
A group of lawyers urged today that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq be tried for war crimes before an international tribunal.
"It's astonishing that the person who should be in prison is still in power," said Irwin Cotler, chairman of the group, called Nuremberg 2.
"It makes a mockery of international law and the grounds under which the international community and the Security Council went to war."


Citicorp to Price $1.4 Billion In Pools of Credit Card Debt
Citicorp expects to price $1.4 billion in securities backed by credit cards today through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.
The interesting twist in this two-part financing is a portion with an unusually long maturity of seven years.
Underwriters said the longer maturity would be possible by replacing credit card loans that are paid down with new credit card loans.


News Summary
International A3-15
Large-scale aid to the Soviet Union should not be granted until Moscow first demonstrates its commitment to substantial economic reform, most of the world's finance ministers agreed.
Page A1
President Gorbachev said the world would lose its best chance yet for a new era of peace if his campaign to restructure the broken Soviet economy failed.
A12
The Pope praised Lithuanians and offered support for their independence movement, speaking with the same kind of allegoric language he used to inspire the anti-Communist struggle in his native Poland.
A12
Baker and Russian envoy may meet on arms treaty A11
Charges of bias tarnish U.S. Army school on Soviet affairs A13
Slovenia is edging to independence from Yugoslavia, raising a concern of many in the crumbling republic: if Yugoslavia falls apart, what will take its place?
A14
Bulgaria presses inquiries into the Communist past A15
Albania picks a caretaker chief A6 Talks between Iraq and its Kurds are reportedly approaching a breakthrough, though some Iraqi officials say there will be no concession to the Kurd's central demand for control of the oil center of Kirkuk.
A1
Kurdish-Americans searching for relatives A8
Progress on peace talks hinted by Israeli A5
200 Ethiopians trapped in West Bank A3
U.S. elaborates on flaw in Patriot missile A9
South Africa's land ownership laws were scrapped by Parliament.
The laws were used to justify racial discrimination in property ownership and residential selection.
A3
A calm returned to Algeria after a military show of force deterred the wave of violent protests that had prompted President Chadli Benjedid to declare a state of emergency and postpone the nation's first multi-party elections.
A10
New Delhi Journal: Grief for the nation itself A4
Symposium tallies cost of Quebec separation A7  National A16-23, B10-11
A major civil rights bill was passed by the House, but the vote fell short of the veto-proof margin sought by the Democratic leadership.
The bill is intended to make it easier for victims of job discrimination to sue and collect damages.
A1
Switches in G.O.P. cost Democrats big margin B10
A lesbian was ordained to the priesthood by an Episcopal Bishop, in an action that is certain to provoke new debate over homosexuality and the clergy.
A1
Fundamentalist is re-elected by Southern Baptists B11
Senator Mark Hatfield's reputation as a political icon whose integrity was above question has been shattered as disclosures mount about his financial dealings.
A1
Voters end 98 years of sending Democrat to Congress A18
Democrats offer wide health plan A22
A new plan to overhaul supervision of banks D2 Tapes say Nixon saw plot in Pentagon Papers' release A20
Eisenhower letters hint at affair with aide A21
The seven regional Bell companies obtained Senate approval to manufacture equipment, an important first step toward rewriting the antitrust action that broke up A.T.&amp;T.
D1
A disturbance of the magnetic field of the earth began on Tuesday night, threatening electric utility equipment and communication systems, Government scientists said.
The disturbance is caused by temporary changes in solar activity.
A16
Postponed twice, the shuttle lifts off A16
Certain heart rhythm abnormalities are being treated not with surgery or long-term drug therapy, but with the use of short blasts of heat delivered through a tiny tube.
B11
A shot at birth aims to prevent many diseases A23
Harvard appoints new dean for school of arts and sciences A16  Regional B1-8
A civil rights bill was approved by the New York City Council.
It gives the city one of the strongest laws in the nation prohibiting discrimination in housing, employment and public accommodations.
A1
Council resists what Dinkins wants on realty tax B4
New head of Board of Correction to be named B3
A park was open, then closed, then reopened with higher fees, on Long Island.
The confusion, all in the course of a few hours, was a new front in the bitter battle over how to manage the spending cuts required in the New York State budget.
B1
Budget is forcing a special session in Connecticut B9
Taxpayer ire not evident in New Jersey primary B6
Many teachers are expected to retire this year from New York City schools to take advantage of a financial incentive plan, raising concerns that the system may lose some of its best teachers to save the jobs of others with little experience.
B1 Students saw a horror film about a killer doll during an assembly period last month at an intermediate school in Brooklyn.
Parental outrage over the screening prompted the district superintendent to promise that it would not happen again.
B5
A little-known Senate candidate, Representative Robert Mrazek, is facing one of the most difficult challenges in beginning a campaign: raising enough money to buy political respect.
A1
A housing discrimination suit that was part of a feud between Hispanic and Hasidic groups in Williamsburg was settled.
Over the next few years, three area housing projects will accept only black and Hispanic applicants for vacancies.
B1
Three held in beating of black teen-ager B1
Kidnapped girl, 4, is reunited with family B2
A war parade with six tons of ticker tape B3  Business Digest D1 The Home Section
To enhance the garden, a pond C1
A tour of treasured Harlem homes C1
Shows of contemporary teapots C1
Parent &amp; Child C2
Currents C3
When a drawer sticks C5
At London show, little chintz C8
Families that volunteer together C10  Arts/Entertainment
New head of Playwrights Horizons C13
Theater: "The Subject Was Roses" C13
Music: Barney Kessel, guitarist C13
Early music in Boston C13
Word and Image: A summer of experiments for CBS C13
How to build a catapult C17
Publishers bid for Schwarzkopf book C20
Home video C18
Free speech on campus C18  Sports B12-19
Baseball: Reds pound Gooden B13
Yanks lose to Blue Jays B15
Harrelson to meet with teamB15
Basketball: Bulls even series, 1-1 B13
Column: Anderson on Thomson and Branca B13
Golf: A strong field for Buick Classic B17
Horse Racing: Lukas has the winner's circle habit B17  Obituaries D25
Curtis Brewer, lawyer
Rev. W. Stanley Mooneyham, an evangelist  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A24
Space yes; space station no
Don't hurry on Antarctica
Topics: Justice, blinded
Letters A24
Anna Quindlen: The heart's reasons A25
William Safire: "Indeed a very dear friend" A25
Pete V. Domenici and C. Everett Koop: Don't sue the doctor A25
Ross Terrill: Pet monkeys and Deng's dogs A25


Where to Find It; Where Awnings Are In
American Awning And Sun Control  285 Tarrytown Road, White Plains, N.Y. 10607; (914) 946-1703.
In the days before air-conditioning, awnings were popular for keeping houses and apartments cool.
And now with the concern for energy conservation, a growing number of well-dressed windows, sun decks and patios are displaying bright awnings.


Pop in Review
Charlie Watts Quintet  Blue Note
Charlie Watts, the Rolling Stones' drummer, is a jazz fan.
In 1964, he wrote and illustrated a children's book, "Ode to a High-Flying Bird," that sketched Charlie Parker's life story.
The book has been reprinted in a boxed set, "From One Charlie . . ." ( UFO/Continuum ) that also includes music by the English alto saxophonist Peter King, leading a be-bop quintet with Mr.
Watts on drums.
The quintet played a one-night stand on Monday night at the Blue Note, where Bernard Fowler narrated from the book and a video crew recorded the event.


House Vote Approving Democratic-Backed Rights Bill
Following is the roll-call vote of 273 to 158 by which the House of Representatives today approved the Democratic-sponsored civil rights bill.
A "yes" vote is a vote to approve the bill.
Voting "yes" were 250 Democrats, 22 Republicans and 1 Independent.
Voting "no" were 15 Democrats and 143 Republicans.
X denotes those not voting.
There are three vacancies in the 435-member House.
ALABAMA
Democrats -- Bevill, Y; Browder, Y; Cramer, Y; Erdreich, Y; Harris, Y.  Republicans -- Callahan, N; Dickinson, N.  ALASKA
Republican -- Young, N.  ARIZONA
Republicans -- Kolbe, N; Kyl, N; Rhodes, N; Stump, N.  ARKANSAS
Democrats -- Alexander, Y; Anthony, Y; Thornton Y.  Republican -- Hammerschmidt, N.  CALIFORNIA
Democrats -- Campbell, Y; Schroeder, Y; Skaggs, Y.  Republicans -- Allard, N; Hefley, N; Schaefer, N.  CONNECTICUT
Democrats -- DeLauro, Y; Gejdenson, Y; Kennelly, Y.  Republicans -- Franks, N; Johnson, N; Shays, Y.  DELAWARE
Democrat -- Carper, Y.  FLORIDA
Democrats -- Bacchus, Y; Bennett, Y; Fascell, Y; Gibbons, Y; Hutto, N; Johnston, Y; Lehman, Y; Peterson, Y; Smith, Y.  Republicans -- Bilirakis, N; Goss, N; Ireland, N; James, N; Lewis, N; McCollum, N; Ros-Lehtinen, Y; Shaw, N; Stearns, N; Young, N.  GEORGIA
Democrats -- Barnard, N; Darden, N; Hatcher, Y; Jenkins, N; Jones, Y; Lewis, Y; Ray, Y; Rowland, Y; Thomas, Y.  Republican -- Gingrich, N.  HAWAII
Democrats -- Abercombie, Y; Mink, Y.  IDAHO
Democrat -- LaRocco, Y; Stallings, Y.  ILLINOIS
Democrats -- Annunzio, N; Bruce, Y; Collins, Y; Costello, Y; Cox, Y; Durbin, Y; Evans, Y; Hayes, Y; Lipinski, N; Poshard, Y; Rostenkowski, Y; Russo, N; Sangmeister, Y; Savage, Y; Yates, Y.  Republicans -- Crane, N; Fawell, N; Hastert, N; Hyde, N; Michel, N; Porter, N.  INDIANA
Democrats -- Hamilton, Y; Jacobs, Y; Jontz, Y; Long, Y; McCloskey, Y; Roemer, Y; Sharp, Y; Visclosky, Y.  Republicans -- Burton, N; Myers, N.  IOWA
Democrats -- Nagle, Y; Smith, Y.  Republicans -- Grandy, N; Leach, Y; Lightfoot, N; Nussle, N.  KANSAS
Democrats -- Glickman, Y; Slattery, Y.  Republicans -- Meyers, N; Nichols, N; Roberts, N.  KENTUCKY
Democrats -- Hubbard, Y; Mazzoli, Y; Natcher, Y; Perkins, Y.  Republicans -- Bunning, N; Hopkins, N; Rogers, N.  LOUISIANA
Democrats -- Hayes, N; Huckaby, N; Jefferson, Y; Tauzin, Y.  Republicans -- Baker, N; Holloway, N; Livingston, N; McCrery, N.  MAINE
Democrat -- Andrews, Y.  Republican -- Snowe, Y.  MARYLAND
Democrats -- Byron, Y; Cardin, Y; Hoyer, Y; McMillen, Y; Mfume, Y.  Republicans -- Bentley, N; Gilchrest, N; Morella, Y.  MASSACHUSETTS
Democrats -- Atkins, Y; Donnelly, Y; Early, Y; Frank, Y; Kennedy, Y; Markey, Y; Mavroules, Y; Moakley, Y; Neal, Y; Studds, Y.  MICHIGAN
Democrats -- Bonior, Y; Carr, Y; Collins, Y; Conyers, Y; Dingell, Y; Ford, Y; Hertel, Y; Kildee, Y; Levin, Y; Traxler, Y; Wolpe, Y.  Republicans -- Broomfield, N; Camp, N; Davis, Y; Henry, Y; Pursell, N; Upton, N; Vander Jagt, N.  MINNESOTA
Democrats -- Oberstar, Y; Penny, Y; Peterson, Y; Sabo, Y; Sikorski, Y; Vento, Y.  Republicans -- Ramstad, N; Weber, N.  MISSISSIPPI
Democrats -- Espy, Y; Montgomery, N; Parker, N; Taylor, N; Whitten, Y.
MISSOURI
Democrats -- Clay, Y; Gephardt, Y; Horn, Y; Skelton, Y; Volkmer, Y; Wheat, Y.  Republicans -- Coleman, N; Emerson, N; Hancock, N.  MONTANA
Democrat -- Williams, Y.  Republican -- Marlenee, N.  NEBRASKA
Democrat -- Hoagland, Y.  Republicans -- Barrett, N; Bereuter, N.  NEVADA
Democrat -- Bilbray, Y.  Republican -- Vucanovich, N.  NEW HAMPSHIRE
Democrat -- Swett, Y.  Republicans -- Zeliff, N.  NEW JERSEY  Democrats -- Andrews, Y; Dwyer, Y; Guarini, Y; Hughes, Y; Pallone, Y; Payne, Y; Roe, Y; Torricelli, Y.  Republicans -- Gallo, N; Rinaldo, Y; Roukema, N; Saxton, N; Smith, N; Zimmer, Y.  NEW MEXICO
Democrat -- Richardson, Y.  Republicans -- Schiff, Y; Skeen, N.  NEW YORK
Democrats -- Ackerman, Y; Downey, Y; Engel, Y; Flake, Y; Hochbrueckner, Y; LaFalce, Y; Lowey, Y; Manton, Y; McHugh, Y; McNulty, Y; Mrazek, Y; Nowak, Y; Owens, Y; Rangel, Y; Scheuer, Y; Schumer, Y; Serrano, Y; Slaughter, Y; Solarz, Y; Towns, Y; Weiss, Y.  Republicans -- Boehlert, Y; Fish, Y; Gilman, Y; Green, Y; Horton, Y; Houghton, Y; Lent, N; Martin, N; McGrath, N; Molinari, N; Paxon, N; Solomon, N; Walsh, Y.  NORTH CAROLINA
Democrats -- Hefner, Y; Jones, Y; Lancaster, Y; Neal, Y; Price, Y; Rose, Y; Valentine, Y.  Republicans -- Ballenger, N; Coble, N; McMillan, N; Taylor, N.  NORTH DAKOTA
Democrat -- Dorgan, Y.  OHIO
Democrats -- Applegate, Y; Eckart, Y; Feighan, Y; Hall, Y; Kaptur, Y; Luken, Y; Oakar, Y; Pease, Y; Sawyer, Y; Stokes, Y; Traficant, Y.  Republicans -- Boehner, N; Gillmor, N; Gradison, N; Hobson, Y; Kasich, N; McEwen, N; Miller, N; Oxley, N; Regula, N; Wylie, N.  OKLAHOMA
Democrats -- Brewster, Y; English, Y; McCurdy, Y; Synar, Y.  Republicans -- Edwards, N; Inhofe, N.  OREGON
Democrats -- AuCoin, Y; DeFazio, Y; Kopetski, Y; Wyden, Y.  Republicans -- Smith, N.  PENNSYLVANIA
Democrats -- Borski, Y; Coyne, Y; Foglietta, Y; Gaydos, Y; Gray, Y; Kanjorski, Y; Kolter, Y; Kostmayer, Y; Murphy, Y; Murtha, Y; Yatron, Y.  Republicans -- Clinger, N; Coughlin, N; Gekas, N; Goodling, N; McDade, N; Ridge, N; Ritter, N; Santorum, N; Schulze, Y; Shuster, N; Walker, N; Weldon, N.  RHODE ISLAND
Democrat -- Reed, Y.  Republican -- Machtley, Y.  SOUTH CAROLINA
Democrats -- Derrick, Y; Patterson, Y; Spratt, Y; Tallon, Y.  Republicans -- Ravenel, N; Spence, N.  SOUTH DAKOTA
Democrat -- Johnson, Y.  TENNESSEE
Democrats -- Clement, Y; Cooper, Y; Ford, Y; Gordon, Y; Lloyd, Y; Tanner, Y.  Republicans -- Duncan, N; Quillen, N; Sundquist, N.  TEXAS
Democrats -- Andrews, Y; Brooks, Y; Bryant, Y; Bustamante, Y; Chapman, Y; Coleman, Y; de la Garza, Y; Edwards, Y; Frost, Y; Geren, Y; Gonzalez, Y; Hall, N; Laughlin, Y; Ortiz, Y; Pickle, Y; Sarpalius, Y; Stenholm, N; Washington, Y; Wilson, Y.  Republicans -- Archer, N; Armey, N; Barton, N; Combest, N; DeLay, N; Fields, N; Johnson, N; Smith, N.  UTAH
Democrats -- Orton, N; Owens, Y.  Republican -- Hansen, N.  VERMONT
Independent -- Sanders, Y.  VIRGINIA
Democrats -- Boucher, Y; Moran, Y; Olin, Y; Payne, Y; Pickett, Y; Sisisky, X.  Republicans -- Bateman, N; Bliley, N; Slaughter, N; Wolf, N.  WASHINGTON
Democrats -- Dicks, Y; Foley, Y (by tradition, the speaker seldom votes); McDermott, Y; Swift, Y; Unsoeld, Y.  Republicans -- Chandler, N; Miller, N; Morrison, N.  WEST VIRGINIA
Democrats -- Mollohan, Y; Rahall, Y; Staggers, Y; Wise, Y.  WISCONSIN
Democrats -- Aspin, Y; Kleczka, Y; Moody, Y; Obey, Y.  Republicans -- Gunderson, N; Klug, Y; Petri, N; Roth, N; Sensenbrenner, N.  WYOMING
Republican -- Thomas, N.


A Woman's Necessity
To the Editor:
Elizabeth Joseph's article in support of polygamy (Op-Ed, May 23) is excellent, but she misses the point.
She says what we feminists have been saying for years: Wives are a tremendous asset in life.
They're good with kids, quick in the kitchen, flexible and accommodating with arrangements.
Every woman should have one!
RONI C. RABIN Kew Gardens, Queens, May 27, 1991


Postponed Twice, Shuttle Lifts Off
The space shuttle Columbia bolted from its launching pad today, darting between rolling banks of thick clouds and carrying a crew of seven astronauts to medical appointments in space.
With a laboratory in its cargo bay, the shuttle lifted off at 9:24 A.M.
Within hours, the astronauts had begun work on a series of medical tests they hope will offer new information on medical aspects of space flight.


Like a Fly On the Wall
HELENE VERIN has raised the status of bugs.
For her new wallpaper design, Flypaper, introduced recently at the International Contemporary Furniture Fair in Manhattan, she painted flies, butterflies, ladybugs and beetles in gold against plain backgrounds of white, kraft, forest green or deep blue.
There is no danger that a wall will seem obliterated by bugs; the two-inch insects are 32 inches apart.
Each golden bug seems to alight alone.


Honor for Paterno
Citing the coach's emphasis on academic achievement by his players, the National Football Foundation yesterday named JOE PATERNO of Penn State the winner of the Distinguished American Award.


Ally of Dinkins Picked to Head City Jails Panel
In his first appointment to the agency that oversees conditions in New York City's jails, Mayor David N. Dinkins will name a former judge and City Human Rights Commissioner, William H. Booth, as the new head of the Board of Correction, senior mayoral aides said.
The appointment of Mr.
Booth as board chairman will give City Hall an ally and a stronger voice on the board and may help to defuse criticism by the panel of jail policies adopted by the Dinkins Administration.


In Lieu of Grass, A Gurgle, a Ripple
STEADY customers at S. Scherer &amp; Sons are expected to know: Tropical waterlilies are not sold there before the end of May, when pond temperatures reach 70 degrees.
Which is not to say that some regulars at this Northport, L.I., aquatic nursery did not sweet-talk Walton Scherer, or Grandpa, as he is known, into letting them have one of his spectacular bloomers sooner.
But then spring 1991 arrived hot and early.
And the water garden business is booming this year.


Accounts
*
Ford Motor Co., Dearborn, Mich., to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide for its Eastern European business.
The agency won out over Young &amp; Rubicam for the account, for which billings were not disclosed.
O.&amp; M. handles other Ford business overseas.


Topics of The Times; The ------ Word
The Cute Alphabet is filling up fast.
"R" has fallen, as in "the 'R' word," the nervous euphemism for recession heard at the American Booksellers Association's convention in New York this week.
Last week President Bush swept up the "Q" word, applying it to supposed quotas in employment.
A locution that probably was invented to protect innocent young ears from the "F" word is metastasizing, like the dread disease that some people still describe as the "C" word.
Republicans sprinkled the 1988 campaign liberally with the "L" word, and an analyst worried about the dread "E" word, referring to the supposed Republican lock on the Electoral College.


Memorial for Tiny Victim


Who's In Charge Here?


SLOVENIA IS MOVING TO INDEPENDENCE
As Yugoslavia continues to muddle through one crisis after another, the republic of Slovenia is coolly preparing to declare its independence.
In so doing, the tiny Alpine republic of two million people will force a question that few inside or outside the crumbling federation are prepared to face: If Yugoslavia falls apart, what will take its place?
Piece by piece, the Slovenes have erected a structure that they say will give them the political and economic autonomy they need to break loose from Yugoslavia.
The republic has already established control over its foreign trade, custom levies and sales taxes, introduced compulsory military service for its own forces, and come June 26, is expected to start issuing its own money and passports.


Parade and Fireworks
The ticker-tape parade welcoming home veterans of the war in the Persian Gulf and honoring all veterans will take place Monday.
It will begin at 11:30 A.M. in Battery Park and go north along Broadway to Worth Street.
More than 24,000 are expected to march.
Organizers expect it to last until 4 P.M.
Beginning at 9:30 P.M., there will be a fireworks display over the East River in the South Street Seaport area.


Home Improvements
PORTABLE circular saws are among the most commonly owned power tools.
They are also among the most dangerous, because they are awkward to operate without practice.
Following are procedures and advice for using circular saws safely, along with some tips that can make sawing easier and more accurate.
Most circular saws use blades with a diameter of seven and a quarter inches.
A larger saw is rarely needed; in fact, a smaller saw with a blade diameter of six inches is adequate for most home repairs.
Its lighter weight makes it easier to handle, particularly by infrequent users.


Home Video
Material for Children
"Video is a nifty resource for parents who know how to use it," said Peggy Charren, the president of Action for Children's Television of Cambridge, Mass.
"The problem is that when children get in a video store, they go straight to the tapes of what they see on television. Parents should bring home what the kids don't see on TV. That's what video is so terrific at providing."


An Urban Start-Up's Rural Twist
Anyone who doubts that you can find anything in New York should consider the struggling Brooklyn-based biotechnology company that has developed a teat dip to prevent bovine mastitis, a common udder infection in dairy cows.
There are, of course, no dairy herds in the neighborhood of Applied Microbiology Inc.'s headquarters in Sunset Park.
None, either, on lower First Avenue in Manhattan outside the company's cluttered laboratories at the Public Health Research Institute of New York City.
But locating cows and their owners is not Applied Microbiology's problem.
The company has turned the challenge of finding customers over to Babson Brothers Inc., one the nation's largest dairy supply distributors.


PROGRESS ON TALKS HINTED BY ISRAELI
Foreign Minister David Levy of Israel said today that a Mideast peace conference might take place within a matter of weeks, but only hours earlier he had reiterated Israel's view that the United Nations should not take part.
During a visit to Paris for talks with French and other Western European officials, he told a local radio station that "I am sure that all sides know that this is a historic occasion that must be seized."


City Practices Its Hero Worship With a Confetti Rehearsal


Jury Declines to Indict Officers in Assault
A second attempt by the Bronx District Attorney to charge four police officers with assault in the beating of a 12-year-old boy has collapsed, prosecutors said yesterday.
In February the District Attorney withdrew misdemeanor charges that the officers had assaulted Gabriel Rodriguez, who, his mother said, was recovering from an epileptic seizure when the incident occurred.


The Health Page
The Health page, formerly published on Thursdays, now appears each Wednesday in The Living Section.


Army Computer Expert Joins Research Group
The Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation, a computer industry consortium, yesterday named a military computer expert, Alan B. Salisbury, as its executive vice president and chief operating officer.
Dr.
Salisbury will share responsibilities for the day-to-day operations of the consortium with Craig Fields, the chief executive, and Barry H. Whalen, vice president for marketing and customer services.


Corrections
An article on May 22 about the spread of diarrheal illness through fecal contamination in day care centers referred incorrectly to some microorganisms.
Rotavirus is a virus, not a bacterium.
Salmonella is a bacterium, but not a coliform bacterium.
Escherichia coli, a coliform bacterium, spreads through feces but does not cause diarrhea.


Time Warner Is Reported To Weigh a Stock Offering
The board of Time Warner Inc. met last night to vote on a proposal to raise $3 billion in equity through a highly complex rights offering to existing shareholders.
The plan would involve as many as 30 million new shares of Time Warner, several executives close to the talks said.
No one at the company could be reached to comment on the meeting or its outcome last evening.
But certainly, the plan represents a big shift in strategy at Time Warner, which for months had hoped to attract foreign investors.


Gasoline Off More Than 2 To Lowest Level Since War
Gasoline futures plunged more than 2 cents a gallon yesterday to their lowest level since the Persian Gulf war, dragging down the rest of the energy market.
The sharp drop was taken as a sign that the nation's refineries were producing more gasoline than needed, considering the bite that the recession has taken out of demand.


Harris Will Call Shots
Ending several weeks of speculation about his future, Milwaukee Bucks Coach DEL HARRIS said yesterday that he would return for a fifth season of handling the basketball team from the bench instead of devoting himself exclusively to handling basketball operations from the front office.


On CBS, Summer Will Be a Laboratory For 6 New TV Series
Every summer, network television executives watch the prime-time ratings plummet week after week and hope they can at least maintain a pulse until September.
The endless diet of summer reruns has become more unpalatable for viewers with each new year -- and each new cable channel and each new video alternative.
And the network executives admit they need to do something to halt the summer exodus.


Severe Sun Storm Threatens Utilities
A severe disturbance of the Earth's magnetic field, caused by temporary changes in solar activity, began on Tuesday night, threatening electric utility equipment and communication systems, Government scientists said yesterday.
The storm, which produced displays of the northern lights as far south as Pennsylvania on Tuesday, is expected to persist for several days and may intensify.


Ammirati &amp; Puris Quits Club Med Account
Ammirati &amp; Puris and Club Med have split -- again.
The agency announced yesterday that it was resigning the estimated $15 million account.
The two have had a turbulent relationship: They ended a five-year affiliation in 1985, then reunited in 1987.


E.P.A. Plans Bank Rules
Federal regulators, as expected, proposed today to limit banks' liability for pollution caused by their borrowers.
The rules, developed by the Environmental Protection Agency over the last 10 months, would clarify when lenders are liable for cleaning up toxic waste under the 1980 Superfund law.


Courier Uses Force to Eliminate Edberg in Paris
Jim Courier adopted an old technique, the one where he imitates a battering ram, and pummeled top-seeded Stefan Edberg, 6-4, 2-6, 6-3, 6-4, in the quarterfinal round of the French Open this afternoon.
Edberg's elegance proved no match for Courier's brutish groundstrokes as the world's No. 1 player continued a run of futility on the red clay here, deflated by a 20-year-old Floridian playing in his first Grand Slam quarterfinal.


Does the President Mourn    All    Violence?
To the Editor:
In reaction to the abhorrent assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India, President Bush said: "I just don't know what the world is coming to. It's a sad thing for this young man to have lost his life this way. When people resort in a democratic country -- or anywhere -- to violence, it's just appalling" (news article, May 22).


In Harlem, Grace of the Past
THE houses bordering Mount Morris Park in Harlem are "as somber and respectable as anything that the Fifth Avenue section can show," noted Grace M. Mayer, citing a 1903 article in The New York Herald, in her 1958 book on turn-of-the-century New York, "Once Upon a City."
"An exaggeration," Michael Adams said, "but the row houses and churches in the Mount Morris Park area exemplify the incredible architectural riches of Harlem."


Vestige of Another Era: Where's the Parade?
O' somewhere flags may flutter, and somewhere bands may play.
And somewhere youths are marching, but not for Brooklyn-Queens Day.
Today, as codified by the State of New York, is a peculiar holiday that seems to violate the separation of church and state and -- particularly for schoolchildren across the East River -- constitutes an obvious abrogation of equal protection.


Baker and Russian May Meet on Arms Treaty
In an effort to complete a nuclear arms reduction treaty before a summit conference, the Soviet and American Foreign Ministers are contemplating a hastily arranged meeting in Europe this weekend, a senior Administration official said today.
Reporters traveling with Secretary of State James A. Baker, who will attend a North Atlantic Treaty Organization meeting here, were told that President Bush met this morning with Mr.
Baker; the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft; the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen.
Colin L. Powell, and Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney in an effort to get them to hammer out a common American position on the remaining issues in the strategic arms reduction treaty.


Parents &amp; Child
PRAISE from adults is a very strong motivator for children.
It boosts their self-esteem and increases the likelihood that they will repeat whatever behavior brought the praise.
Yet recent research has shown that the relationships between praise, self-esteem and behavior are not as simple as once thought.
Excessive praise for a mediocre performance can be more disturbing to a child than having that performance ignored.


'Baby Bells' Bill Passed By Senate
In a victory for the seven regional Bell companies, the Senate today passed by an overwhelming margin legislation to allow the telephone companies to manufacture equipment.
Although the measure faces an uphill battle in the House of Representatives, today's 71-to-24 Senate vote is an important first step toward rewriting the historic antitrust court ruling that broke up A.T.&amp; T. in l984.


Currents; Whirligig Strategic Defense System
ARE marauding birds or other wild creatures having their way with your garden?
An old-fashioned wooden whirligig just might make enough sound and motion to keep the beasts at bay.
Wolfman-Gold and Good Company in Manhattan stocks a 30-inch-high red, white and blue pinwheel and a 23-inch-high mallard duck with twirling white and green wings.
They cost $15 each.
There is also a pinwheel that spins beneath the watchful eye of a twirling bald eagle (center photo).
This piece, which is 28 inches high, is $60.


New Therapy Combats 2 Types of Racing Heart
Using short blasts of heat delivered through a tiny tube, doctors are curing more than 90 percent of patients with two types of racing heart without surgery or long-term drug therapy, new studies show.
The technique uses tubes inserted into a vein or artery and pushed into the heart.


Currents; Less Muscle Per Snip
IT resembles an oversized wishbone.
Yet this sleek, lightweight pair of hedge shears is ergonomically designed to be easier to wield and inflict less wrist and arm fatigue.
Last autumn it won the Innovative Product Award from Lawn and Garden magazine.
Imported from Wales by Fiskars Manufacturing of Wausau, Wis., the shears have white nylon handles and chrome carbon-steel blades with a special pivot for maximum strength and low maintenance.
A 20-inch pair with 8-inch blades costs about $50.
An 18-inch pair with 6-inch blades is about $42.


Schools Brace For Exodus Of Teachers
More than 1,000 additional New York City teachers -- including many of the most polished classroom instructors -- are expected to retire in the next month to take advantage of pension incentives passed Tuesday night by the state Legislature.
The plan will allow the city's hard-pressed school system -- and others around the state -- to save the jobs of many young teachers, many of them minorities hired in the last few years.
But concern has been expressed among principals, teachers and parents that schools will lose some of their most experienced teachers and shrewdest disciplinarians to save teachers who have little relatively little classroom experience.


Aftermath of Shoal Creek: The Greens Are Still White
Ten months after the controversy over the membership policies at the Shoal Creek Golf Club near Birmingham, Ala., focused attention on racial discrimination at the nation's country clubs, private clubs in the New York suburbs are making some progress in admitting black members, but not that much.
A telephone survey of 39 private clubs in Westchester County, the site of this week's stop on the PGA Tour, the Buick Classic, found that many have no black members and that those that do rarely have more than one or two.
Some of them have been recruited since the controversy at Shoal Creek.
Over all, according to the 1990 findings of the Census Bureau, blacks make up 13.7 percent of the county's population.


Priest and Dancer Among Those Honored at Hunter College
A dancer, a Jesuit priest, a business leader and two poets received honorary degrees from Hunter College of the City University of New York during the school's 163rd commencement exercises.
A total of 1,890 students graduated from Hunter at ceremonies on Tuesday and yesterday.
At the Tuesday ceremonies, held for graduates in the humanities, arts, sciences and mathematics, the Rev.
Joseph A. O'Hare, president of Fordham University, discussed issues of cultural diversity in his keynote speech.


Symposium Tallies Cost of Quebec Separation
Quebec, which by itself ranks as the ninth largest trading partner of the United States, could survive economically as an independent country, but the economic costs imposed on 6.5 million Quebecers would be heavy.


Council Resists What Dinkins Wants on Realty Tax
Digging in its heels amid New York City's fiscal crisis, the City Council leadership said yesterday that it would pass no more than $170 million in new real-estate taxes -- or less than a third of what Mayor David N. Dinkins is seeking -- to help balance the city's $29 billion budget.
The Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, and the Finance Committee chairman, Herbert E. Berman, also said they planned to seek one-time revenues from the Municipal Assistance Corporation to help make up the difference in taxes and would propose to restore about $330 million in programs the Mayor has proposed to cut.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in some copies on Sunday about Representative Les Aspin's relationship with a steel executive whose company has military contracts characterized a House Ethics Committee staff member's comments incorrectly. (The error was repeated when the article was reprinted on Monday.) The staff member, Mark Davis, commented on a hypothetical case, and said it would not violate conduct rules for members of Congress; he did not specifically address Mr.
Aspin's relationship.


U.S. DETAILS FLAW IN PATRIOT MISSILE
The computer failure that blinded a Patriot missile defense system to an Iraqi missile that killed 28 Americans during the Persian Gulf war was similar to a problem discovered in another Patriot battery in Israel five days earlier, Army officials said today.
Army investigators disclosed last month that a "freak" software glitch was to blame when the Scud missile hit an American barracks in Al Khobar near Dhahran in Saudi Arabia on Feb. 25, causing the war's single worst casualty toll for Americans.


LESBIAN ORDAINED EPISCOPAL PRIEST
In an action that is certain to provoke new debate over homosexuality and the clergy, the Episcopal Bishop of Washington today ordained to the priesthood a woman openly living in a lesbian relationship.
The ordination, occurring in a denomination that holds a particularly prestigious place in American society, comes as several major Christian denominations are struggling with questions about homosexuality, Scripture and sexual relations outside of marriage.


Greenspan Sees Growth; Bonds Drop
Remarks by Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, sent a chill through the credit markets yesterday, where prices of Treasury securities fell and interest rates rose.
Attending an international monetary conference in Japan, Mr.
Greenspan told reporters that the economy seemed to be bottoming out in the second quarter, and that as a result of rapid inventory liquidation, a stronger-than-expected recovery was increasingly likely.


School Shows R-Rated Film and Ruckus Follows
Public-school assemblies are usually a time when the students watch documentary films, hear from health officials or get the latest instructions on fire drills.
But last month, sixth graders at Intermediate School 223 in Brooklyn saw an R-rated horror movie about a killer doll, Chucky.
He is a chubby, blue-eyed doll who comes to life to murder, maim and hurl four-letter words.


Brooding Storm Clouds Barked, but Scarcely Bit


U.S. Pressure Angers Panama Banks
Bankers and some Government officials here are angered by what they see as the Bush Administration's efforts to make Panamanian banks practice a higher level of scrutiny than is required of banks in the United States to prevent the laundering of illegal-drug profits.
At issue is the interpretation of a new law-enforcement agreement between the United States and Panama, signed recently after the Bush Administration threatened to withhold some economic aid.


Curtis Brewer, 65, Lawyer Known For Work on Rights of the Disabled
Curtis Brewer, a lawyer who was a quadriplegic for much of his life and who founded Untapped Resources, a nonprofit legal-services agency for the handicapped, died yesterday at Tisch Hospital in the New York University Medical Center.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Brewer was stricken with a viral infection of the spine in 1955, when he was 30 years old, and was left paralyzed from the neck down.
He died of complications from stomach surgery necessitated by a progressive weakening of his lungs that stemmed from the initial paralysis, his family said.


Impressive Johnson Upstaged By Jays
Jeff Johnson's first trial in the big leagues might have started and ended last night.
That's how uncertain the Yankees are about their pitching.
They have a numbers problem.
Mike Witt will be activated from the 60-day disabled list tomorrow and face the Texas Rangers, and the Yankees will have to free a spot on their roster to make room for him.


Kurdish-Americans Searching for Relatives
Seven thousand miles from their comfortable homes in California, two Kurdish-Americans are traveling through isolated villages and refugee camps along the Turkish-Iraqi border searching for lost relatives.
Their parents, brothers, sisters, cousins, nieces and nephews were among the nearly two million Kurds who fled from Saddam Hussein's army at the beginning of April.
They have no idea how many are still alive, or where they may be hiding.


Rule Industries
Rule Industries, a maker of marine equipment and related hardware, said its senior institutional note holders had refused to allow the company to pay the interest due Monday on its public issue of 12.5 percent subordinated notes.
The company said the holders' refusal to renew some short-term notes had caused a technical default under senior institutional loan agreements.


Finlandia Drops the Puns To Take On a New Identity
A VIVID new advertising campaign for Finlandia vodka shifts the focus of the pitch for the "super premium" brand from Finland to strong imagery from weak puns.
In an advance look at the campaign, the signature style of Finlandia's new agency, Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, which won the $10 million account in September from Young &amp; Rubicam, is evident.


Albania Picks a Caretaker Chief
After the resignation of the Communist Prime Minister, the President of Albania designated a 42-year-old former economist today to head a nonpartisan caretaker government until new national elections are held.
Members of the opposition Democratic Party said the appointment by President Rami Alia of the economist, Ylli Bufi, an alternate member of the Central Committee of the hitherto governing Communist Party, was acceptable to them.


The Curve That Never Got Thrown
FOR nearly four hours, Bobby Thomson and Ralph Branca had been together, reminiscing about "the homer," chatting with people, autographing this and that.
Now, when a baseball was handed to Branca, he carefully signed his name on the lower part of the sweet spot between the red stitches.
Soon the ball was handed to Thomson.
"Ralph left enough room," he was told, "for you to sign above his name."


Unisys Pushes Severance Offer
The Unisys Corporation, the nation's third-largest computer maker, said it was asking employees to volunteer to take severance packages and leave the company to reduce its worldwide work force by at least 2,000.
Unisys, whose debt totals $3.43 billion, has posted meeting notices or met with employees, asking them to take the severance packages.
Employees have until Friday to take advantage of the program.


For Hatfield, a Shining Image Tarnished by Ethics Charges
Senator Mark O. Hatfield has survived past ethics scrapes by riding on his reputation for three decades as a political figure whose integrity was above question here.
But the latest disclosures about the Oregon Republican's financial dealings have shattered any remnants of his unimpeachable image.
Investigations into the ethics of his conduct have left Mr.
Hatfield, a deeply religious man once dubbed "Saint Mark" for his devotion to principle, struggling to save his reputation.
Even some of the Senator's closest friends say he has greatly disappointed them and left them wondering what led to his apparent lapses in judgment.
And the controversy swirling around Mr.
Hatfield, so highly regarded that he already has buildings named for him back home, has spurred Democrats in the state to position themselves for political advantage.
Investigations Under Way
A Federal grand jury began meeting in Columbia, S.C., this week to look into ties between Mr.
Hatfield and James B. Holderman, the former president of the University of South Carolina.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Senate Ethics Committee had already begun examining Mr.
Hatfield's acceptance of nearly $15,000 in airline travel and gifts from the university while Mr.
Holderman was president.
The gifts include Steuben glass, an Audubon print and a porcelain statue.
The university also granted a full scholarship, worth an estimated $15,000, to Mr.
Hatfield's youngest child, Charles.


Laid-Off Employee Kills 2 at Workplace
A laid-off computer technician shot his way into his old workplace here Tuesday, hunted for his former superiors and killed one of them and another man, the authorities said.
The gunman, identified as Larry Thomas Hansel, 41 years old, then fled on a bicycle and later drove his pickup truck 135 miles northeast to Palm Desert, where he surrendered to deputies of the Riverside County Sheriff's Department.
He was returned to San Diego, where he is being held in the county jail.


In Latest Riverfront Bout, Reds Knock Out Gooden
Dwight Gooden descended into the dugout, gathered his belongings and left.
There was disbelief, not anger, among the Mets.
One night after a dugout confrontation between Manager Bud Harrelson and David Cone, Gooden's departure was a more disturbing scene.
Gooden, who began the game with apprehension following three straight ineffective starts, left it after only four innings with his doubts compounded and his earned run average in full ascension.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Economic and Social Council DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM BUDGETARY AND FINANCE COMMITTEE -- 4:15 P.M.


Quotation of the Day
"What other city would show its affection for their heroes by throwing litter at them?" -- Barnett Lipton, whose company is producing New York's
parade for gulf veterans.  [ B3:3. ]


Intel to Phase Out Singapore Plant
The Intel Corporation announced that it would phase out its Singapore manufacturing plant by early next year.
The plant builds computer boards and systems for the Intel Products Group, and has about 350 workers.
Products now made in Singapore will be made at plants in Oregon, Puerto Rico and Ireland.


Harvard Names Dean to Top Arts and Sciences Post
Harvard University has appointed Jeremy R. Knowles, a British-born professor of chemistry, as its new dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, the second most important academic post at the school after the president.
His selection was announced today by Neil L. Rudenstine, the president-elect of Harvard, who will assume his new duties on July l, as will Professor Knowles.


We're All Better Off for Reagan's Tax Reforms; Business Helps Schools
To the Editor:
Your May 22 front-page article on educators' complaints that business tax breaks are hurting schools distorts the contributions corporate taxes make to state and local government activities, including education.


Buddy Defends System After Battle With Cone
Manager Bud Harrelson said today that he would soon address his players on the issue of his control of the team and the role of Doc Edwards, the dugout coach, who has become the focus of the Mets' latest clubhouse controversy.
One day after an angry and physical dugout confrontation with David Cone, which the Mets pitcher said was the culmination of longstanding frustration with Edwards's role, Harrelson today defended his dugout coach.
He also stated flatly that Edwards's degree of influence was no greater than that enjoyed by any other such coach.


Essay; 'Indeed a Very Dear Friend'
I thumb through auction catalogs; you can never tell what you may find.
In a Sotheby's catalog for a sale in New York on June 13, I found a historic love story in a collection of letters.
The romance, its evidence now for sale to the highest bidder, was between Gen.
Dwight Eisenhower and his secretary-driver, Kay Summersby.


Topics of The Times; Justice, Blinded
After a 3 1/2-year experiment that proved the value and fairness of photography in state criminal trials, New York is again without it.
The Legislature, having let the coverage lapse, needs to reinstate it promptly.
The Assembly and Senate have passed differing extension bills.
Each would maintain safeguards for fair trials and the interests of all parties to a criminal case.
The chief safeguard is the charge to judges to maintain careful control of the proceedings.
But the Senate version unwisely dilutes confidence in the trial judge by giving every witness a veto over camera coverage.
That's odd, since many state senators already complain of incomplete trial reporting.
Common sense and the public interest suggest the Senate ought to give ground.


Mix-Up Delays Asbestos Trial
A Baltimore judge dismissed 51 prospective jurors today in the nation's largest consolidation of asbestos personal-injury cases because a confidential defense document was mistakenly sent to the opposing side.
The misdirected fax, containing psychological profiles of prospective jurors prepared by defense lawyers for insulation manufacturers, was sent to lawyers representing the reported asbestos victims.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL L.S.U. in Title Game Gary Hymel had two three-run homers and Louisiana State blasted its way into the championship game of the College World Series with a 19-8 victory over Florida last night in Omaha.
The fourth-seeded Tigers, who had 14 hits against five pitchers, reached the title game for the first time despite having been in the C.W.S. five of the last six years.
L.S.U. will face either Creighton or Wichita State for the championship on Saturday. (AP)


Louisiana Lawmakers Pass Strict Anti-Abortion Measure
By a vote of 29 to 9, the Louisiana Senate on Tuesday passed a strict anti-abortion bill and sent it to Gov.
Buddy Roemer.
The measure would outlaw abortion except in cases of rape or incest or when the life of a woman was endangered by her pregnancy.


Profession of Rabbi Still Doesn't Lure Cream of the Candidates
To the Editor:
It was gratifying to read your upbeat article "More and More Young Jews Are Picking Careers as Rabbis" (front page, May 24).
The phenomenon of many young people who have numerous career options selecting the rabbinate fills us with hope.


Sara Vogan, 43, Dies; Novelist and Teacher
Sara Vogan, a novelist and teacher of creative writing, was found dead on May 17 at her home in San Francisco.
She was 43 years old.


Goal Eludes Democrats As 9 in G.O.P. Switch
Democrats failed to win the veto-proof majority they were hoping for on the civil rights bill that passed today because a number of Republicans who supported a similar bill last year switched their votes to support President Bush this time.
The White House lobbied heavily for the defeat of the legislation, and by the time the voting ended at 12:55 P.M. 10 lawmakers had become White House converts.


We're All Better Off for Reagan's Tax Reforms
To the Editor:
"Richer Rich, Poorer Poor and a Fatter Green Book" (The Week in Review, May 26) reports on statistics compiled by the House Ways and Means Committee that show the rich getting richer and poor getting poorer since 1977.
The Republican complaints that the numbers distort reality may be right to a small degree, in that the numbers magnify reality.
But the phenomenon is exactly what one should have expected from the Reagan tax reforms.
It is a good thing, too, for the most part.


Delta Air Adding Up to 500 Planes
Delta Air Lines Inc. said it planned to add up to 500 aircraft to its fleet over 10 years, with purchases of 42 planes a year planned for 1991, 1992 and 1993.
The effort will require a large expansion of Delta's operations -- besides the doubling of its gates to 50 -- at the Cincinnati airport, the company said.


A Connecticut Trooper Is Found Shot to Death
A 28-year-old state trooper was shot to death early today when he was ambushed in his cruiser while making a routine security check at a gun shop, the state police said.
He was the first Connecticut state trooper shot to death in the line of duty in 29 years.
The trooper, Russell Bagshaw, apparently surprised a burglar when he pulled up to the Land &amp; Sea Sports Center on Route 6, said Sgt.
Dan Stebbins, a state police spokesman.


Dollar Gains on Optimism About Improved Economy
The dollar strengthened yesterday on optimism over improvement in the United States economy.
Earl Johnson, vice president for the Harris Trust and Savings Bank in Chicago, said economic reports and remarks by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, led to some firming.
Mr.
Greenspan said the economy seemed to be stabilizing.


Currents; Take a Break, Already
REST on it.
Read on it.
Or just stand around and admire it as a piece of garden sculpture.
Nothing beats a hammock when a hard-working gardener has time to tarry between weeding, feeding or watering.
There's room for two on this one, which is 60 by 84 inches and comes with a cotton duck pillow.
The hammock was designed by Hatteras Hammocks and won the Lillian B. Winchester Award at the casual furniture show in Chicago.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about a meeting of leaders of civil rights groups to discuss rights legislation misidentified the group to which Elaine Jones and Julius Chambers belong.
It is the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, which is not affiliated with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.


Don Scardino to Head Playwrights Horizons
Don Scardino, who played Jesus for more than 1,000 performances in the musical "Godspell" and directed "A Few Good Men" on Broadway and "The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd" on television, was chosen yesterday as the new artistic director of Playwrights Horizons.
Mr.
Scardino, 43 years old, is to take over in January as artistic head of the Off Broadway company.
He will replace Andre Bishop, who was named in March to succeed Gregory Mosher as director of Lincoln Center Theater.


3 Die in Israeli Raid on Bases in Lebanon
Israeli warplanes attacked guerrilla bases around Sidon today for the third time in 48 hours, killing three guerrillas and wounding nine.
The raid came a day after Israel's biggest attack on targets in Lebanon since the Israelis invaded their neighbor in 1982.


CUNY, After Year's Search, Names President At Baruch
After a yearlong search, the City University of New York yesterday announced a new president for Baruch College in Manhattan.


The Big Contrasts In 2 Japan Pacts
TRADE experts and American and Japanese negotiators say differences between two recently concluded trade negotiations reflect disputes within the bureaucracies of both countries, the very different styles of the American negotiators and the character of the industries involved.
Several hours before Saturday's agreement on American access to Japanese public works projects, a senior Commerce Department official publicly announced in Tokyo that the talks were at "a complete impasse" and that the United States would draw up sanctions against Japanese companies.


INSIDE
Victory for the Baby Bells
The Senate, 71 to 24, passed a bill to allow Bell regionals to manufacture equipment, a step toward rewriting the A.T.&amp; T. breakup ruling.
Page D1.
Pretoria Ends Property Bias
South Africa voted to scrap the laws used to justify its racial discrimination in property ownership and residential selection.
Page A3.
Calm Returns to Algiers
Military force restored calm to Algeria's capital after violent protests by Muslim fundamentalists prompted a state of emergency.
Page A10.
Pope Backs Lithuanians
In Poland, the Pope offered his moral support for Lithuanian independence, saying he hears "the voice of a nation living on a Baltic seaside." Page A12.
Out of School Early
More than 1,000 senior New York City teachers may retire soon under new pension incentives.
Page B1.
Bulls Get Even
Chicago routed Los Angeles, 107-86, in the second game of the National Basketball Association finals.
Page B15.


A Trainer They Can't Keep Out of the Winner's Circle
Outside Barn 25 at Belmont Park, the green-and-white sign read: "D. Wayne Lukas Racing Stables." Inside the office, a few feet from two long rows of stalls filled with race horses, the sign over the desk said: "Success is simply a matter of fact. Ask any failure." A drawing of Theodore Roosevelt was tacked to the wall, personifying the spirit of the barn.
A huge photo of Winning Colors winning the 1988 Kentucky Derby hung on the opposite wall, personifying the success.
"I don't play golf; I don't go to the movies," Wayne Lukas was saying.
"I get up at 3 o'clock every morning, and I haven't missed a day in 10 years. I've got tunnel vision about my work. I train horses. It's the only thing I do in life."


DEMOCRATS OFFER WIDE HEALTH PLAN
Senate Democratic leaders today offered legislation to guarantee basic health insurance coverage for all Americans, and they vowed to push it through Congress by the end of next year.
The Democrats' timetable is ambitious because the legislation is immensely complicated and is opposed by many Republicans, in Congress and in the Bush Administration.


Lenz Is Said to Plan To Retire From B.S.B.
Robert Lenz, the chairman of Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. who was present at the creation of that agency, plans to retire from advertising, according to advertising executives.
Reached yesterday, Mr.
Lenz, who is 51 years old, declined to comment pending an announcement, which is expected today or tomorrow.


10 Who Switched From Yea to Nay
Ten House members who displeased President Bush by voting for a civil rights bill last year pleased him yesterday by voting against a similar one.
The 10 who switched included 9 Republicans.
While their stated reasons for opposing the bill varied, none said it was because of White House pressure.
Article, page B10.


New Midsize Stock Index: Will It Fly?
DOES America really need a new stock index in addition to the Standard &amp; Poor's 500, the Dow Jones industrial average, the Wilshire 5,000, the Russell 2,000 and countless others?
Standard &amp; Poor's, a McGraw-Hill subsidiary, is betting that the answer is yes.
Yesterday, it introduced the S.&amp; P. Mid-Cap 400, which is supposed to do for smaller companies what the S.&amp; P. 500 does for larger ones.
The companies in it are supposed to be bigger than the small ones, but smaller than the large ones.


Review/Music; Once a Cult, Early Music Approaches Mainstream
In 1981, when the Boston Early Music Festival opened its doors, early music was still early.
It appealed to a fervent but confined cult of devotees of the Baroque and before, especially before.
The stereotype was of earnest young men in rimless glasses and earnest young women in long dresses playing lutes and recorders and acting like highbrow folkies.
As anyone who pays the most cursory attention to classical music knows by now, all that has radically changed.
The cult isn't quite yet the mainstream, but it's getting there, faster than the old mainstream would like to see from an uppity tributary.
Public interest in the concerts and especially the recordings of early music has grown enormously, and early music itself isn't so early anymore.
"Historically informed" performances have plunged deep into the 19th century, affecting the way even the most hidebound modern-instrument orchestras must do business.


Books of The Times; How to Build a Catapult And Let the Rocks Fly
Catapult Harry and I Build a Siege Weapon  By Jim Paul  256 pages.
Illustrated.
Villard Books. $18.
"It had occurred to me that holding an old rock might be like looking at the stars," writes Jim Paul at the outset of this sneakily profound book on the links between human playfulness and aggression.


Pope Subtly Offers Moral Support For Lithuanians' Independence
In this town about 55 miles from the Soviet border, Pope John Paul II offered his moral support for Lithuanian independence today, with the same kind of gestures and allegoric language he used to inspire the anti-Communist struggle in his native Poland.
"Lithuania, I hear your voice, the voice of a nation living on a Baltic seaside," the Pope said this morning to a group of Lithuanians who had crossed the border to meet him.
"Here, where I am so close, I am answering this voice. Your Pope is with you."


Outlook Is Hopeful for Perez's Latest Shoulder Problem
Pascual Perez walked into the Yankee clubhouse yesterday afternoon carrying X-rays under his arm and a sense of relief in his mind.
But he still isn't likely to pitch again until at least next weekend.
The Yankees, of course, are used to this.
Since he signed a free-agent contract worth $5.7 million in November 1989, Perez has spent more time in the trainer's room than on the pitcher's mound.


W.S. Moneyham Is Dead at 65; Evangelist Headed Relief Agency
The Rev.
W.
Stanley Mooneyham, an evangelist who formerly headed an agency that provides relief programs for developing countries, died Monday at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center.
He was 65 years old and lived in Palm Desert, Calif.
Mr.
Mooneyham died of kidney failure, the World Vision relief agency said.
He was admitted to the hospital last week for liver transplant tests.


Brooklyn College Ban
Brooklyn College's soccer team has been suspended from the men's national championship tournament for two years, the N.C.A.A. announced yesterday.
The ban stems from unsportsmanlike conduct toward game officials after Brooklyn's first-round loss to Adelphi in the 1990 tournament.
A Brooklyn player identified as JOSEPH FAPETU punched linesman BOB FISCHER. (AP)


We're All Better Off for Reagan's Tax Reforms; To Encourage Giving
To the Editor:
Contributions to 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations, such as most colleges, universities, private elementary and secondary schools, hospitals and medical centers, and cultural and social service causes, offer donors the chance to benefit from the charitable tax deduction, a quid pro quo of sorts.
But corporate contributions to public schools (front page, May 22) do not usually qualify for the charitable deduction, as the schools typically do not have 501(c)(3) status.


Review/Television; Political Correctness Versus Open Expression on Campus
About halfway through "Safe Speech, Free Speech and the University," what some academics might call the subtext of the evening emerges: what some critics call the pressure for political correctness on campus.
The site of tonight's offering in the Columbia University Seminars on Media and Society, at 9 on Channel 13, is Stanford University, whose speech code and multi-cultural curriculums have become flash points of the debate.
Donald Kennedy, Stanford's president; Thomas Grey, the Stanford law professor who drew up the code, and two Stanford students are on hand for the defense.
Fred W. Friendly, acting as peripatetic moderator, begins with the speech code, which Stanford's Mr.
Kennedy calls "a vaguely worded entreaty to behave well." The conversation does not go much beyond affirmations of a standard difference of opinion.
The students, a black woman and an Asian-American man, defend the code as a weapon against insults to minorities and women.
Nadine Strossen, the president of the American Civil Liberties Union, and Nat Hentoff, a columnist for The Village Voice, rebut with the principles of the First Amendment.
Ms.
Strossen is daring enough to say that she sort of enjoys being whistled at: "I don't mind being flattered for my appearance."


Kirby Keeps Control Over Foundation
All five justices of the Delaware Supreme Court refused on Tuesday to overturn a lower court ruling that leaves Fred M. Kirby 2d, the chairman of the Alleghany Corporation, and his immediate family in control of a $200 million charitable foundation that his grandfather created 60 years ago.
Their control had been challenged by three of Mr.
Kirby's siblings whom he ousted from the F. M. Kirby Foundation.
The feud has spilled over into the affairs of Alleghany, which is roughly 40 percent-owned by the four branches of the Kirby family.


Battle of Budget: Park as Political Football?
In the course of a few hours today, the Robert Moses State Park on Long Island seemed to be opened, closed and then reopened with higher fees, all part of a new front in the bitter battle over how to manage the spending cuts required in the new state budget.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo raised the possibility that the budget approved by the Legislature on Tuesday would force his agencies to close parks, leave highways unrepaired and deplete the ranks of state troopers.
The Legislature's top Republican, suggesting that such actions were a political gambit, vowed to begin an all-out investigation if some of the proposed cuts became reality.  'Mindless Is a Better Word'
One proposal that has drawn sharp reaction would result in the closing later this month of Robert Moses State Park, the oldest park on Long Island.
Long Island officials said today that the park, which attracted 3.5 million visitors last year, could remain open if the state approved a 25 percent increase in parking and other fees.


Review/Ballet; 'Giselle': Love, Death and Class Differences
Alessandra Ferri and Julio Bocca, who introduced the first "Giselle" of American Ballet Theater's season on Tuesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House, are clearly forging a true ballet partnership.
Their remarkable rapport, as evident in this perfect and highly romantic performance, is both calculated and instinctive.
Their similarity in height is used to both vibrant and lyrical effect.
When Ms.
Ferri's merry peasant girl and Mr.
Bocca's infatuated young Count Albrecht in peasant disguise soar into their leaps, they form the same arc.
The image becomes a visual metaphor for their love and unity.


No Headline
Parliament voted today to scrap the laws used to justify South Africa's longstanding racial discrimination in property ownership and residential selection.
The new legislation, which repeals the Land Acts of 1913 and 1936 and the Group Areas Act, will take effect on June 30.
The Land Acts reserved 87 percent of the country's land for whites, who currently make up less than 14 percent of the population.
The Group Areas Act dictated where people could live according to their race.


New Delhi Journal; Some in India Grieve For Their Country, Too
The black-bordered poster of Rajiv Gandhi was hastily pasted on trees and telephone polls the other night with the inscription in Hindi, "I have a dream of a strong India, free of the poison of communalism and casteism."
The crowds around the Gandhi family compound at 10 Janpath have thinned, partly because the former Prime Minister's widow, Sonia, and children remain in seclusion and partly because the temperature at midday reaches 105, even higher.
The city's residents are coping with some of the worst power shortages and breakdowns in years.


CHRONICLE
GORDON P. GETTY has offered $1.7 million to help rebuild the Globe Theater in London, providing the British do their part, the Shakespeare Globe Trust announced Tuesday.
Their share, stipulated by Mr.
Getty, would be $13.5 million allocated by the Government to complete the project, the trust said.
The first phase of the Globe reconstruction, including the foundations and walls, was finished last year along the Thames River across from the London financial district.
The open-air theater was built in 1599 at Bankside on the south side of the Thames.
It burned down in 1613, was rebuilt the following year and was demolished in 1644.


Baghdad Hopeful on Kurdish Pact But Insists on Control of Oil Center
Iraqi officials are forecasting a breakthrough in continuing negotiations with the leaders of the nation's Kurdish minority, but senior officials here said today that there would be no concession to the Kurds on a central demand -- control of this war-scarred city.
In April, Baghdad authorities reached an agreement in principle with one of the major Kurdish leaders, Jalal Talabani, providing for a form of regional autonomy in the nation's northern region.
Important details were to be worked out.
The following month, the other major Kurdish leader, Massoud Barzani, reported his own 20-point agreement, but with the significant question of Kirkuk's status unsettled.


Pop in Review
Roy Gerson's Swing Septet  Top of the Gate Bleecker and Thompson Streets Tuesdays
After playing on Tuesday nights for two years at the Third Avenue jazz club Zanzibar and Grill, Roy Gerson's Swing Septet has moved its boisterous Tuesday sessions to larger quarters at the Top of the Gate, where there is more space for the dancers for whom this music has traditionally been intended.
Drawing on the big-band repertories of Count Basie, Duke Ellington and Lionel Hampton and the jumping small-group style of Louis Jordan, Mr.
Gerson has teamed a horn section made up of four highly personal soloists -- Spanky Davis and Randy Sandke on trumpets, the trombonist Joel Helleny and the tenor-saxophonist Gary Keller -- with a strongly propulsive rhythm section.
In it, Mr.
Gerson's piano is joined by the bassist Mike Hall and a drummer, Daryl Pellagrino, who shows suggestions of the broad, supportive power of the legendary swing-era drummer Sid Catlett.


Spanish Group In Deal With B.P.
La Corporacion Banesto S.A., the Spanish industrial group, said it would sell its Petromed oil refining and chemicals unit to the British Petroleum Company for about $770 million.
The Spanish group is controlled by Banco Espanol de Credito S.A., one of Spain's largest banks, which is trying to restructure its holdings.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Alpha Microsystems, Santa Ana, Calif., a microcomputer systems company, appointed Rene H. Caron vice president of sales and marketing.
He replaces Douglas J. Tullio, who was promoted to president. *
Boston Consulting Group, Boston, named Eran Broshy, Mark F. Blaxill and Michael Steiner vice presidents.


Funeral for Lasorda's Son
Frank Sinatra and Don Rickles were among the 320 mourners who attended the funeral of Thomas Lasorda Jr. today at the Rose Hills Memorial Chapel.
The son of the Los Angeles Dodgers manager died on Monday at his home at the age of 33.
His death was attributed to pneumonia and dehydration.
In addition to the Lasorda family, many representatives of the Dodgers organization attended.
Texas Rangers Manager Bobby Valentine, a longtime family friend, delivered the eulogy.


Stock Prices Drop Sharply; Dow Off 22.58
Extending their Tuesday decline, stock prices dropped sharply yesterday -- and in heavy trading -- with analysts forecasting that further declines may lie ahead soon.
"In my judgment," said Hugh Johnson, chief economist for the First Albany Corporation, "we're in the process of an orderly, and I think, manageable pullback, primarily because the market got somewhat ahead of itself."


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 6


It's Hard to Overlook Fly So Free's Return
It will not get star billing because the marquee for the blockbuster weekend at Belmont is already jammed with headline acts.
But it could still become one of the dramatic highs of the racing weekend: the return of Fly So Free, the champion colt who was favored to win the Kentucky Derby but instead ran fifth just when he seemed on the brink of runaway success.


Sue the Doctor? There's a Better Way
Under America's medical malpractice system, everyone pays grossly inflated health care bills.
President Bush has offered sound remedies for the problem, but more fundamental change is required.
Instead, we want to overhaul the system by removing virtually all malpractice claims from courts and resolving them in binding arbitration.
Medical liability insurance was the fastest growing part of patients' bills in the 1980's, increasing by more than 18 percent annually from 1982 through 1988.
Today, every $100 paid to a doctor includes $11 for such insurance.
In Chicago, neurosurgeons and obstetricians are charged more than $150,000 in premiums, and, like their colleagues elsewhere, pass the costs along to patients.


New Autopsy Is Performed For 3d Trial in Evers Slaying
The body of Medgar Evers, the slain civil rights leader, was exhumed and secretly re-examined here as prosecutors prepared to try a white supremacist for the third time in the 1963 killing, officials confirmed today.
Mr.
Evers's body was exhumed Monday from Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia, said Maj.
Arlene Beatty, an Army spokeswoman.
She said Mississippi prosecutors, who last fall reopened the investigation into Mr.
Evers's killing in that state, requested the exhumation.


We're All Better Off for Reagan's Tax Reforms; Relief for Investors
To the Editor:
As you state in "Soak the Rich? No. Help the Poor" (editorial, May 10), income tax cuts need to be carefully targeted, but you don't go far enough.
Tax relief for investors, just like child care credits, can be precisely engineered to produce desired objectives.


Rocky Start Didn't Faze Dunleavy
It took about two weeks for Mike Dunleavy to encounter his first serious test as coach of the Los Angeles Lakers.
The Lakers lost five of their first seven games this season.
It was the worst start of Magic Johnson's career.
Laker fans, spoiled by success, questioned whether Dunleavy was the right man to succeed Pat Riley.


Strife Cripples Yugoslavia's Big Tourist Industry
The boutiques beneath the soaring arches of this city's Roman palace stood deserted on a brisk spring afternoon, their jewelery and folk art gathering dust.
The hotels were all but empty.
Those in the tourism business here concede that the 1991 season is the worst in their memory.
"Last summer, there were many people here; now, there is nobody," said Jadranka Durdov, a 25-year-old saleswoman.
"It's obvious the political situation has scared people, and I can understand why."


Rookie's Errors Hurt Braves As Phillies Win in 12 Innings
Rookie Brian Hunter's second error in two innings allowed Philadelphia's Dickie Thon to score from first base in the 12th inning as the Phillies beat the Atlanta Braves, 12-11, last night.
The Braves tied it at 10-10 in the 11th when Hunter hit his first major league home run, a two-run shot off Darrel Akerfelds (2-1) after Lonnie Smith had walked.


Vaccine at Birth Aims to Block Many Diseases
Scientists have designed a new type of vaccine that might eventually inoculate a child against a dozen or more diseases with a single potent shot given at birth.
The vaccine, made with genetic engineering techniques, has so far been tested only in mice, but it holds great promise for children in developing nations, whose sole contact with any sort of health care system is often limited to when they are born -- or later, when they are too sick to save.


Saudi Oil Minister's Family in Mobil Deal
The Mobil Corporation and a company headed by the son and son-in-law of the oil minister of Saudi Arabia have joined forces there to build one of the largest petrochemical plants of its kind in the world.
The venture is getting under way as middle-class Saudis grow quietly resentful of nepotism and of what many regard as undue influence by prominently placed Saudis.


Lorraine Walters Katz, Retailer, 66
Lorraine Walters Katz, a retired owner of a children's clothing store in Deal, N.J., died on Monday at Riverview Hospital in Red Bank, N.J.
She was 66 years old and lived in Deal.
She died of lymphoma, her husband said.


Budget Impasse Forces Legislature Into a Special Session in Hartford
With no state budget and no immediate hope of passing one, legislative leaders adjourned their regular session tonight and called themselves back immediately into special session to try to break the fiscal stalemate.
The lawmakers' decision to declare a special session themselves, while not unprecedented, was a break with the tradition that has allowed governors that privilege.
It provided further evidence of the distancing -- if not outright alienation -- that has developed between the General Assembly and Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.


Money Market Funds Drop Despite Short-Term Trend
Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down for the week ended yesterday.
The decline occurred despite a general rise in short-term interest rates, IBC/Donoghue's analysts noted.


Doubts Evaporate, at Least for a Night, as Bulls Even Series
Foul trouble for Michael Jordan usually means big trouble for the Chicago Bulls.
Tonight, it may have been a blessing.
In order to protect Jordan but keep him in the game, Scottie Pippen was forced to cover Magic Johnson, and Pippen did that as well as anyone can.
Horace Grant and John Paxson were forced to become more aggressive offensively, and they both accepted the challenge.
The Bulls were forced to unite, and the result was a mammoth effort that revitalized their championship aspirations.


S.&amp; P. Drops Debt Ratings For Chrysler
In a move reflecting the deteriorating financial condition of the Chrysler Corporation, the Standard &amp; Poors Corporation further lowered its ratings today on more than $21 billion worth of Chrysler debt securities.
Chrysler has been squeezed out of the public debt markets since S.&amp; P. lowered its ratings on commercial paper to below investment grade last year and then lowered ratings on its notes and bonds to below investment grade in February.


Excerpts From Gorbachev's Speech: 'The Idea That Peace Is Indivisible'
Following are excerpts from the address by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union in Oslo as winner of the 1990 Nobel Peace Prize, as translated by the Nobel committee:
Today peace means an ascent from mere coexistence to cooperation and common creative endeavor among countries and nations.
Peace is movement toward globality and universality of civilization.
Never before has the idea that peace is indivisible been as true as it is now.


3 Arrested In Beating Of a Black
His friends said of Alfred Jermaine Ewell yesterday that he understood that racism existed, but that to him, it was something distant, something he knew about but was never touched by.
His mother had been a housekeeper in a white household and he had lived there for the first five years of his life.
His godmother is white and his best friend is white, and he went here and there with both blacks and whites, to parties and dinners and sports events.
He was always able to cross racial boundaries and was even naive to them.
This was true, perhaps to a fault, because when it mattered most, last Saturday night, he was ultimately unprepared for the bigotry that found him.


Southern Baptists Assail Bush for Stand on N.E.A.
One day before he is to address them, the 20,000 delegates to the Southern Baptist Convention's annual gathering rebuked President Bush today for his support of the National Endowment for the Arts.
At a convention where conservatives have easily reaffirmed their control over the nation's largest Protestant denomination, the delegates overwhelmingly approved a resolution that deplored "the lack of initiative by the President and Congress in addressing the continuing abuses of the N.E.A."


Tigers to Help Pay For New Stadium
The Detroit Tigers would get a new stadium to replace their 79-year old ball park, and they will help to pay for it, under a plan announced today.


A New Plan to Overhaul Supervision of Banks
A Congressional task force is preparing to recommend changing the regulatory structure of the banking industry by increasing the authority of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Treasury Department and decreasing the power of the Federal Reserve Board.
The task force, which has been deliberating behind closed doors, was created two weeks ago after a House banking subcommittee unanimously rejected the Administration's proposal on restructuring the regulatory system.
That proposal would have consolidated four existing agencies into two -- a new division for the Treasury Department and one for the Fed -- and stripped the F.D.I.C. of most of its authority.


Philips Advances New TV Set Debut
Philips N.V., the Dutch electronics giant, said it would introduce its high-definition television sets in early 1994, a year ahead of schedule.
The move marks an effort by the financially troubled company to pre-empt Japanese and American companies developing their own versions of such sets, which provide a larger and clearer picture.


Diner's Journal
Mambo Grill
Mambo Grill is not the latest hot dance club cum Latin cafe.
It is a new Venezuelan restaurant on East 82d Street in Manhattan that is attracting a buoyant young crowd of adventuresome diners.
Irma Correa, one of the owners, used to have a vest-pocket establishment on Second Avenue at 11th Street called the 11 Cafe that served savory little arepas (white cornmeal cakes) stuffed with shredded flank steak, pork, black beans and other Venezuelan specialties.


Save Those Bases
The question is: How can the United States pull its strength and creativity together in a few months to win a military victory thousands of miles away but keep floundering around for years at home, throwing away one chance after another for social victory?
The answer is: I don't know but let's not argue about it right now.
While we stand around debating, one more opportunity to do the country some good is slipping through our fingers and our minds.


Due Process Found to Apply Even in Temporary Holds on Property
The Supreme Court ruled today that states must provide a hearing before permitting a plaintiff in a private lawsuit to place a lien on the other side's property.
State courts commonly authorize liens of this type, which in effect turn the defendant's real estate into collateral against an eventual order to pay damages to the plaintiff.


Azinger Among 4 Leaders With 66's
While three of the leaders after the first round of the Buick Classic today limped and lurched their way around the Westchester Country Club, the other was rested, willing, and most able.
Paul Azinger, who finished second here last year, led a group of four players who produced rounds of five-under-par 66 on a day in which much of the field was bedeviled by shifting winds on the 6,779 yard tree-lined course.


M.C. Chang, Scientist, Dies at 82; A Developer of Birth-Control Pill
Dr.
M.
C.
Chang, a renowned scientist in the field of reproductive biology who was the co-developer of the birth-control pill, died Wednesday at the Medical Center of Central Massachusetts-Memorial in Worcester, Mass.
He was 82 years old and lived in Shrewsbury, Mass.
He died of heart failure, said his daughter, Pamela.


Strike the Gold Draws Outside Post in Belmont
Strike the Gold, the winner of the Kentucky Derby, lost the early skirmishing for the big return match yesterday when he drew the outside post position for the Belmont Stakes while his chief rival, Hansel, winner of the Preakness, drew the fifth lane in the field of 11.
Even so, the track's oddsmaker installed Strike the Gold as the favorite at 5 to 2, with Hansel next at 3 to 1 for the mile-and-a-half race, the longest of the Triple Crown series.
Next, at 6 to 1, came the Irish import, Smooth Performance, who was rated a good chance to duplicate the coup scored a year ago by Go and Go, another commuter from Ireland who snatched the $500,000 classic from American stars like Unbridled and Thirty-Six Red.


2 Promoted At Journal
The Wall Street Journal said yesterday that Norman Pearlstine, the paper's managing editor since 1983, had been named executive editor, a position that had been vacant for many years.
Paul E. Steiger, who has served with Mr.
Pearlstine as assistant and then deputy managing editor, has become managing editor and will continue to report to Mr.
Pearlstine, who retains overall responsibility for the paper's news coverage.


3 Veterans of No-Name Music Return
At the start of the 1980's, the Lower East Side was a nerve center for new music with a wide streak of defiance.
It was made by musicians who had little use for any orthodoxy -- improvisers who didn't want to play by the rules of jazz, composers who didn't want to be classical serialists or strict minimalists, people who loved urban noise and discontinuity.
The music never got a name that stuck, although "downtown improvisation," "skronk," "noise-rock" and, later, "Knitting Factory music" were attempted labels.
While the music's early shock value dissipated by the mid-80's, composers associated with it have continued to follow their own intuitions.
Lately, they have allowed themselves to erect musical structures without immediately shredding them, to use chunks of recognizable styles, even to settle into a groove once in a while.


Being Read to Is Better Than Reading, Huh?; Boon to a Dyslexic
To the Editor:
Your May 20 editorial on recorded books highlights an industry that remade a part of my life.
Being slightly dyslexic, I found reading tedious and an unproductive use of my time.
All that changed when I began reading books on tape in the car.
I've read more books in the last three years than in the previous 30!


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  L.I. Golfer Takes Lead


Pakistan Asks Talks on Atom Spread
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, intent on asserting civilian government control over strategic policies in a country long dominated by the military, asked the United States, the Soviet Union and China today to sponsor urgent talks on nuclear nonproliferation in South Asia, where both Pakistan and India have the ability to make nuclear weapons.
Speaking to high-ranking military officers at Pakistan's National Defense College in Rawalpindi, Mr.
Sharif, who has been in power for barely eight months, said a regional conference on nuclear weapons should be held "as quickly as possible."


Our Towns
He doesn't look like big news.
He sits there in his six-foot bulk, tousled gray hair, shorts and a pink sports shirt, hands clasped across his middle, leaning back in his big easy chair with the fold-out footrest.
Little birds chirrup in sunny bushes just outside as he opens the new scrapbook.


3 at Tompkins Square Park Are Arrested After Protest
Three protesters were arrested at Tompkins Square Park in the East Village last night during a confrontation with the police after a candlelight vigil protesting the eviction of homeless people from the park, the police said.
Two men and a woman were arrested shortly before midnight at Seventh Street and Avenue B, said Sgt.
Norris Hollormon, a police spokesman.


Sounds Around Town
Brazilian Energy
Elba Ramalho, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
Elba Ramalho hails from northeastern Brazil, home of forro, frevo and other styles that don't get exported as frequently as the samba and bossa nova of Rio de Janeiro.
Through the 1980's, she has been one of Brazil's most popular singers, with a hearty voice and contagious energy.
Her repertory embraces songs from Brazil's best-known Rio-based songwriters along with material closer to her home.
Sets are to be at 9 and 11 P.M. tonight and tomorrow and at 9 P.M.
Sunday through Wednesday; there is a $15 to $25 cover, depending on seat location, and a two-drink minimum.


Addis Ababa Journal; Today, a Flower-Filled Prison. But Tomorrow?
Early every morning, finely dressed women gather at the front gate of the Yekatit 66 Institute for Political Education carrying fresh clothes and picnic baskets full of cake and cheese.
As a disheveled group of guerrilla guards nod courteously, the women walk past a bust of Lenin to find their husbands sitting around a fountain full of goldfish in the shade of palm trees and purple flowers.
The couples embrace tenuously, since this is not a society where emotion is shown freely in public.


Moscow Official Denies Soviets Need Huge Aid
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's top economic adviser said today that the Soviet leader would not ask for hundreds of billions of dollars worth of aid when he meets in London next month with participants in the seven-nation summit conference of industrial democracies.
The adviser, Yevgeny M. Primakov, told the newspaper Izvestia that what the Government's reform plan needed was coordinated support from the West to help make the ruble fully convertible and keep inflation down when prices are fully decontrolled.
Other Soviet officials say controls are to be lifted by the end of next year.


Investments in Poland
Poland has signed $500 million in contracts for American aircraft and telecommunications equipment and for a financial center, the largest United States investments in the country to date, Polish and American officials said today.
In a $350 million deal, LOT Polish Airlines will buy eight aircraft from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.
In addition, two American engineering companies, the Golub Corporation in Schenectady, N.Y., and Epstein Engineering Inc. in Chicago, have formed a venture with the Bank of Poland to build a $100 million financial center.
Another $100 million contract has been signed between the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and the Polish telecommunications company to improve the nation's telephone system.


From Mrs. Bush: Tough Talk, and Mumbling
On a tour of the White House family quarters today, Barbara Bush pointed to a smattering of burn marks on the outside wall of the Truman Balcony overlooking the South Lawn and the monuments of Washington.
"This is where the British tried to burn down the White House," she said.
"We showed it to Queen Elizabeth when she was here."
The First Lady recalled that she had to "mumble" to the Queen at lunch when describing the wallpaper in the family dining room that had been installed by Jacqueline Kennedy: scenes of George Washington and the revolutionary troops triumphing over the British. 'Go Down Fighting'
Over a luncheon with several reporters in that dining room today, Mrs.
Bush offered a picture of life in the Bush White House, along with a few political opinions that she wryly observed might scuttle her marriage.
"If it's the end of our marriage," she proclaimed over medallions of beef and baby corn and sherbet molded like fruits and vegetables, "I might just as well go down fighting."
When a reporter reminded her that her marriage had survived her comment about how she would like to see Saddam Hussein hanged, Mrs.
Bush rolled her eyes and murmured: "Barely."
But she conceded that she had more influence over her husband than people think.
"The truth is," she said solemnly, "I'm lip-synching him."
Despite the wrenching pictures of female soldiers leaving newborn babies to go off to the Persian Gulf, the First Lady said that she would not exempt women in the military who had infants or small babies from going to war.
"It's hard, but you have to make choices in life," she said.
"It's your choice. Nobody's making you do that. Now women in the service, particularly the reservists, will know what they've gotten into." To Fight Bigotry
The First Lady said she intended to use her position as a bully pulpit against bigotry, but she firmly disagreed with civil rights leaders who maintain that her husband is fomenting racial divisions by threatening to veto the civil rights bill passed Wednesday by the House.
"Nobody wants a civil rights bill more than George Bush," she said.
"But he wants one that's fair to the whole country."
She was asked if Mr.
Bush would be left open to accusations next year that he was fostering racial divisions, similar to the ones he faced when he made an issue in the 1988 campaign of Willie Horton, the black convict who raped a woman and stabbed a man while on furlough from a Massachusetts prison.
"That would be too bad because that's not what Willie Horton was about at all," she replied, starchily.
She said she favored non-denominational prayer in schools.
"We grew up with grace before meals," she said.
"Congress opens with a prayer. The Supreme Court opens with a prayer. I've never known anyone it hurts." Tonic and Bitters
She said her husband was feeling fine after his bout with heart fibrillations.
He has not slowed down, she said, adding that the naps he takes are not new.
But she said he had switched to non-alcoholic beer and tonic and bitters while he is taking his medication for Graves' disease and heart problems.
"He told me, that first day in the hospital, 'You know, I wish I hadn't mentioned it,' " she recalled, saying that he did not like being dragged away from his sporting activities at Camp David after he admitted being fatigued after jogging.
She said she was not sure why they had both come down with a rare conjugal case of Graves' disease but suggested that, for her, it may have been set off by the excitement of the 1988 campaign, and, for him, by worries about sending young soldiers into war.
She said that she had kept diaries about her life for decades, but that they were hopelessly "boring."
She said she and her husband were happier than they had ever been.
"You'd be an awful spoiled person," she said as Millie slept under the dining room table, "if you didn't love this life."


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about the number of black members at Westchester County country clubs misidentified the tournament played last summer at the Shoal Creek club near Birmingham, Ala.
It was the Professional Golfers' Association championship.


Sexuality Report Is Assailed At Hearing of Presbyterians
Representatives of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A) assailed a special church committee's report on human sexuality at the denomination's annual General Assembly here.
But the authors defended their report, which was released for discussion in February after three years of work.
Both critics and authors spoke before the Assembly Committee on Human Sexuality, a 67-member body, which began hearings today.


Timberland Promotes Grandson of Founder
"If Ralph Lauren is the voice of the indoors, Timberland is the voice of the outdoors," said Jeffery B. Swartz, who was recently named chief operating officer of the Timberland Company, the footwear and apparel company founded by his grandfather in 1973.
In announcing the appointment, Mr.
Swartz's father, Sidney W. Swartz, the chief executive and president of Timberland, said his son had been vital to the company's growth since he joined Timberland six years ago.
Mr.
Swartz will be in charge of manufacturing and domestic and international sales.


Traffic Alert
Upper Columbus Avenue Fair: Columbus Avenue will be closed tomorrow from 86th to 96th Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Puerto Rican Day Parade: Fifth Avenue will be closed on Sunday from 44th to 86th Street from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Welcome Back to Brooklyn Fair: Eastern Parkway will be closed Sunday between Washington and Flatbush Avenues from noon to 5 P.M.
Operation Welcome Home: The ticker tape parade will create gridlock conditions on Monday in Manhattan.


Rochester Gas
The Rochester Gas and Electric Company will refund $10 million to customers through adjustments on their bills.
The refund stems from an agreement with the New York State Public Service Commission regarding the utility's fuel procurement practices over 10 years.
During the decade covered by the audit, the company said, its fuel purchases totaled more than $525 million.
The commission began assessing Rochester Gas's coal and nuclear-fuel procurement activities in January 1989.
The company's stock price fell 25 cents today, to $19.50, in over-the-counter trading.


Review/Art; Sam Francis, at the Height of His Powers
The Gagosian Gallery exhibition of Sam Francis's elegantly explosive "Blue Balls" paintings is something of an eye-opener.
Made between 1960 and 1964, these often dazzling canvases release huge transparent spheres or embryo-like clusters of blue on stark white grounds.
They show a young artist at the height of his powers, mark a turning point in American painting with unusual complexity, and in both ways may unsettle prevailing opinion about their creator's achievement.
Mr.
Francis, who is 68 years old and lives in California, has a career that spans 40 years and several continents and is shaky in reputation.
Ever since the 50's, when he lived and worked primarily in Paris, his art has been held in higher regard in Japan and Europe than in the United States.
In New York especially, Mr.
Francis's meteoric ascent -- which began in Paris in the early 50's -- is widely thought to have been followed by a steady decline.
His reputation rests primarily on his shimmering crepuscular monochromes from the mid 50's, in which rounded repeating brushstrokes create a multi-celled or honeycombed surface while also resembling a Mark Rothko color cloud in the process of disintegration.


Technologies Taking Writedown
The United Technologies Corporation announced that it would take a $148 million charge against its second-quarter earnings, partly because of settlement of a longtime contract dispute with Israel.
The company and Israel had signed a $350 million contract in 1984 for the Multi-Mode Radar System to be installed in Israel's F4 Phantom jets, said a spokesman, Martin Moore.


Judge Says 2 Should Share Honor
A dispute between two students at a Georgia high school over who should be the class valedictorian ended up in the courtroom of a Federal judge today.
The judge ruled that the two students -- one black, one white -- should share the honor.
But the black student, Johnathan Henderson, said he would refuse to speak at the graduation ceremony on Friday night at Newton County High School in Covington, about 30 miles southeast of Atlanta.
The dispute has heightened racial tensions at the school.
"I refuse to share in what I feel is an injustice," said Mr. Henderson, 18 years old.
The white student, C. Thomas Allgood 3d, 17, had compiled a slightly higher grade-point average than Mr.
Henderson's.
But before transferring to the school, Mr.
Allgood had earned some of his grades at a private school whose accreditation is in dispute.
The fight began in April.
The County School Superintendent recommended that the two share the honor, which carries a $1,000 prize.
Mr.
Henderson's father asked the school board to pick one valedictorian; it picked Mr.
Henderson and Mr.
Allgood sued.
Mr.
Allgood , did not attend Thursday's hearing before Judge, Marvin H. Shoob of Federal District Court here and was not immediately available for comment.
The judge said he was forced to make the decision because the county school board abdicated its responsibilities by deadlocking in a vote on the matter on Monday night.


A Bull Market for Fraud Emerges in Hard Times
In New Jersey this spring, thousands of people signed up for high-paying jobs rebuilding Kuwait.
Many of the jobs did not exist.
But hefty application fees did.
In Connecticut, hucksters appealed to the public to donate money to buy water filters for troops growing thirsty and sick in the Saudi Arabian desert.


ABORTION RULING IS FOCUS OF PANEL
A Senate committee moved today to reverse a Supreme Court decision by approving legislation requiring family planning clinics that accept Federal money to offer information on abortion.
On May 23, the Court upheld a Federal regulation that prohibits clinics that receive Federal money from providing information on abortion, deciding that the rule was a valid interpretation of Congressional intent.
The regulation, suspended while the case was in court, is scheduled to take effect next month.


Hachette Sets Publisher For Elle Decor Magazine
Elle Decor magazine and Home magazine will share the same publisher and advertising staff, Hachette Magazines announced yesterday.
The company named John J. Miller, the publisher of Home, as publisher of Elle Decor as well, succeeding Polly Perkins, who resigned.
She will remain a consultant to the company.
"I launched this magazine two years ago and I had different ideas about a long-term strategy than Hachette," Ms.
Perkins said.


Grand Jury Indicts El Paso Electric
The El Paso Electric Company, the largest provider of electricity in El Paso and the Rio Grande Valley of South Texas, was indicted by a state grand jury on charges of defrauding investors through its ties to a financial company that collapsed in 1987.
The charges relate to the utility's involvement with a financial empire once controlled by an El Paso executive, Maury Page Kemp.
The utility invested $96 million in annuities, most of which were secured by Treasury bills and other assets, that were sold by two insurance companies owned by Mr.
Kemp from 1984 to 1986.


Ali Is Still a Comfort To Many Aging Fans
Muhammad Ali lurches toward 50, moon-faced, whispery, a holy child.
"Holy?" he snaps. "The life I lead?"


Failed Bank Layoffs Seen
As many as 1,000 Bank of New England data processing employees could lose their jobs as the failed bank is merged with Fleet/Norstar Financial Group Inc., Fleet officials said today.
Details for integrating the banks' operations have not been completed, but the basic outline calls for the combined companies' computer networks to be consolidated at Fleet's operations center in Albany.


Businesses Plan a Slim 3% Rise in Spending
Businesses in the United States plan to increase their investment spending by just 3 percent this year, the smallest rise in five years, the Government reported today.
Analysts said the recession, in trimming consumer demand, had reduced available cash as well as any immediate need for new plants and equipment.


Salomon Inc.
A $100 million issue of Salomon Inc. $25 perpetual preferred stock was priced yesterday to yield 9.5 percent annually.
The perpetual preferred, which will not accrue interest before the settlement date of June 13, does not have a fixed maturity date and was rated A-2 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P. Underwriters noted that this issue is noncallable for five years.


Rights Spotlight on G.O.P.; Senators Offer Compromise Bills to Bridge Gap Between President and the Democrats
The flickering civil rights spotlight has shifted from the House Democrats and their failure to make progress toward a veto-proof majority to Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri and eight Republican colleagues who are trying to find some ground for compromise.
In their efforts to find some space to legislate beneath the political artillery fire exchanged between President Bush and the Democrats, they are serving as a reminder of the fact that civil rights legislation, though identified more and more with Democrats in recent years, has always depended on Republican votes for ultimate success.


INSIDE
Space Station Survives
The space station survived a key vote as the House of Representatives backed an amendment to take money from other projects.
Page D16.
Survey on Jewish Life


20 Tons of Gold Sold by India
The Indian Government has sold 20 tons of gold on the international market to meet a foreign exchange crisis.
Government officials confirmed the sale, which news reports said took place on May 24.
The reports said the gold was sold for $11.7 million a ton, or $234 million.


BUSH SEEKS UNITY ON U.S. ARMS STAND
President Bush met today with his top national security advisers about the strategic arms talks with the Soviet Union, in an unusual last-minute rush to resolve American policy on issues that have blocked the Moscow summit conference and revealed a high-level split within the Administration.
Mr.
Bush met with members of his National Security Council at the White House on the eve of an important meeting scheduled for Friday in Geneva between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh of the Soviet Union.


Grey Faces a Review For the Maalox Account
Grey Advertising is having its own "Maalox moment." The agency, which created that popular advertising slogan for the antacid brand, has been told that the $15 million account is up for review.
"We have been using Grey for five years, and we have had a very good relationship with them," said Patricia Bowman, group product manager at Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, the Fort Washington, Pa., maker of Maalox.
"But we think it makes very good business sense to review this type of option periodically."


Cynthia Damens Weds
Cynthia J. Damens, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart H. Damens of Willowbrook, S.I., was married last evening at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck, L.I., to Thomas A. Richman, the son of the late Thelma Richman of New York.
Rabbi David Posner officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, is an administrative assistant in the asset-management department of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York.
The bridegroom, 36, is the founder and president of Creative Benefit Plans, an insurance brokerage in New York.


Grey Gets Firm In Washington
The public-relations subsidiary of Grey Advertising has acquired a government-relations firm from Arnold &amp; Porter, Washington's largest law firm.
Terms of the deal for APCO Associates, which was announced yesterday, were not disclosed.


Berlin Court Convicts the Former Chief of Communist Unions
The first trial of a former Communist East German party boss ended here today, with Harry Tisch, who headed the Communist labor unions until he was toppled in November 1989, found guilty of misappropriation of funds on five counts and sentenced to 18 months in prison.
In its unanimous verdict, the court of three judges and two jurors dropped the main charge against the 64-year-old Mr.
Tisch, that in 1984 he diverted $57 million in union pension funds to pay for a lavish festival organized by the Communist youth group.
But the court acknowledged that grounds existed for "suspicion of manipulation."


America West Airlines Stops Lease Payments
America West Airlines Inc. said yesterday that it had suspended payments to holders of leases on its planes to conserve cash.
The airline said it did not expect the step to interrupt its flights.
The carrier, which is the nation's ninth-largest airline and has its main hub in Phoenix, said it was seeking to negotiate short-term deferrals of its aircraft payments.


A New Look at Children and Divorce
Many of the problems children exhibit after their parents divorce are apparent even before the marriage ends, the first large before-and-after study of the effects of divorce has shown.
The findings, reported in today's issue of the journal Science, suggest that staying together for the sake of the children is not necessarily helpful if the marriage is marred by conflict.
The findings call into question the blame that has been attributed to divorce itself as the cause for the behavioral, emotional and academic problems commonly noted in other studies among the children of divorced parents.


The Wedtech 6: A Morality Tale
The great moral drama of the Wedtech trials has dissipated on appeal.
First, Lyn Nofziger, President Ronald Reagan's political mechanic, had his conviction for violating the Ethics in Government Act overturned.
Then Representative Robert Garcia and his wife, Jane, were awarded a new trial after a jury had found them guilty of extortion.
And last week the Second Circuit Court of Appeals overturned the racketeering convictions of E. Robert Wallach, Frank Chinn and Rusty Kent London.
Remember Wedtech?
It was the mid-Reagan-era scandal involving a minority-owned defense contractor in the South Bronx.
The company was lauded by the President himself, but its success turned out to be built on bribery and political muscle.
Politicians, public officials, lawyers, accountants and bankers played a key part in Wedtech's vast deceit.


Edward J. Stern Wed to Ms. Rein
Stephanie Beth Rein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert M. Rein of New York, was married last evening at the New York Botanical Garden to Edward Julius Stern, a son of Judith S. Peck and Leonard N. Stern, both of New York.
Rabbi Marshall T. Meyer officiated.
The bride, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Bryn Mawr College, she is a candidate for an M.D. degree at the Albert Einstein School of Medicine.
Her father is the president of the CEI Group Inc. in New York, an exporter and distributor and an operator of retail stores.
Her mother, Susan Lee Rein, is a supervisor of speech pathology for Community School District 22 in Brooklyn.


Keep Feeding Women, Infants, Children
It's well and good to talk, as President Bush does, about the year 2000 as the time by which all American children entering school will be truly ready to learn.
But it's not going to happen if many of those children grow to school age without minimally decent nutrition.
That was the sensible message of five corporate executives when they testified before the House Budget Committee in March on the wisdom of a 19-year-old Federal program called WIC.
WIC, for Women, Infants and Children, provides poor, pregnant or nursing women and their children with diet supplements and formula.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Recalled Leo Gomez, third baseman, from Rochester of the International League.
Placed Jeff McKnight, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.


CHRONICLE
While covering a meeting of the far-right National Front party, an observant French reporter asked JEAN-MARIE LE PEN, the party leader, why he was suddenly wearing a wedding ring again.
Mr.
Le Pen then disclosed that he had been married last Friday.
Mr.
Le Pen, 62 years old, and JEANNE-MARIE LOUISE PASCHOS, 59, were wed in the affluent Paris suburb of Rueil-Malmaison.
They met five years ago at dinner with mutual friends.
It is the second marriage for both.
His first wife, PIERRETTE LALANNE, posed for French Playboy after being divorced from Mr.
Le Pen in 1985.


Birthday? Speech! Speech!
Bud Harrelson didn't have a party to celebrate his birthday today.
He did, though, hold a get-together of sorts.
In fact, it was the kind of affair the Mets specialize in.
He called a team meeting.
Harrelson, who wasn't pleased to count among his presents the delivery of the day's newspapers from New York, spent the morning fuming privately over articles concerning his stewardship of the Mets.
Then, after canceling his daily meeting with reporters, the 47-year-old manager cleared them from the team's clubhouse and took center stage.


In Daring Landing, Plane Rescues Sick Man From Antarctica
Groping its way through darkness to a hazardous ice landing, a National Science Foundation transport plane made the first midwinter landing in Antarctica in nearly 24 years on Tuesday to evacuate a dangerously ill New Zealander.
After its skis touched down for a landing on a runway at Williams Field marked by blazing drums of kerosene, the plane remained on the ground for only 90 minutes as its crew, including the doctor on board, rushed to refuel it.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT REDFORD was to receive an honorary doctorate from the University of Utah on June 14.
But he has told CHASE N. PETERSON, the university president, that he will be on location and unable to attend.
"He sent a letter explaining that, when he was invited, he didn't realize there was this conflict," said ROBERTA MILLER, Mr.
Redford's spokeswoman.
He is in Livingston, Mont., to direct the film "A River Runs Through It." It is based on a critically acclaimed book by NORMAN MacLEAN about fly fishing.
Filming is to begin on Wednesday.
The honorary doctorate will not be in the mail.
"The rules are that, if a recipient cannot be here in person, he cannot get the degree," said JO ANNE McNULTY, a university public relations assistant.
"But it doesn't eliminate him from further consideration. He's very popular in Utah." Mr.
Redford lives near Salt Lake City.


United and American Show Jump in Air Travel in May
The nation's two largest airlines, American and United, posted big increases in traffic for May.
It was the first significant advance since the beginning of the year, when the Persian Gulf war discouraged many people from air travel.
American Airlines said yesterday that its traffic had risen 6.6 percent in May over May 1990.
On Tuesday United showed a surge of 14.9 percent.


Quotation of the Day
"When times are good there are many ways to strike it rich legitimately, everything from the stock market to business ventures. When the times go sour, people from the shady side come out and offer opportunities." -- James Allen Fox of Northeastern University.  [ B3:5. ]


Winners Are Selected For Livingston Awards
An independent radio producer, two magazine writers and a Moscow correspondent for The Washington Post were the winners yesterday of the 10th annual Livingston Awards for Young Journalists.
The three $5,000 awards are given in recognition of "outstanding journalism in print or broadcast" by journalists under 35 years old.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday with a dance review of "Raymonda (Act III)" misidentified the dancers shown.
They were Scott Schlexer and Elizabeth Ferrell.


AIDS Definition Excludes Women, Congress Is Told
Women with AIDS have more trouble getting government disability payments than men because the standard definition of AIDS does not take into account many of the symptoms experienced by women, witnesses told a Congressional hearing today.
An increasing number of AIDS patients are women, rising from a few percent in 1982 to about 12 percent of all AIDS cases reported in the United States last year.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 548 money market mutual funds decreased by $1.9 billion, to $462.57 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 196 institutional funds decreased by $439.1 million, to $133.1 billion.
The assets of the 260 general-purpose funds were down by $665.8 million, to $178.17 billion.
The 92 broker-dealer funds decreased by $792.2 million, to $151.3 billion, the institute said.


Bridgeport Filing for Bankruptcy Protection
The City of Bridgeport filed for Federal bankruptcy protection this evening, five months after being forbidden to do so by a state monitoring board.
Mayor Mary Moran told an emergency meeting of the Common Council tonight that the city had sought protection under Chapter 9 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


Corrections
A chart on the television page on Wednesday, headed "The Ratings Race," carried week-old data in some copies.
A corrected chart appears today on page C34.


Tokyo Stocks Up a Bit
Japanese stock prices closed slightly higher here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues finished up 50.99 points, or two-tenths of 1 percent, to 25,035.11


Art in Review
Kenneth Noland Salander-O'Reilly Galleries 20 East 79th Street Through June 29
In the last couple of years, Kenneth Noland has been in some way turning his work inside out.
In his "Flares" paintings, irregular shapes bearing the memory of the regular shapes within his earlier canvases are detached from one another and independent of any pictorial frame.
The painted edges between the areas of color in earlier paintings are now lines of colored Plexiglas.
The white canvas in and around areas of color in his early works is now actual space.


Birmingham's Toughest Lawyer is Faced Down By His Outraged Colleagues Over a Funeral Wreath.
Anyone here watching reruns of "Perry Mason" or "Mayberry, R.F.D." has heard of Robert M. Norris.
In televised advertisements -- which he had to sue the Birmingham Bar Association to be allowed to run -- Mr.
Norris promotes himself as "the toughest lawyer in town." His name can also be seen on wrist watches, baseball caps, church chairs, plastic business cards, and bumper stickers that warn: "BACK OFF! MY LAWYER IS ROBERT NORRIS."


On Stage, and Off
Second-Guessing the Tonys
The most venerable Tony Award tradition is, of course, the designation of the Apres Tonys, conferred by the first-night second-guessers once the real Tonys are history.
Here, then, is a sampling of Apres Tonys awarded by theater gossips since the ceremony on Sunday night:


Algeria Imposes a Curfew and Promises to Use Force
The Algerian Government stepped up its confrontation today with the Islamic fundamentalist political movement by imposing a curfew on the capital, Algiers, and warning that any illegal activities by political parties, including rallies, public demonstrations and strikes, will be met with force.
But Muslim fundamentalist leaders called again today for the continuation of the general strike they announced 12 days ago and said rallies should be held wherever possible.
They cautioned against clashes with Algeria's 125,000-member army, which has deployed its troops across the country at the orders of President Chedli Benjedid.


Paramount Stock Rises
The stock of Paramount Communications Inc. rose $4.25 yesterday to close at $45 on rumors that Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company and David Geffen, a Hollywood producer, were planning to buy the company.
Mr.
Geffen, however, said late yesterday that he owned no Paramount stock and had never met the partners of Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts.
A person close to that company also denied the rumor.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
CUC International Inc., Stamford, Conn., an operator of home-shopping clubs, promoted E. Kirk Shelton to president.
He succeeds Walter A. Forbes, who will continue as chief executive and chairman. *
Coastal States Management Corp., a unit of the Coastal Corp., Houston, named Stirling D. Pack Jr. and Ronald D. Matthews as vice presidents.


Kraft Will Reduce Use of Low-Fat Claims
Kraft General Foods Inc., the nation's largest food company, confirmed yesterday that it plans to drop fat-percentage claims from some of its products, including cottage cheese, as soon as practical.
The unit of the Philip Morris Companies said it had advised the Food and Drug Administration last summer that it might drop such claims.
But it was only notified earlier this week that David A. Kessler, the F.D.A.'s chairman, planned to cite Kraft's offer in a speech yesterday at a nutrition conference.


Review/Film; Spike Lee's Comedy of Sorrow
ARTISTS remain forever separate and unequal.
There's no way to legislate parity.
As a black film maker, Spike Lee has one terrific advantage over his white contemporaries who, like him, came out of film schools.
He not only knows how to make movies, but he also has something to make movies about: the pluralistic American society that is not quite as perfect as it's advertised to be.
Mr.
Lee's is an impatient passion.
It's also something to be cherished in an art that deals mostly in anesthetics.


Being Read to Is Better Than Reading, Huh?; Prophets of Doom
To the Editor:
As one who has been regularly reviewing and writing about books on cassettes since 1985, I was happy to see "Literary Echoes, on the Road" (editorial, May 20), praising their growing popularity.
Not many years ago, the situation was the reverse.


At the Movies
"It was a very pleasant thing, like a summer day in the middle of winter," Giuseppe Tornatore said.
The Italian film maker was reminiscing about winning the Academy Award for best foreign film last year with "Cinema Paradiso," the nostalgic, sentimental tale of a grizzled projectionist and a little boy growing up in a Sicilian town after World War II.


Being Read to Is Better Than Reading, Huh?; A New Way to Enjoy
To the Editor:
I was delighted by your May 20 editorial on audio books.
The unabridged recording of quality literature by gifted readers gives us a new way to enjoy and understand the printed word.
But you don't adequately describe the source of the example you cite -- Tony Hillerman's "Listening Woman," read by George Guidall.


Review/Film; Aristocracy When It Thinks No One Is Looking
Rarely does a documentary film maker make the transition to fiction as adroitly as Nicholas Broomfield has in "Dark Obsession," a psychological thriller displaying a documentarian's fascination for small, telling details.
Mr.
Broomfield, whose earlier work includes "Soldier Girls" and "Tattooed Tears" (made in collaboration with Joan Churchill), turns this time to the world of a bony, haggard English aristocrat (Gabriel Byrne) whose bloodless manner belies a capacity for desperate jealousy, reckless behavior and worse -- much worse.
Much of the film unfolds at the huge drafty ancestral hall inhabited by Sir Hugo Buckton (Mr. Byrne) and members of his complex, unhappy family.
Among these are a patriarch, Lord Crewne (Michael Hordern), who resents finding his estate now open to the public ("Am I being roped off?" he asks irritably, as a servant makes arrangements for the tourists), and his supercilious wife (Judy Parfitt), who is very skilled in the ways of insulting the lovers of her two children.


Nixon And Bush
The veritable, the irreplaceable Richard Nixon was with us again this week.
In newly released transcripts of his White House tapes he fulminated about "Jews," talked about using teamsters' union thugs to beat up antiwar protesters and said aides should "sneak in in the middle of the night" to get the tax records of leading Democrats.
Reading his words, one wondered again about that morbid personality, so lacking in self-esteem that he sees conspiracies all about him and plots gutter vengeance against enemies.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON DECOLONIZATION, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SMALL TERRITORIES 10:30 A.M.
Economic and Social Council DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, GOVERNING COUNCIL -- 3 P.M.
BUDGETARY AND FINANCE COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Attack Victim: 'A Kid That Everybody Liked'
When friends and teachers talk about Alfred Jermaine Ewell, the 17-year-old victim of what the authorities are describing as a racial attack, they acknowledge that he sounds too good to be true.
"Jermaine is the best," said Lisa Sharek, one of dozens of students who spilled out of Lawrence High School at midday for lunch at the Foodland Express on Peninsula Boulevard.


For Children
Carnival  Victory Park  Pier 84  44th Street and Hudson River  Manhattan  (212) 239-0796  Recommended ages: 2 and up  Through Oct. 31
This carnival on the edge of the Hudson River makes children feel like adults -- as they steer motor boats on a "river," and drive rockets through the air -- and makes adults feel like children.
It has all the requisites that adults can conjure from their past: cotton candy, enormous stuffed toys, games of chance, bumper cars.
There are contemporary touches, too.
The Raiders game challenges youngsters to walk across well-netted hanging bridges, push aside oversize balloons and slip down an airslide that lands in a "lagoon" (a large cushion).
A mini-roller coaster is just fast and high enough to ignite a thrill; when children climb aboard Tilt-a-Whirl, a whipping, spinning ride, even acrimonious siblings huddle close.
The kiddie rides are models of gentility.
The Bumble Bee, for example, rises up and down, and each bee comes equipped with its own buzz horn.
A few more rides will be set up soon; meanwhile, there are plenty to work with, including a 45-foot-high slide that can get children racing 15 miles an hour.
Admission to the carnival is $2 for adults and $1 for children (free for those under 36 inches).
Each activity also requires tickets -- 2 tickets cost $1; 12 cost $5; 24 cost $10, and 50 cost $20.
There are hot dogs, steak sandwiches and pizza.
The carnival is open Sundays through Thursdays from 11 A.M. to 11 P.M., and Fridays and Saturdays from 11 A.M. to 1 A.M.


Plan for Boat People Cheers Hong Kong
When the boat people from Vietnam started pouring in again in recent months, the prospects for resolving a problem that had haunted this territory for years seemed grim.
But a more accommodating attitude by the United States has now given Hong Kong hope that it will not always be burdened by unwanted refugees.
The United States Government agreed on Wednesday to back the "non-voluntary" return of boat people to special camps in Vietnam, as long as the camps were managed by an international organization like the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
That was a breakthrough because the United States has always opposed forcible repatriation of the boat people.


TV Executions: Trite Overnight
The California public television station that sued for the right to film the state's executions used practical First Amendment arguments to make its case.
But the station, KQED of San Francisco, turned to myth for the claim that television images of state-inflicted death would have more value than words alone.
Broadcast images are disposable.
The more dramatic they are, the more they are shown, the quicker their impact is exhausted.
The first gas chamber death would shock.
The third would be familiar.
A dozen times, and it would be no more compelling than wallpaper.
The film of Los Angeles policemen bludgeoning a helpless victim will transform itself in just this way.


New York Marathon Changes the Rules on Prize Money
In a move intended to make the New York City Marathon more competitive among the leading runners and more lucrative for Americans, the New York Road Runners Club has created a prize-money structure based on performance rather than placement.
While appearance money will still be offered to elite runners, the only finishing position that will be rewarded is first.
The fastest man and woman will each win a new Mercedes Benz.
Otherwise, the distribution of prize money will be determined by time, starting with a bonus of $100,000 for any runner who breaks the existing world record.
Currently, that is 2 hours 6 minutes 50 seconds for men, and 2 hours 21 minutes 6 seconds for women.
Each athlete who breaks the record qualifies for the bonus, although only the winner gets the car.


Math Survey in Public Schools Shows No State Is 'Cutting It'
In the first state-by-state comparison of how public schoolchildren do in national academic tests, the Federal Government released data today showing that the highest scores in eighth-grade mathematics came from students in the upper midwestern and northwestern states, which in general have few large cities and less poverty than other regions.
The Federal survey also indicated that only one out of seven eighth graders nationally reaches the proficiency in mathematics expected at that grade level.


MITCHELL OFFERS GUN CONTROL PLAN
The Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, today presented his plan on handgun control that would combine a seven-day waiting period with a requirement for criminal background checks of prospective gun buyers.
A bill that the House passed last month requires a seven-day waiting period but does not mandate a background check, though states can do so if they choose to.
Representatives of Handgun Control Inc. and gun control supporters in the House and the Senate have expressed support for Senator Mitchell's approach.
But the National Rife Association is maintaining its opposition to waiting periods of any kind, while supporting the idea of required background checks.
Mr.
Mitchell's bill, which is expected to replace a measure similar to the House bill sponsored by Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, would provide $40 million in grants to help state and local governmentsbring state criminal records up to date.
Fifty percent of the $40 million appropriated for the grants would be distributed among states according to population, with the remainder to be distributed at the discretion of the Attorney General.
"This proposal is designed to accomplish what the opposing sides of this issue identify as their common goal -- to keep handguns out of the hands of convicted felons," Mr.
Mitchell said.
Part of Anti-Crime Bill
Sponsors of the Mitchell bill said the measure would be incorporated into the anti-crime package already introduced by Joseph R. Biden Jr., a Delaware Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
The anti-crime measure was expected to be taken up in the Senate next week.
An aide to Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, the ranking Republican on the Judiciary Committee who is a strong supporter of an anti-crime bill sought by President Bush, said today that he had not read the Mitchell proposal and would not comment.


Dance Has Given Rise to Some of the Century's Greatest Music
To the Editor:
Bernard Holland's May 21 critic's notebook presents an enticing theory on the re-emergence of the public and the popular in the composition of classical music.
It prompts me to expand on two different thoughts.
Some of this century's greatest music, including the post-World War II era Mr.
Holland writes about, has come from commissions for dance companies.
Dance in this era has had to meet its public head on and has stirred the creative fires in ways few art forms have matched in the last 40 years.
Dance artists and institutions have been serious music's most consistent investors.


Belle Grounds Into Demotion
The Cleveland Indians sent outfielder Albert Belle to the minors after he failed to run hard tonight on a double-play grounder in a 2-1 loss to the Chicago White Sox.
"Tonight was the most flagrant example of not running out a ground ball I've ever seen at the major league level," Manager John McNamara said.
"I have gone to the wall with that man. We have talked to him and talked to him. It doesn't take any talent to hustle. This was the last straw."


Larry Kert, 60, a Romantic Lead In the Original 'West Side Story'
Larry Kert, the singer and actor who soared to fame in 1957 as the male romantic lead in "West Side Story," died Wednesday night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old.
He died of AIDS, a family spokesman said.


Greitzer, a Democratic Colleague, Will Seek Dryfoos's Council Seat
Councilwoman Carol Greitzer of Manhattan announced yesterday that she will challenge Councilman Robert J. Dryfoos for his Upper East Side seat in the special November election, calling him an embarrassment to the Council and the city's Democratic leadership.
Ms.
Greitzer is the first Council member to challenge a fellow incumbent in another district since proposed district lines were released on Monday.


Pope Visits Children's Hospital in Poland


Mandela Urges Convicts to End 37-Day Fast
Nelson Mandela, the leader of the African National Congress, appealed today for political prisoners to stop a hunger strike, now in its 37th day.
Mr.
Mandela has been in Nigeria this week attending the meeting of the Organization of African Unity and is scheduled to fly to France before returning home.
The African National Congress issued a statement today saying Mr.
Mandela wanted the protesters in prison to stop.


Squabbling Halts Gulf Parade
Disputes between peace and pro-military groups have scuttled a parade that was to be held here for troops who served in the Persian Gulf war.
The parade, which had been planned for June 22, needed $250,000 to get off the ground, and only $160,000 in cash, goods and services was collected, the event's chief organizer said Wednesday.


8,000 New York City Workers Caught in Budget Purgatory
It was just days before Memorial Day and the top of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument in Riverside Park at 89th Street was smudged with graffiti.
A creaky three-story ladder was brought in, but none of the Manhattan park workers were willing to climb it to clean the windswept marble.
Harvey Hicks, on a workfare assignment from his welfare office, volunteered.
"When I came down," he said, "I had a job."


SALVADORAN FOES EXCHANGE CHARGES
The Government and the guerrillas have threatened to resume the Salvadoran civil war at full force after the latest round of peace talks recessed without agreements and each side asserted that the other was toughening its stand.
"If they want war, they'll get war," President Alfredo Cristiani said on Wednesday in response to intelligence reports that the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front was preparing for a new offensive.
This morning, the guerrillas' Radio Venceremos responded with almost the same phrase.


Credit Report Problems Cited
People seeking to correct false credit reports tried an average of nearly six months and many notified the ratings agencies five or more times without success, a consumer group said today.
The United States Public Interest Research Group reviewed 155 complaints on private credit bureaus on file with the Federal Trade Commission.


House Approves Rescue of Space Station
The House rescued the embattled space station today, voting to spend nearly $2 billion next year on NASA's centerpiece program well into the 21st century.
By a vote of 240 to 173, the House agreed to give President Bush the $1.9 billion that the space agency had requested for the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1.
The money will be taken mostly from other programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.


Philips Stake To Whirlpool
Philips N.V., the troubled Dutch electronics giant, said today that it would sell its remaining stake in its home-appliance manufacturing venture with the Whirlpool Corporation.
Philips will receive about $600 million from Whirlpool.
"We believe that transferring these activities to a company that is fully dedicated to this business is the best guarantee for long-term growth and success," said Jan Timmer, the president of Philips, in a statement issued by the two companies.
"The proceeds of this transaction will enable Philips to strengthen its financial position."


Amax Note Issue
A $300 million note issue by Amax Inc. was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The notes, which mature in 2001, have a 9.875 percent coupon and are priced at 100 to yield 165 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
Analysts noted that the spread was on the low end of what many traders had expected.
Noncallable by the company, the notes were rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P.


New Evers Autopsy Replaces Original, Reported as Missing
Prosecutors say they had the body of Medgar Evers exhumed because an autopsy report done soon after the civil rights leader was slain in 1963 is missing.
They say a new autopsy was needed to try to convict the man suspected of killing Mr.
Evers.
Two New York pathologists exhumed and examined Mr.
Evers's remains at the request of a Mississippi district attorney who is preparing to try the suspect, Byron de la Beckwith, for a third time, an official said.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about a singer and actor who became a leader in organizations of patients with AIDS rendered his name incorrectly in some copies.
He was Thomas A. Hannan.


Talks With Gorbachev Urged
Britain, as host of an economic summit meeting in July, urged that the Soviet leader be invited for talks immediately afterward.
Page A8.


Books of The Times; Of Love and Loyalty, Binding and Rending Apart
Isaac and His Devils By Fernanda Eberstadt 338 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
Part way through Fernanda Eberstadt's richly detailed new novel, her youthful hero, Isaac Hooker, asks his father about the story of Abraham and Isaac.
He is disturbed by the fate of his biblical namesake, the boy who was nearly sacrificed by his father as a testament of his faith in God.
"You know what I would do if God told Abraham to sacrifice me?" he asks his father.
"I'd turn right around and sacrifice Abraham. Bind him and serve him up for Sunday dinner."


General Tire Begins Layoffs
General Tire Inc. plans to cut its salaried work force of 3,100 by more than 20 percent this year to reduce costs.
The company, owned by Continental A.G. of Germany, said 160 employees were cut immediately, including 100 at its headquarters in Akron.
Continental is the world's fourth-largest tire maker.


Report Adds Twist to Case of Beating Victim
Confidential police reports published today add a new twist to the saga of Rodney G. King, the victim of this city's most widely publicized police brutality case, who is now accused of trying to run down an undercover police officer with his car last week.
In the latest incident, which occurred on May 28, the police had said Mr.
King fled and was stopped by other officers after a confrontation with two undercover officers who said they saw Mr.
King in a car with a transvestite prostitute.


Changes in Family Patterns: Solitude and Single Parents
Delayed marriage and frequent divorce are transforming the American household, etching patterns of solitude, single parenthood and homes increasingly filled by unmarried couples, a new Census Bureau survey shows.
Children of the 1950's are living alone in record numbers, children of the 1960's and 1970's linger in the parental nest and almost one-quarter of the children of the 1980's and 90's are living with a single parent.


Sandoz Reduces Cost of Treatment
The Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corporation said it had eliminated an exclusive and expensive blood-monitoring procedure for patients taking its new schizophrenia drug, Clozaril.
The company had been under pressure to cut the cost of administering Clozaril because many who might have benefited from it could not afford the treatments, which ran about $8,950 a year under Sandoz's system for monitoring patients' blood.


The Things We Celebrate
The grunts knew the weight of every item they carried as they slogged on patrol through the jungles of Vietnam.
But as Tim O'Brien wrote in his book of stories, "The Things They Carried," they also bore more terrible weight:
For the most part they carried themselves with poise, a kind of dignity.
Now and then, however, there were times of panic, when they squealed or . . . flopped around on the earth and fired their weapons blindly and cringed and sobbed and begged for the noise to stop and went wild and made stupid promises to themselves and to God and to their mothers and fathers, hoping not to die.


Review/Art; Shaggy Steel Sculptures With Energy Racing
The welded-steel abstract sculptures of Daniel Barrett at the ACA Galleries have an infectious freedom.
All of them seem to sprout off the wall or floor.
All are so shaggy, gregarious and profuse that they hardly appear able to restrain the energy rising, winding and racing through them.
Some sculptures are assembled with so many taut and frilly lines that the black masses appear to have been plugged into an electric socket.
A number of works suggest sculptural composites of boisterous revelers well into the dissipated bliss of New Year's Eve.
Part of the appeal of this work is that it seems entirely at ease with itself.
Its tone is not neutrality, anxiety or aggression.
The work is not defensive or self-conscious.
Mr.
Barrett trusts sculpture, trusts movement, trusts that the process of making his work will transform everything in it.
So that, by the end, every artist he has met along the way will speak in his language.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12
NATO said it would protect countries of the Warsaw Pact from any "coercion or intimidation." The plan, which did not specify how NATO would respond to a threat, is an effort to ease military concerns.
Page A1


Where Performers Converge, Collide and Sometimes Wield Chain Saws
The New York International Festival of the Arts begins tomorrow and runs through June 23.
For information about events, call the appropriate box office.
For general information, call (212) 768-1818.
A schedule follows.
Tomorrow
PONG SAN, Korean masked dance drama, Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, Manhattan.
Tomorrow, 8 P.M. (Also Sunday 2 and 8 P.M.) Admission: $20; $16 for Asia Society members.
Information: (212) 288-6400.
"NEW TRADITIONS IN EAST ASIAN BAR BANDS," American Museum of the Moving Image, Riklis Theater, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
New music by John Zorn, with screenings of rare Asian films, Tomorrow at 3 and 7 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets, $16.
Information: (718) 784-0077 or (718) 784-4520.
COMPAGNIE PHILIPPE SAIRE, the 14th Street Dance Center, 344 East 14th Street, Manhattan.
Tomorrow and Sunday, 8 P.M.
Admission: $12.
Information: (212) 673-2207.
DAVID BYRNE'S "FOREST," JOHN CALE'S "SANCTUS," GLENN BRANCA, UNTITLED WORK, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
Tomorrow and Sunday, 8 P.M.
Tickets, $30.
Information: (212) 840-2824.
KIDS ARTS INTERNATIONAL: Triplex Theater I and II, 199 Chambers Street at West Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 618-1980 or (212) 307-7171.
"NOVA VELHA ESTORIA," directed by Jose Alves Antunes Filho, Repertorio Espanol, 138 East 27th Street, Manhattan.
Loosely based on "Little Red Ridinghood." Performed by Grupo de Teatro Macunaima from Brazil.
Tomorrow to June 15 and June 18 to 22, 8 P.M.; next Sundayand and 23, 7 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 889-2850.
Sunday
COLE PORTER 100th BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION, a revue at Carnegie Hall, with Michael Feinstein, Bobby Short, Celeste Holm, Marilyn Horne, Sammy Cahn, Steve Ross, Juliet Prowse, Alexis Smith, Lorna Luft, Margaret Whiting and Patricia Morison, Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $20 to $100.
Information: (212) 879-4354.
CITY LORE, Rumsey Field, Central Park, entrance at 72d Street.
Haitian, Latino, Afro-American and klezmer music, performed by Frisner Augustin/La Troupe Makandal and Sakad, McCullough's Sons of Thunder, Hamiet Bluiett and Ensemble, and others, Sunday, 1 to 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 529-1955.
Monday
"STITSHA," by Cont Mhlanga, Davis Hall, City College, West 134th Street and Convent Avenue, Manhattan, (212) 650-7100.
A young township girl in Zimbabwe wants to become a theater producer.
Performed by Amakhosi, a theater group from Bulawayo, Zimbabwe.
Monday, 8 P.M.
The group is also performing at the Continental Atrium, 180 Maiden Lane, Manhattan (212-432-0900), Tuesday, 12:15 P.M.; at Snug Harbor Cultural Center, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, S.I. (718-448-2500), June 16, 3 P.M., and at Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, Manhattan (212-477-5288), June 19 to 23, 9:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12 at Davis Hall and Performance Space 122; free at the Continental Atrium and Snug Harbor.
BERGMAN ON STAGE, Brooklyn Academy of Music, Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene section.
Ingmar Bergman directs the Royal Dramatic Theater of Sweden in three classic dramas: August Strindberg's "Miss Julie," with Lena Olin and Peter Stormare, Monday at 7 P.M. and Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 P.M.; Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey Into Night," with Bibi Andersson, next Friday and Saturday, at 8 P.M. and next Sunday, 2 P.M., and Henrik Ibsen's "Doll's House," with Pernilla Ostergren and Erland Josephson, June 18 to 20 at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $35.
Information: (718) 636-4100.
"IMMIGRANT VOICES," with text by Geoffrey Ward and score by Ellen Taaffe Zwilich, Ellis Island Immigration Museum.
A dramatic work celebrating the immigrant experience.
Monday and Tuesday, 8:30 P.M.
Boat leaves from the West Shore at the center of Battery Park at 7:15 P.M.
Harbor tour around Liberty Island with on-board music after the performance.
Tickets: $45.
Information: (212) 633-1258.
CONTEMPORARY ITALIAN MUSIC, with works by Claudio Ambrosini, Alessandro Lucchetti, Salvatore Sciarrino, Fabio Vacchi and Federico Incardona, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
Monday and Tuesday, 8:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 362-8719.
Tuesday
BALI: CAK AND LEGONG, the World Financial Center Plaza, West Street south of Vesey Street, Manhattan.
A festival of Indonesian dance, music and theater with 40 performers from the Balinese village of Tista and the National Arts Academy of Bali.
Cak is an eerie rhythmic chanting; Legong is a delicate dance drama accompanied by a gamelan orchestra.
Tuesday and Wednesday, 8:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 245-5100.
"FORBIDDEN BROADWAY 1991," by Gerald Alessandrini, Theater East, 211 East 60th Street, Manhattan.
Parody of current Broadway productions.
New edition previews during festival: Tuesday to next Friday, 8 P.M.; next Saturday, 7:30 and 10:30 P.M., and next Sunday, 3:30 and 7:30 P.M.
Opening June 20.
Tickets: $32.50 and $35.
Information: (212) 838-9090.
Wednesday
"DEAD CLASS," Tadeusz Kantor, La Mama Annex, 74A East Fourth Street, Manhattan.
Surrealist drama, in Polish, about adults confined to a classroom.
Performed by Cricot 2 Theater from Poland.
Wednesday to next Sunday, 7:30 P.M., with additional 3 P.M. show next Sunday.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 475-7710.
"UCCELLI, THE DRUGS OF LOVE," Dance Theater Workshop at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, 219 West 19th Street, Manhattan.
A play with puppets, featuring Roman Paska, a puppeteer.
Wednesday to next Saturday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
Information: (212) 924-0077.
"A GIRL SKIPPING," by Graeme Miller, upstairs at Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, Manhattan.
A dramatic study of children's rituals and games.
Wednesday to next Sunday , 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
Information: (212) 477-5288.
"MUESTRA ESPANOLA: SUZ/O/SUZ," Kaufman Astoria Studios, Stage G, 34-12 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Abstract theater with audience participation.
Performed by Fura dels Baus from Barcelona, Spain.
Wednesday to next Saturday, 8 P.M.
Produced by the Kitchen, Creative Time and Performance Space 122.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 255-5793 or (212) 307-7171.
KIDS ARTS INTERNATIONAL, Triplex Theater I, 199 Chambers Street, at West Street, Manhattan.
ILKHOM, an ensemble from the Soviet Union that will present classical clown scenes, Wednesday at 8 P.M. and Thursday, Saturday and Sunday at at 10 A.M. and noon.
Tickets: Monday through Friday, $6; Saturday and Sunday, $8.
Information: (212) 618-1980 or (212) 307-7171.
Thursday
ALARMEL VALLI, Danspance Project, St.
Mark's Church, 131 East 10th Street, Manhattan.
Traditional Indian dance, Thursday to next Sunday, 8:30 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212) 529-2318.
COMPAGNIE PHILIPE GENTY, French Institute/Alliance Francaise, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan.
"Driftings," a blend of mime, puppetry and dance.
Thursday, next Friday and Saturday, 8 P.M., and next Sunday, 3 P.M.
Admission: $15; $12 for French Institute/Alliance Francaise members, students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 355-6160.
"CITIZEN MIND," Performance Space 122, First Avenue at Ninth Street, Manhattan.
Performed by Amakhosi, an all-male cast from Zimbabwe that is making its United States debut in this parable of misguided Government policy; in English and Mdebele.
Thursday to next Sunday, 9:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 477-5288.
ABRIDGED SHAKESPEARE: COMPLETE WORKS, Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street, Manhattan.
New York debut of the Reduced Shakespeare Company, consisting of three actors who perform 37 of Shakespeare's plays and his sonnets.
Thursday to next Saturday and June 20 to 22, 8 P.M.; next Sunday and June 23, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: Ticket Central, (212) 279-4200.
"LA NIT," South Garden, Battery Park City, Battery Place and West Street, Manhattan.
Street theater with a carnival atmosphere.
Performed by Els Comediants, a Catalan group from Barcelona, Spain.
Thursday to June 17, 9 P.M.
Tickets: $15 for adults, $7.50 for children and the elderly, 20 percent off for groups of 10 or more.
Information: (212) 307-7171.
"UNCLE VANYA," Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.
Chekhov's directed by Eimuntas Nekrosius; New York debut of the State Theater of Lithuania.
In Lithuanian with simultaneous English translation.
Thursday and next Friday, 8 P.M.; next Saturday, 2 and 8 P.M.; next Sunday, 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
"LA PAZZIA SENILE," Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
An Italian madrigal comedy, presented by Accademia del Santo Spirito di Torino, Thursday, 8:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 362-8719.
KIDS ARTS INTERNATIONAL, Triplex Theater II, 199 Chambers Street, at West Street, Manhattan.
PAULA CHAN BING and MARGARET WOLFSON, music ensemble, Thursday at 10:30 A.M. and 12:30 P.M., next Friday at 10:30 A.M. and next Sunday at 11 A.M. and 1 P.M.
Tickets: Monday through Friday, $6; Saturday and Sunday, $8.
Information: (212) 618-1980 or (212) 307-7171.
Next Friday
GULANYE, a Soviet folk-dancing troupe, at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Manhattan.
Next Friday and Saturday, 8 P.M. and next Saturday and Sunday, from 1 to 4 P.M.
Tickets to the evening performances are $15; the afternoon sessions are free.
Information: (212) 662-2133 or (212) 316-7400.
OLODUM AND FRIENDS, Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street.
Next Friday, 7 P.M.
From the streets of Bahia, Brazil, a 20-member carnival group.
Information: (212) 242-3374.
Tickets: $20 and $25.
Also next Sunday at 3 P.M. part of Summerstage, at Central Park, Rumsey Field, entrance at 72d Street.
Free.
Information: (212)360-2777.
"MACBETH," St.
Bartholomew's Church, 109 East 50th Street, Manhattan.
World premiere of Stephen Rayne's production of Shakespeare's tragedy.
This version reflects the current political climate in Africa, and features a cast of black actors from the Royal Shakespeare Company and the Royal National Theater.
Next Friday and June 17, 18, 20 and 21, 8 P.M.; next Saturday and June 19, 22, 2 and 8 P.M.; next Sunday and June 23, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25; $10 students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 307-7171.
"GRANUAILE," an Irish song cycle composed by Shaun Davey, South Meadow, at Snug Harbor Cultural Center, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, S.I., next Friday, 8 P.M.
Take blankets or lawn chairs.
Tickets: $14; free for children under 12.
Information: (718) 448-2500;
KIDS ARTS INTERNATIONAL, Triplex Theater I and II, 199 Chambers Street, at West Street, Manhattan.
LALELA, storytellers from various African countries, next Friday at 10 A.M. and noon; next Saturday, at 3:30 P.M. and next Sunday at 7:30 P.M.; RALPH LEE AND THE METTAWEE RIVER COMPANY, a storytelling program, next Friday at 8 P.M., next Saturday at 1, 4:30 and 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 4:30 and 6:30 P.M.
Tickets: Saturday and Sunday, $8, Monday to Friday, $6.
Information: (212) 618-1980 or (212) 307-7171.
Next Saturday
SAMBA AND POP CONCERT, Alice Tully Hall, next Saturday, 8 P.M.
Featuring Paulinho da Viola, a samba singer, composer and guitarist, accompanied by Brazilian musicians.
Tickets: $25 and $35.
Information: (212) 875-5050.
Next Sunday
"AGADOT," Stephen Horenstein and the Jerusalem New Music Ensemble in a production combining music, sculpture, lighting design and staged movement, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, next Sunday, 7 P.M., and June 17, 8:30 P.M.; Information: (212) 362-8719.
June 18
"TODAY IS MY BIRTHDAY," by Tadeusz Kantor, at La Mama Annex, 74A East Fourth Street, Manhattan.
Surrealist drama, in Polish, with imagery of World War II and Auschwitz.
Performed by Cricot 2 Theater from Poland.
June 18 to 23, 7:30 P.M., with additional 3 P.M. show on June 23.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 475-7710.
GRUPO SEMA OF MADRID, in two evenings of Spanish Renaissance music and medieval hymns, performed on period instruments, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, June 18 and 19, 8:30 P.M.
Tickets:$15; information: (212) 362-8719.
FLAMENCO, World Financial Center Plaza, West Street south of Vesey Street, Manhattan.
Antonio Canales and a Spanish troupe performing traditional flamenco fused with salsa, bossa nova, jazz and rock.
June 18 and 19, 8:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 245-5100.
June 19
GRUPO ZERO/EL TALLER, the Pregones Theater, 295 St.
Ann's Avenue, the Bronx.
"El Esplendor," June 19 to 22, 8 P.M. and June 23, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $7.
Information: (212) 585-1202.
"TATTOO THEATER," by Mladen Materic, the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Manhattan.
Surrealistic treatment of domestic life.
Performed by the Open Stage Obala, a theater company from Sarajevo, Yugoslavia.
June 19 to June 22, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 255-5793.
"EL ESPLENDOR," Pregones Theater, 295 St.
Ann's Avenue, at 140th Street, Morrisania section of the Bronx.
A play about a Chicano theater troupe that discovers an old vaudeville house in a border town; Group Zero from Mexico and El Taller, Chicano/Latino performance group; in Spanish and English.
June 19 to 22, 8 P.M.; June 23, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $7.
Information: (212) 585-1202.
"THE SQUARE," Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.
A love story about the effects of restriction on the human soul.
Performed by the State Theater of Lithuania; in Lithuanian with simultaneous English translation.
Tickets: $30.
June 19 to 21, 8 P.M.; June 22, 2 and 8 P.M.; June 23, 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
June 20
AN ASCAP SALUTE TO CABARET: TRADITION AND INNOVATION, Pierre Hotel, Fifth Avenue at 61st Street, Manhattan.
Rosemary Clooney is the host for composers, lyricists and performers who got their start in cabaret.
June 20, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Information: (212) 621-6234.
MALAYSIAN DANCERS, the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, Manhattan.
"Made in Malaysia/A Shamanic Journey," featuring martial arts and shadow puppetry.
June 20 and 21, 8 P.M.; June 22 and 23, 3 and 8 P.M.
Admission: $20 ($16 for Asia Society members).
Information: (212) 288-6400.
COMPAGNIE PRELJOCAJ, at French Institute/Alliance Francaise, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan.
June 20, 21 and 22, 8 P.M., and June 23, 3 P.M.
Admission: $15; $12 for French Institute/Alliance Francaise members, students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 355-6160.
"OGURI HANGAN TERUTE HIME," Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Manhattan.
A play by Takuo Endo, adapted from an ancient Japanese fable.
The Yokohama Boat Theater; in Japanese with an English translation.
June 20 to 22, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: Ticketmaster, (212) 307-7171.
"DIONYSUS," Juilliard Theater, Lincoln Center.
The Suzuki Company of Toga; in Japanese with simultaneous English translation.
Tickets: $16 to $25.
June 20 to 22, 8 P.M.; June 23, 3 P.M.
Information: (212) 752-3015.
EAST BLOC ROCK, Rumsey Playfield, Central Park, entrance from East 72d Street.
Sardonically theatrical rock by Brigada S. from the Soviet Union and the band Garaz from Czechoslovakia.
June 20, 8:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: 360-2777.
GRUPO CIRCULO, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
Grupo Circulo, a chamber orchestra, led by Jose Luis Temes, June 20 and 23 at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets, $15.
Information: (212) 362-8719.


CHRONICLE
After teaching stints in Australia and Hawaii, MICHAEL S. DUKAKIS starts a new job this summer as a visiting professor at Northeastern University in Boston.
Mr.
Dukakis, who was Governor of Massachusetts until January, will teach political science to undergraduates during Northeastern's summer term, which begins on June 24.
In the fall, he will teach a graduate course on health-care policy and an undergraduate course in either American government or public policy, Northeastern officials said.
Each course will meet for three hours a week.


Clarence Darrow, Standing to Face the World
"Darrow" is about Clarence Darrow, the legendary lawyer. (Darrow hated his first name, jokingly referring to it as a curse.) The two-hour film, an "American Playhouse" presentation at 9 tonight on Channel 13 and at 10 P.M. on Channel 49, stars Kevin Spacey in the title role, and that's its strongest asset.
Mr.
Spacey, winner of the Tony Award for best supporting actor on Sunday for his performance in Neil Simon's "Lost in Yonkers," latches onto Darrow and, covering some 30 years of his career, hangs on tenaciously.
Darrow is one of those American originals who believed, as the film puts it, that a person has to "be strong enough to stand alone and face the world unafraid." He was born in 1857 in rural Ohio and began practicing law in Chicago, his home base for more than 50 years.
He started out as a lawyer defending railroad interests, but impressed with the labor crusading of Eugene V. Debs, he soon took up the causes of civil rights and workers.
He was a Socialist and an agnostic who considered the Bible to be a work of literature falling somewhere between "Aesop's Fables" and "Bulfinch's Mythology."


Restaurants
A brasserie could be defined, with a liberal cultural stretch, as the Gallic equivalent of the unassuming American diner.
It's a place where you can find anything from omelets to sandwiches to a steak at all hours.
If there is an etiological difference between the two, it is that brasseries originated as places for making and selling beer (the term means brewery in French), while homespun diners celebrate the virtues of coffee and milk, which they dispense from giant containers with those plastic udders that leave a foam on top.
The Brasserie, owned by Restaurant Associates, has quietly sustained New York's early birds and midnight ramblers for 32 years.
Its patrons have gone not necessarily for its singular qualities, but rather for its accessibility, like an all-night gas station's.
In recent months, however, I have heard reports about improvements in the kitchen, which four visits confirm.


Stan Getz, 64, Saxophonist, Dies; A Melodist With His Own Sound
Stan Getz, one of jazz's best known figures and most explosively imaginative tenor saxophonists, died yesterday afternoon at his home in Malibu, Calif.
He was 64 years old.


Big Board Names 2
The New York Stock Exchange elected two new directors from outside the securities industry yesterday to serve two-year terms.
They are Anthony J. F. O'Reilly, chairman and chief executive of the H. J. Heinz Company, and Clifton R. Wharton, chairman and chief executive of the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association and the College Retirement Equities Fund.
The board has 12 public members, 12 industry members and two exchange officers.


Silver Hits an 8-Month High On Hope of Strong Demand
Silver soared to an eight-month high yesterday amid speculative buying prompted in part by an industry report that demand for the metal was exceeding production.
Gold futures also rose and oil futures were mixed.


Federated and Allied Shifted 3 Executives
Federated Department Stores and the Allied Stores Corporation set in motion yesterday a three-way shift in top-level posts in their Bloomingdale's and Rich's/Goldsmith's chains and their New York buying office.
Carl Tooker, president and chief operating officer of Rich's, the 24-store subsidiary in Atlanta, was named its chairman and chief executive.
Russell Stravitz, executive vice president and general merchandise manager of Bloomingdale's, was named president of Rich's.


Data System Is Approved For Tax-Exempt Securities
In a move designed to enhance disclosure as well as efficiency in the municipal bond market, the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday unanimously approved two-thirds of a plan that will provide investors with easier access to information about tax-exempt securities and the states and localities that issue them.
The plan, put forward by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, the industry's primary regulator, calls for the creation of a central electronic library where official offering statements and advance refunding documents will be stored.
Magnetic tapes of those documents will then be made available on a daily basis to all interested parties at a price of $12,000 a year.


Harvard President Urges Social Commitment
In his final address after 20 years as president of Harvard University, Derek C. Bok delivered a pointed rebuke today to the country's leaders who "stand by idly" in the face of rising poverty, crime and homelessness.
Charging that "an eerie indifference hangs over the land," Mr.
Bok said, "Instead of a popular outcry to end the urban violence, the poverty, the homelessness, the hunger of children, the loudest clamor we hear from the public today is 'no new taxes.' "


Going, Gone: Voila Stays in One Batter Too Many
Paul O'Neill uncoiled in the batter's box.
Frank Viola spun on the mound.
Bud Harrelson stared out from the dugout.
The baseball hurtled to right and the moment was frozen.
And then, it was broken, and the explosion of sounds that followed shook the Mets to the bone.
The home run smashed into the right-field stands.
An instant later, another landed with a thud in left.
The traditional fireworks boomed again and again above Riverfront Stadium.


Survey Says Teen-Age Drinking Is Common
A national survey of students atttending junior or senior high schools has found that more than half of them drink alcoholic beverages and that almost half a million go on a drinking spree every week, Surgeon General Antonia Novello said today.
Many of those who go on weekly sprees "are already alcoholics, and the rest may well be on their way," Dr.
Novello said.


Britain Is Proposing to Invite Gorbachev to London Talks
British officials proposed today that the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, be invited to London next month to meet with the leaders of the world's seven major industrial democracies, immediately after their mid-summer economic summit.
As the host of the summit, the British Prime Minister, John Major, sent a letter to other members of the Group of Seven nations, asking for their permission to invite Mr.
Gorbachev, who has been pressing to come to London to plead for more Western economic support for his domestic reform package.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Bally Manufacturing Corp., Chicago, a hotel and casino operator, will sell its Life Fitness fitness equipment business for $62.5 million.
The buyers are a partnership of Life Fitness management and Mancuso &amp; Co., New York, a merchant banking firm. *
Brooke Group Ltd., Durham, N.C., a consumer products and information systems company, said its Brooke Overseas Ltd. unit would participate in a venture with Factory Ducat, a Soviet state-owned cigarette maker, to manufacture and distribute cigarettes in the Soviet Union.


Curtis Brewer, 65; Worked for Rights Of Disabled People
Curtis Brewer, a lawyer who was a quadriplegic for much of his life and who founded Untapped Resources, a nonprofit legal-services agency for the handicapped, died on Wednesday at Tisch Hospital in the New York University Medical Center.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Brewer was stricken with a viral infection of the spine in 1955, when he was 30 years old, and was left paralyzed from the neck down.
He died of complications from stomach surgery necessitated by a progressive weakening of his lungs that stemmed from the initial paralysis, his family said.


Fresh From Success in the Persian Gulf, the Military Invades Washington


Now Working a Late Shift: High School
Lindsay Baird felt compelled to become an adult at age 16, moving out of his parents' home into a one-room apartment and leaving school to take a job with a Brooklyn construction company.
A year later, he has decided not to let the 11th grade be his last.
Straight from work, he takes the subway to Manhattan, where he is a student in the nation's first full-time night high school.
Manhattan Comprehensive Night High School is for students who have learned some of life's lessons.
Like Lindsay, most of its 438 students live on their own.
About half have children.
Many have dropped out of at least two other schools.
They juggle their jobs and families with efforts to recoup an education.


Duane S. Doolittle, Magazine Founder, 79
Duane S. Doolittle, founder of Down East magazine, died Sunday at a hospital in Vero Beach, Fla.
He was 79 years old and lived in Portland and Lincolnville, Me.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Democrats Step Up Calls for Thornburgh to Resign
Democrats in Congress are intensifying their demand that Attorney General Dick Thornburgh resign immediately instead of waiting two months before he leaves to run for the Senate in Pennsylvania.
George J. Mitchell, the Senate majority leader; Thomas S. Foley, the Speaker of the House, and several Democratic members of the House and Senate Judiciary committees have attacked Mr.
Thornburgh's stance over the last two days, asserting that the nation's chief law-enforcement officer should not pose even the appearance of political partiality.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Time Warner said it would offer shareholders 34.5 million new shares for $63 to $105 a share.
Time Warner's stock plunged for the second straight day, closing at $99.50, down $11.25, or 10 percent, on the news.
On Thursday, it fell $6.25 in anticipation of the offering, which would dilute existing shares.  [ D1. ]
The two biggest airlines posted traffic gains for May.
American and United's rises were the first significant advance since the Persian Gulf war.
But analysts and travel agents attributed some of the recovery to promotional ticket sales and said the big question was whether there would be a future downturn.  [ D1. ]


Broadway Memories: The Hits and the Hits
IT'S no ordinary hat.
As it stands on display at the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art, the simple hat of Irish tweed becomes so much more.
It is memory, and experience, and music, and laughter, and song.
It is Broadway.


Investors Settle Insider Charges
The Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday that two investors had agreed to settle civil charges that they illegally traded on inside information they received from advance copies of Business Week magazine.
The investors, Stephen Rasinski and Lawrence Small, without admitting or denying guilt, agreed to pay penalities and consented to an order stopping them from breaking the law in the future.


The Salmon Vs. Utilities
The Government is expected to require endangered-species protection for more types of Pacific salmon amid warnings by Western utility companies that it could increase electricity costs.
The National Marine Fisheries Service is scheduled to disclose on Friday whether it will protect four more salmon species in the Columbia River under the Endangered Species Act.


Panel Begins Deliberations on Base Closings


People
*
Murray Smith, president of Bozell International, has been named chairman of the International Committee of the American Association of Advertising Agencies. *
Kay Koplovitz, president and chief executive of the USA Network, has been named volunteer chairman of the Advertising Council, succeeding Stuart B. Upson, chairman of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising. *
Fernan Montero has been named executive vice president and area director for the Latin American network at Young &amp; Rubicam, New York, while continuing his worldwide responsibilities for such accounts as Eastman Kodak's.
He succeeds Nelson de Mello, who continues as a consultant to Y.&amp; R. in Latin America.


2 More Patients of Florida Dentist Are Infected With AIDS Virus
Two more patients of a Florida dentist have become infected with the same strain of the AIDS virus that killed him, bringing to five the number of patients known to have been infected by him in his practice, Florida health officials said yesterday.
The same strain of the AIDS virus was found in the five patients and the dentist, Dr.
David J. Acer of Stuart.
Neither of the two newly identified infected patients had risk factors for AIDS.
But the dentist performed invasive procedures on both, Florida health officials said in a statement.
The officials did not specify the type of dental work performed.


Prices Fall on Strong Jobs Report
Prices of Treasury securities fell again yesterday and interest rates moved higher as dealers sold notes and bonds after a report from the Labor Department suggested that May employment data scheduled to be released today might be stronger than had been anticipated.
Figures from the Labor Department showed that initial unemployment claims in the week that ended May 25 fell by 6,000, to 439,000, from the previous week's mark of 445,000.
It was the third straight weekly decline.
Most economists had expected the number to be unchanged.


Charles J. Fuschillo, Councilman, 62
Charles J. Fuschillo, a member of the Town Council of North Hempstead, L.I., since 1975, died yesterday at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 62 years old and lived in Westbury, L.I.
He died of a heart attack, a spokesman for the family said.


Citicorp Plans Bigger Offering
Strong demand for its credit card-backed certificates prompted Citicorp to increase the size of its planned offering yesterday to $1.68 billion, from $1.41 billion, Salomon Brothers, the lead underwriter, said.
The amount of three-year class A certificates sold through the Standard Credit Card Master Trust 1991-2 was increased to $625 million, from $500 million, while the size of of the three-year class B subordinated issue was increased to $78 million, from $62 million.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about the nature of rumors referred incompletely to a researcher who has studied them as a reflection of people's fears.
He is Dr.
Jack Levin, a professor of sociology at Northeastern University in Boston.


Back Surgery for Bird
Boston Celtics forward LARRY BIRD will undergo surgery today to repair a back injury that nagged him throughout the regular season, the team said.
A surgical team led by Celtics team physician Dr.
ARNOLD SCHELLER will operate on Bird at New England Baptist Hospital in Boston. (AP)


Review/Film; Coping After the Baby Sitter Drops Dead
"Don't Tell Mom the Baby Sitter's Dead," which is not to be confused with "Honey, I Shrunk the Kids," is a feature-length sitcom made almost painless by the first-rate farcical performances of Joanna Cassidy and John Getz.
Unfortunately, Miss Cassidy and Mr.
Getz are peripheral to the main business, which is about five fairly bratty but fast-thinking children and what they do to preserve their freedom when their baby sitter drops dead.


No Needy Mother, Just a Con Artist, Brooklyn Police Say
From house to house the woman went with a heart-wrenching tale.
Her little boy, 7-year-old Joey Lupa, had died of leukemia and there was no money for a proper burial.
She cried and shared her sorrows with the people who came to the doors.
"Would you give, please?" she asked.
And people all over Brooklyn and Queens did, donating at least $25,000 -- money now locked in a police evidence room.
Yesterday, Rose Pannizzo was arrested and charged with scheming to defraud, grand larceny and criminal impersonation, the police said.


Judge Enters Ring
Judge AMOS SAUNDERS of the New Jersey Superior Court in Passaic County has enjoined the World Boxing Council from holding a purse bid on the EVANDER HOLYFIELD-MIKE TYSON heavyweight title match.
The purse bid, a process of bidding for a bout by promoters, had been scheduled for tomorrow in New York and the W.B.C. had ordered a 60-40 split, in Holyfield's favor, rather than the traditional 75-25 purse-bid split in favor of the champion. (AP)


Art in Review
Timur Novikov Phyllis Kind Gallery 136 Greene Street Through June 30
Timur Novikov, a 33-year-old artist from Leningrad, makes his New York City gallery debut with a series of paintings notable for their whimsical precision and their intelligent slightness of means.
First the artist sews together two carefully selected rectangles of cheap fabric; then he paints this ersatz ground with small cartoonish images that give new meaning to its contrasting patterns.
The results can make you think of children's book illustrations or New Yorker magazine covers; in other words, their refusal to take painting seriously or to macho extreme is refreshing.


Owner Rejects Thrust as Cause of Air Crash
The owner of the Austrian airliner that crashed in Thailand last month said today that he did not believe the plane went down solely because one engine suddenly went into reverse.
The comments by the owner, Niki Lauda, owner of Lauda-Air, corroborate statements by investigators from Boeing, which manufactured the 767-300ER jet that crashed last month in Thailand, killing 223 people.
Mr.
Lauda earlier this week cited the deployment of the thrust reverser as a possible cause of the crash.
He is not part of the official investigation.


Ex-Official Of Laidlaw Is Penalized
The Securities and Exchange Commission penalized the former chairman and chief executive of Laidlaw Holdings Inc., a brokerage and asset management firm, yesterday for misappropriating more than $1.1 million from client accounts.
The executive, Walter L. Twiste, accepted the findings without admitting or denying guilt, and agreed to be barred permanently from the securities industry and other sanctions.
Robert T. Norton, a lawyer for Mr.
Twiste, said his client had not been charged with any crimes and had not been contacted by any law enforcement agencies.


Union Wins Pension Case
The union representing officers on commercial ships stands to recover nearly $22 million from litigation against pension fund trustees, banks, auditors and lawyers over their role in mismanagement of its pension fund, according to settlement papers filed yesterday in a Federal court in Manhattan.
Attorneys involved in the case said illegal investments by Tower Asset Management Inc. cost the fund $28 million in lost principal and interest in 1985 and 1986, the largest loss to any single retirement plan set up under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, or Erisa.


As Children Play, a Flash of Gunfire Takes a Life
A 16-year-old boy was shot and killed in a crowded park playground in Brooklyn yesterday in what witnesses called a dispute with a man who asked him for a paper to roll a marijuana cigarette.
An 8-year-old girl playing nearby was wounded by a stray bullet also fired by the assailant.
A former Transit Authority employee was arrested last night and charged with the shootings.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Bear Stearns Cos., New York, is offering $150 million in 9 3/8 percent senior notes due in 2001 at 99.70 to yield 9.421 percent.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Federal Farm Credit Banks is offering $350 million in two-year floating-rate notes due on June 17, 1992, at a price of 100 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The notes will float at the prime rate minus 246 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point. *
Ford Motor Credit Co., Dearborn, Mich., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $2 billion in medium-term notes. *
Johnston Coca-Cola Bottling Co. is offering $150 million in 11.5 percent subordinated notes due in 2001 at 100 through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated B-1 by Moody's and BB+ by S.&amp; P. *
U S West Inc., Englewood, Colo., has filed for $1.05 billion face amount of liquid-yield option notes due in 2011 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The approximate gross proceeds from the sale were placed at $253 million.


S.&amp; L. Regulator Vows More Minority Hiring
The nation's senior regulator overseeing the bailout of the savings industry vowed today to provide more business for minority-owned companies by changing the way the Government hires concerns that manage billions of dollars in assets taken over from failed savings associations.
Responding to complaints, L. William Seidman, chairman of the Resolution Trust Corporation, said that next month the agency would begin breaking packages of the assets -- from apartment buildings to loan portfolios and raw land -- into smaller parcels.
The aim is to give smaller and minority businesses a better chance of winning Government contracts to manage the assets until they are sold.
The average size of the contracts has been about $200 million worth of assets.


Art in Review
Gilberto Zorio SteinGladstone 99 Wooster Street Through July 31 Sonnabend Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) Through July 15
It is not easy to look at Gilberto Zorio's sculptures.
They partly block the entrances to galleries and extend into them, like prows of ships, slicing the spaces in two.
A viewer who negotiates a path around a work may suddenly come face to face with the blinding beam of a halogen lamp or leap at the unexpected scream of a siren.
There's an element of danger and even terror in the works.


Review/Dance; A 'Giselle' Celebration, From Pure to Romantic
In a season that has had its ups and downs, American Ballet Theater has suddenly been deluged with sterling performances in "Giselle" at the Metropolitan Opera House.
After Alessandra Ferri and Julio Bocca got the series off to a stupendous start, two new sets of principals -- Amanda McKerrow and Wes Chapman, both pure in the afternoon, and Cynthia Harvey and Ricardo Bustamante, both dramatically expressive in the evening -- had the chance to shine affectingly as the most famous of hapless lovers in 19th-century Romantic ballet.


Sports of The Times; Missing Bulls Are Found
"People were asking, 'Where are the other guys?' " said John Paxson, who happens to be one of those other guys.
This was in the locker room in Chicago Stadium Wednesday night, after Game 2 of the National Basketball Association playoff finals.
The "other guys" are also known by Michael Jordan as "My Supporting Cast." They are known by others as "Michael Jordan's Supporting Cast," and even refer that way to themselves, with what seems to be a bit more pride, or at least realism, than disparagement.


Economic Scene; A Better Feeling On Trade Talks
THE tension between the United States and the European Community over trade, especially in agriculture, was eased by this week's meeting in Paris of financial and trade officials of the wealthy countries that make up the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
But a lot of tough bargaining is ahead if the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations, under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, is to be brought to a successful conclusion.


Being Read to Is Better Than Reading, Huh?; A Two-Cassette Trip
To the Editor:
As a weekly commuter by car from upstate New York to the metropolitan area, I can attest to the revitalization of storytelling through audio cassettes (editorial, May 20).
I listen to two books a week, one coming to the city, the other going home.


For Bulls' Grant, Finals Are a Matter of Focus, Focus
As the Chicago Bulls flew to California this morning, Horace Grant had a clearer vision of what it will take to beat the Los Angeles Lakers.
Grant wore his prescription goggles for the first time in weeks during Game 2 of the National Basketball Association championship series Wednesday night.
The results were eye-opening.
Scoring 20 points on 10-for-13 shooting, Grant was a major factor in the Bulls' 107-86 victory that evened the four-of-seven game series, 1-1.
As the Bulls and the Lakers prepare for Game 3 Friday night here at the Forum, Grant has emerged has one of the pivotal players in the series.
No matter how spectacular Michael Jordan is, the Bulls will not win without strong performances from other players.
Jordan commonly refers to his teammates as, "my supporting cast," and the more co-stars Jordan has, the better off Chicago will be.
Judging by his performance in Game 2, the 6-foot-10-inch Grant is ready to play a leading role.
"We
are
his supporting cast," Grant said, when asked why that label does not offend him. "No matter what we do, Michael's going to be in the spotlight.
He's our leader, and we accept that.
"But we know that for us to beat the Lakers, we'll have to do it as a team. We didn't do our parts to help Michael in Game 1. In Game 2, we did."
Did they ever.
Scottie Pippen's brilliant defensive job against Magic Johnson (14 points, 10 assists, 4-for-13 shooting) was the key to the game.
Not only did Pippen harass Johnson, he found time to score 20 points and hand out 10 assists.
John Paxson had a perfect shooting night (8 for 8 for 16 points) and made the Lakers pay when they ignored him to double-team Jordan.
And Jordan did the rest with a spectacular performance -- 15-for-18 shooting, 33 points, 13 assists, and 7 rebounds.
One of Jordan's moves will be talked about for years -- a basket in the third quarter when he coiled his body, hung in midair, switched the ball from his right to left hand, then made an off-balance shot while being fouled by Sam Perkins.
Whatever Grant saw, he saw clearly.
After wearing his goggles all season to correct an astigmatism, Grant discarded them after the Bulls' first-round playoff series against the Knicks.
Knicks forward Charles Oakley repeatedly knocked Grant's goggles off his face, a tactic that annoyed Grant.
So when the Bulls played the Philadelphia 76ers and then the Detroit Pistons in the next two rounds, Grant thought he wouldn't give Charles Barkley or Dennis Rodman the chance to do what Oakley had done.
But against the Lakers, who are known for Magic more than muscle, Grant decided he should wear his goggles after playing poorly in Game 1.
REBOUNDS
Several Lakers were upset by MICHAEL JORDAN'S taunts in Game 2.
Twice after making shots during the third quarter, Jordan glared at the Lakers' bench before heading downcourt.
"That's something you just don't do this early in the series," said Lakers guard BYRON SCOTT.
"But since he's Michael, I guess he feels he can get away with it. It got us all upset and we'll be ready at home."


Latin Population Puts Pressure on the U.S.
To the Editor:
"Hispanics' Promised Land's Broken Promises" by the Rev.
Joseph A. Fahy (letter, May 25) focuses on "the burgeoning Spanish-speaking population nationwide." He cites 12 unhappy reasons to explain this.
Father Fahy ignores a central cause of the phenomenon, of his 12 reasons and of the mass influx of Latino immigrants to the United States.


A Japanese-Style 'Old Boy' Network
When Japan's banks and securities houses began battling several years ago to break into each other's business, policy makers at the formidable Finance Ministry were deadlocked over what to do.
It finally took an even greater power to break the stalemate: the "Old Boys."
Occasionally, an issue arises in this seemingly harmonious society that lifts the facade of orderliness and illuminates both the intensity of the business rivalries and the real lines of power for resolving disputes.
The five-year tug-of-war over financial deregulation has done just that.


Review/Film; 3 Men at Dude Ranch In Comedy of Good Will
At the New Mexico dude ranch where "City Slickers" takes place, 39-year-old men like Mitch Robbins (Billy Crystal) are a common sight.
Something about the cowboy experience appeals to those who feel a creeping midlife dissatisfaction with the mundane.
Mitch, who ordinarily sells advertising time for a radio station, has figured out that he's in trouble during a visit to his children's school on career day.
He winds up being upstaged by a construction worker who holds the children rapt with the story of how a passer-by was crushed by a falling crane.
Mitch, by comparison, winds up speaking so woefully of his job that he nearly reduces a teacher to tears.
Mitch's two best friends are similarly unsettled, since Phil (Daniel Stern) detests his wife ("If hate were people, I'd be China!" he finally screams at her), and Ed (Bruno Kirby) is a sporting-goods salesman who can't seem to grow up.
"Ed, have you noticed that the older you get, the younger your girlfriends get?" Mitch asks him.
"Soon you'll be dating sperm."


Vincent Splits Expansion Booty
Breaking with decades of precedent, Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent yesterday granted American League teams approximately one-fifth of the $190 million that the National League will take in when it expands by two teams.
In all previous league expansions -- three in the American League, two in the National -- the league that expanded kept 100 percent of the franchise fees, the highest of which was the $12.5 million that the Montreal Expos and the San Diego Padres paid in 1969.


Being Read to Is Better Than Reading, Huh?; O.K. for the Car
To the Editor:
You write (editorial, May 20) of the pleasure of listening to books on tape while taking long drives.
I agree wholeheartedly.
At times the landscape takes over; at other times the reading claims our attention.


Honoring a Saintly Lawyer: Pilgrimage to the Past
Jean Le Mapillan, a lawyer from Nantes, trod solemnly through the cobbled streets of this medieval town, helping to carry a gilded reliquary that holds the skull of St.
Yves, the patron saint of lawyers.
Although St.
Yves has as much in common with modern corporate lawyers as the Virgin Mary has with Madonna, lawyers from around the world flock each year to Treguier, perched on Brittany's rugged hills, to remember this town's saintly favorite son.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 7


Accounts
*
Health-tex Inc., Greensboro, N.C., a children's wear unit of VF Corp., Wyomissing, Pa., to the Martin Agency, Richmond, from AC&amp;R Advertising, New York.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Wesley-Jessen, Chicago, manufacturers of contact lenses, to Kobs &amp; Draft Advertising, from Wunderman Worldwide, both New York, for its direct-marketing account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Where the Ships Go, So Go the Sailors


Genentech Drug
Genentech Inc. said its blood clot-dissolving drug, t-PA, or tissue plasminogen activator, had received marketing approval from the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare as a treatment for heart attacks.
Genentech said it had begun shipping the product to its Japanese licensees, the Mitsubishi Kasei Corporation and the Kyowa Hakko Company.


Poll Shows Jews Both Assimilate and Keep Tradition
In a radical change from just a generation ago, American Jews today are as likely to marry non-Jews as Jews.
But even as this assimilation accelerates, Jews are clinging to religious traditions: roughly 60 percent of Jewish-gentile households, for example, report that they either attend Passover seders or light Hanukkah candles.
These trends -- one away from tradition, the other maintaining tradition -- are spelled out in a report on what its authors call broadest national survey of American Jews ever undertaken.
The results, based on random telephone interviews in 1990 with 2,441 Jewish households, were released yesterday in New York by the Council of Jewish Federations.
The results have a margin of sampling error of plus or minus two percentage points.


Volcano's Fury Turns a Shrine Into a Morgue
For more than a century almost no one in this ancient seaside town ever paid much attention to the Anyoji Temple, a quiet Buddhist sanctuary built in memory of the 15,000 people who died here in 1792, when a volcanic eruption swept Shimabara into the sea.
"It was something they mentioned in school, but nothing that could ever happen again," said Manabu Ogawa, 40 years old, a city official who remembers when his elementary school teacher led hikes up to the crater of Mt.
Unzen for class picnics.
"We never even thought about it."


Rap Song Called Anti-Semitic
It's probably not surprising that one of the songs most requested this week at WHTZ, a "top 40" New York radio station, is a rap song.
What is surprising is its subject: "Jewish- American princesses."
The station says the song, "JAP Rap," is a parody and meant to be funny.
But at least one listener, the Anti-Defamation League, isn't laughing.


GTE Debentures Have 9.118% Yield
Paine Webber Inc. led an underwriting group yesterday that priced $500 million in GTE Corporation debentures due in 2003.


Chrysler Keeps Stakes High In Triple Crown Marketing
LIKE the trio of horse players in "Guys and Dolls," the Chrysler Corporation hopes it's "got the horse right here."
Tomorrow, the auto maker's executives will be watching the Belmont Stakes, the third leg in horse racing's Triple Crown.
The race will conclude the fifth year of the Chrysler-Plymouth division's Triple Crown Challenge, a integrated marketing program that combines national advertising and promotions with dealer incentive contests, showroom displays and other special events.


Dinkins Says Albany's Aid Falls Short
In a bitter round of fiscal wrangling yesterday, Mayor David N. Dinkins accused the State Legislature of failing to provide the $250 million in extra aid that the Mayor said he needed to balance his budget.
The Assembly Speaker, Mel Miller, dismissed Mr.
Dinkins's charge as "stupid."
Mr.
Dinkins's uncharacteristic attack came amid a convulsion of charges and counter-charges in Albany and Manhattan, as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo renewed his vow to veto parts of the state budget passed by the Legislature and the City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, sharply rebuked the Mayor's handling of the city's budget.


U.S. Complaint On Airbus Aid
The United States has charged that subsidies on airliners built by Airbus Industrie, the European constortium, violate free-trade rules, a trade official said today.
"It's a general complaint covering all aspects of support for the Airbus program," the official said, adding that it was a necessary step toward seeking an independent panel of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the world trade body, to rule on the dispute should Washington press the case that far.


Political Terrorism Is Rising in Soviet Union, K.G.B. Says
Political terrorism ranging from bombings to hijackings is increasing in the Soviet Union, the K.G.B. said today.
It blamed ethnic disputes and waning Government power, and said foreign groups were partly responsible.


Spacewalk Is Scheduled to Fix Seal on Shuttle's Cargo Doors
The space shuttle Columbia's astronauts were told today that they might have to make an emergency spacewalk as early as this weekend to fix a loose seal on the space shuttle's cargo bay doors.
A special team of National Aeronautics and Space Administration engineers was conducting tests to determine whether the flapping weatherstripping would prevent the doors from closing tightly at the end of the mission.


Time Plans Big Stock Offering
Time Warner Inc. announced an offering to stockholders yesterday that would enable them to buy about 34.5 million new shares for a price between $63 and $105 a share, depending on how many accept the offer.
Wall Street was clearly not impressed, as Time Warner's stock plummeted for a second day, closing at $99.50, down $11.25, or 10 percent.
With more than 1.5 million shares traded, Time Warner was the eighth-most active issue on the New York Stock Exchange.
On Wednesday, the stock fell $6.25.


Dow Drops by 10.51 to Close Below 3,000
Stock prices gave way yesterday for the second straight day, as trading turned sluggish.
Investors appeared increasingly worried that the stock market could be losing ground.
Concern also grew that bond market yields, already very strong, could soon begin pulling money out of stocks and into bonds.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which lost 22.58 on Wednesday, lost 10.51 points yesterday to close at 2,994.86 -- the first time the blue-chip index had moved below the 3,000 mark since May 29.


YUGOSLAVS PUSH COMPROMISE PLAN
The Presidents of Yugoslavia's six contentious republics agreed tonight to accept as a basis for further negotiation a compromise power-sharing plan for this multi-ethnic country.
Today's agreement, relating to the division of authority and perogatives between the central government and the republics, is the first sign of progress in the six rounds of negotiations that began in February.
The talks took place behind tight security in a villa near Sarajevo.


NBC Appoints Jay Leno To Replace Johnny Carson
NBC announced the expected appointment of the comedian Jay Leno yesterday as the next host of the "Tonight" show when Johnny Carson steps down in May.
Mr.
Leno, who has substituted for Mr.
Carson since 1987, had long been designated NBC's choice to succeed Mr.
Carson, but the announcement was delayed until the network spoke with David Letterman, the other star in NBC's late-night lineup.


Sounds Around Town
Jazz Ensemble
The Vineyard Vintage Jazz Ensemble, New York-Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, near 77th Street, (212) 399-3357.
The Vintage Jazz Ensemble, which was formed to play at the Vineyard Theater's First Vintage Jazz Festival in 1985 and returned annually until the series was dropped last year, will be reassembled on Sunday for a concert presented by the Jewish Museum at the New-York Historical Society.
Led by its founder, the cornetist Dick Sudhalter, the eight-man Vintage Jazz Ensemble, which features jazz styles of the 1920's, 30's and 40's, is to have a guest of rare vintage in the person of the celebrated 86-year-old trumpeter Doc Cheatham.
In addition, Artie Shaw, now 81, who will be in town to appear in the Cole Porter Festival on Sunday night at Carnegie Hall, is to join Mr.
Sudhalter in the intermission commentary that has always been a feature of the Vintage Jazz concerts.
Tickets for the concert, which is to start at 2 P.M., are $8; $6 for Jewish Museum members, and $5 for students and those over 65.
Ticket information: (212) 399-3357 or (212) 399-3430.
Wild as Always
Dawn Hampton, Adam's Rib, 1338 First Avenue, at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 535-2112.
Dawn Hampton, who recently returned to performing after a decade of retirement, has said: "I'm not a singer. I'm a sight act." And so she is!
The voice of this 63-year-old performer is simply serviceable, but what service she gets from it as she draws a variety of intense emotions from songs that take on unexpected colorations ("Night and Day" in a chuckling, squirming schoolgirl delivery).
And she extends the built-in tear-jerking of "Good for Nothin' Joe" to emphatic quivering lips and a quavering voice.
These things are just good fun, but she rises to sheer genius when she whistles "Never-Never Land" with a pure-toned delicate shading and dramatic emphasis.
She is to go on at 9 P.M. today and tomorrow, with Bobby Peaco at the piano.
There is a $15 minimum but no music charge.


The Longest Day (or Is It Night?) As Royals Win in 18th Inning
Kevin Seitzer scored on pitcher Kenny Rogers's throwing error in the 18th inning to give the Kansas City Royals a 4-3 victory over the Texas Rangers today in the longest game on the clock this season.
The game lasted 6 hours 28 minutes, which was 23 minutes more than a 19-inning contest between Milwaukee and Chicago on May 1.
The 18 innings matched the longest game previously played between the two teams -- on May 17, 1972, when Texas beat Kansas City, 4-3.


Shedding Tears, Bush Tells Baptists of Praying as Gulf War Neared
Wiping away tears as he recalled praying at Camp David before ordering the start of the Persian Gulf war, President Bush today offered a testimony of emotion, politics and faith to a cheering crowd of thousands of Southern Baptists.
In a speech to the annual gathering of the Southern Baptist Convention, Mr.
Bush did not touch on issues over which the nation's largest Protestant denomination has differed with him.
Among these is his stated support for John E. Frohnmayer, chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, whose dismissal by the President was demanded in a resolution that the meeting's delegates passed Wednesday.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher After Jobless-Claims Report
The dollar settled mostly higher in quiet trading yesterday, helped by an improvement in United States unemployment.
Gold prices advanced worldwide.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $365.10 an ounce, up $2.50 from Wednesday.
The Republic National Bank said gold rose $2.05 an ounce, to a late bid of $364.25.


CHRONICLE
The steps of the "21" Club will get their first new jockey statue in 10 years today.
It will wear the shocking-pink and electric-blue silks of B. GILES BROPHY.
Mr.
Brophy's horse Strike the Gold won the Kentucky Derby and is to run tomorrow in the Belmont Stakes.
Each of the 26 statues represents a prominent stable.
Mr.
Brophy, 54 years old, and his wife, GALE BROPHY, 36, were invited into the circle of owners last year for their horse Thirty Six Red, who came in second in the Belmont Stakes.
Their stable is based at Belmont Park, they live in New York (and Palm Beach and Westhampton) and they frequent "21," where they eat the steak tartare and the Dungeness crab.
They keep wine in the restaurant's cellar, including a couple of bottles of 1971 Chateau Petrus valued at $600 each.


Graf Bewildered; Sabatini Bothered
It was one bizarre production on the heels of another as two instances of unintentional self-destruction were played out in a very public scenario in the women's semifinals at the rain-splattered French Open this afternoon.
"If I ever felt before the match that I was going to play this badly, I'd never go out there," said Steffi Graf, who, along with Gabriela Sabatini, came out on the embarrassing end of two unanticipated mismatches.
First, defending champion Monica Seles advanced to her second consecutive final here by administering a 6-4, 6-1 thrashing to Sabatini under a sprinkling sky this afternoon at Roland Garros Stadium.
Then, 1989 champion Arantxa Sanchez Vicario wreaked even greater havoc on the game and composure of Graf, a two-time champion here, eliminating her by 6-0, 6-2.
It was the worst defeat of Graf's professional career, and one for which she had no explanation other than an untimely absence of rapport with her tennis racquet.
Seles Holds the Edge
Seles and Sanchez Vicario will meet Saturday in the final.
They have met four times previously, with Seles holding a 4-0 edge.
The most recent Seles victory came on clay in straight sets in the semifinals at Hamburg, Germany, this spring.
In the men's semifinals Friday, Andre Agassi will face Boris Becker and Jim Courier opposes Michael Stich.
If Agassi and Courier win, they will produce the first all-American final since 1954; if Becker and Stich prevail they will produce the first all-German final ever.
Graf not only appeared disengaged during the match, but behaved similarly after it: she seemed more bewildered and bemused than distressed by a match in which she committed 51 errors and managed to hold her serve only twice.
"I couldn't get a ball inside the court," said Graf, whose only previous loss to the 19-year-old Spaniard in 11 meetings came on this same court in the 1989 final.
"I lost a few games and my confidence went down; everything I did didn't work, and I'd never had that happen before. I tried to keep the ball in play, it didn't work. I tried to hit the ball, it didn't work."
Graf's absolute disassociation from her surroundings was nowhere more evident than the moment late in the second set where, winding up for an overhead smash at netside with Sanchez Vicario far out of position, Graf slammed the ball into the alley.
The loss prevented the 21-year-old German, who had not lost a Grand Slam set by 6-0 since 1983, from immediately recapturing the No. 1 position held by Seles and also extended her streak without a victory in Grand Slam events to five.
But by a quirk of the ratings computer, should Sanchez Vicario defeat Seles in the final, Graf will slip back into the top spot.  'Strange to Be No. 1'
"It's strange to be No. 1; it's different to be No. 1," said Seles, "and if I keep winning my matches I'll stay No. 1, but being No. 1 is not a great excitement like when you win a Grand Slam. I want both, but I don't want all that pressure."
The sour weather caused two interruptions of the match, and after the second rain delay, which occurred with the players caught in a dead heat at 4-4 of the first set, Sabatini appeared to forget to bring her tennis game back onto center court and lost seven quick games in succession.
Sanchez Vicario, who had promised an uninhibited game plan against Graf and delivered it, packed her shots with topspin and aimed for the sidelines right from the first point of the match.
As invisible as Sabatini was in the second set of her match, Graf was even less of a factor in the opening set of hers, and a 43-minute rain delay did not refresh her confidence.
Although Graf was a virtual nonpresence today, her father, Peter, attracted interest in the stands when he scuffled with Jim Levee, an heir to the Annenberg fortune who counts Seles and Sanchez Vicario among the handful of female players he sponsors.
Levee's association with the Graf family ended on unfriendly terms several years ago.
Levee, who was unhurt, contended that Graf shoved him as both men went up a stadium aisle while Sanchez Vicario served for the first set.
Graf said Levee insulted his daughter; Levee said Graf manhandled him, and Levee later exchanged unpleasantries with Pavel Slozil, Graf's coach, vowing to bring bodyguards to Wimbledon for the sake of menacing Graf.
"I heard about it from my mother," said Graf, "but I have no idea what happened and I really don't care."
MATCH POINTS
None of the four men's semifinalists are averse to serving and volleying, and although ANDRE AGASSI and JIM COURIER prefer the baseline, both have taken pains to rely on more than their blunt groundstrokes.
"It's not a power tournament," said BORIS BECKER, who has never advanced beyond the semifinal round.
"There are always players who can only play well on clay, but if you look at the last 10 years, the winner could always play on other courts. To win here you need more than a high spinning ball."


NATO TRIES TO EASE SECURITY CONCERNS IN EASTERN EUROPE
In an effort to ease the concerns of Eastern European countries still worried about a possible return of Soviet occupation forces, NATO moved today to strengthen its political and military ties to its former Warsaw Pact adversaries.
While not specifying how it would actually respond to any Soviet or other threat, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization declared today that any "coercion or intimidation" aimed at the countries of Central and Eastern Europe would be treated as a matter of "direct and material concern" to the 16 members of the Western alliance.


765 Parades: Too Much Cost, Too Little Honor
There's a simple way for New York City to save millions of dollars: ban parades, or at the very least, regulate them tightly and require their sponsors to pay for policing and cleanup.
Last year the city's crowded streets were cleared for 765 parades, large and small.
When so many people march for so many causes they cheapen the value of ceremony even as they raise the cost.
And direct municipal expenses don't include the hidden costs -- the irritations of blocked traffic, interrupted deliveries, loss of business and the endless hours of snare drum cadences and snorting sousaphones.


A Final U.N.L.V. Season Is Reported for Tarkanian
Jerry Tarkanian, whose 18 years at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas have been marked by highly successful teams and continuing investigations by the collegiate authorities, will step down as basketball coach after next season, according to a person close to Tarkanian who has knowledge of his plans.
Officials at the university have scheduled a news conference for Friday morning to announce his plans.


Atlantic Beach Struggles to Explain Assault on Black Youth
With one of its young men lying critically injured in a hospital and another accused of the vicious attack that put him there, this community is struggling to come to terms with a crime that the police say was racially motivated and that residents say they abhor and cannot explain.
Residents say they are pained and angered by the broad-brush portrayal of their community as another Howard Beach or Bensonhurst, places that, rightly or wrongly, have become symbols of racial hatred.


Solemn Meets Spunky
WHAT is culture?
The more the world shrinks, the more pertinent that question becomes.
As the mass media permeate the globe, spreading a lowest-common-denominator vision based on television, movies and pop music, the world's ancient, honored traditions begin to blur and face extinction.
The international arts festival, a proliferating species, was really invented to deal with the problem.
A vehicle for accelerating cultural cross-fertilization, it is also a laboratory for preservation.
While celebrating the resilience of the old, it also reveals the fragility.


S.E.C. Studies Short-Selling
The Securities and Exchange Commission decided today to seek information on whether investors should be required to announce when they take large positions in a risky trading strategy known as short-selling.
The commission voted 3 to 1 to seek public comment on whether a rule was needed to force market participants to disclose when they have taken a short position of 5 percent or more of a company's stock.


Critic's Choice/Dance; A Trio of Giselles For Balletomanes
One of the great challenges for any ballerina is the title role in "Giselle," which will be performed by American Ballet Theater tonight and tomorrow at the Metropolitan Opera House, with three very different casts.
First produced in 1841, "Giselle" makes use of the great Romantic themes.
Giselle is an ideal woman, a sweet young thing who is wronged but who saves the man who jilts her.
Albrecht, the nobleman Giselle loves, is clearly in search of that ideal.
And the icy Myrtha, who rules the man-hating spirits of women who die before their wedding day, is a perfect example of the Romantic notion that beneath the ideal lies a lethal predator.


Perkins Has a Pair of Proud 'Dads'
John Elacqua dropped by Herb Crossman's house Wednesday night to watch the Los Angeles Lakers play the Chicago Bulls.
The two friends headed for Crossman's basement, sat themselves down -- Elacqua on the couch, Crossman into his cushioned "viewing chair" in front of his 42-inch television screen.
"Ready," he announced.


Supply Faces Demand in the Ivy League
To the Editor:
Justice Department officials hail as a victory for students the agreement by eight Ivy League schools to stop sharing student financial aid information (front page, May 23).
And you quote Attorney General Dick Thornburgh as having said at a news conference, "Students and their families are entitled to the full benefits of price competition when they choose a college."


Review/Film; Corruption And Greed On the Road
In a remarkable display of bad judgment, a bland executive named George O'Brien (Jim Metzler) stops for two hitchhikers whom anyone else would speed up to avoid.
They are Chevy (Kyle Secor), a seedy criminal type who swigs Pepto-Bismol and spouts endless boring small talk and nosy questions, and Patti (Jennifer Rubin), who looks like a model but makes very little sense when she speaks.
"Mm! Computers! A.T.&amp;T., I.T.&amp;T., you and me!" she purrs upon learning that George, at least until he became interested in "creative invoicing," was in the computer trade.
In "Delusion," a road movie about this tedious threesome, the predictable array of mind games carries George, Chevy and Patti (who always use one another's names when they speak, as if they, too, found the material stilted) to a predictable dead end.
Written and directed by Carl Colpaert, a Belgian-born film maker who gives the film an in-your-face overbearing style without any particular intimacy, "Delusion" vaguely addresses corruption and greed during the course of 100 very slow and cuttable minutes.


Being Read to Is Better Than Reading, Huh?
To the Editor
"Literary Echoes, on the Road" (editorial, May 20), which praises books on tape, is puzzling.
While everyone around the country is bemoaning the growing problem of illiteracy and urging people to read, you tell them that being read to is much better than reading.


50 Paintings to Be Sold From Tremaine Estate
Fifty 20th-century artworks by Fernand Leger, Piet Mondrian, Robert Delaunay and Jasper Johns, acquired over a half-century by Burton G. and Emily Hall Tremaine, are to be auctioned by Christie's in November, Christopher Burge, president of Christie's in America, announced yesterday.
Christie's estimates that the collection will bring $32 million to $47 million in a sale it has guaranteed for an undisclosed figure.


The Spoken Word
LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"House of Heritage," a lecture and slide presentation on the history of the museum and the surrounding area, Sunday at 2 P.M.
Admission, $2.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Unless otherwise noted, all lectures are free with $6 museum admission ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3764.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art.
"Architecture Since 1945" by Christopher Miele, today at noon; "Looking at Modern Art: Abstractions" by Wendy Belser, today at 1 P.M.; "The Language of Modern Architecture" by Mr.
Miele, today at 3 P.M.; "Henri Matisse" by Barbara Larson, tomorrow at 1 P.M. and "Ad Reinhardt," tomorrow at 3 P.M., by Ms.
Larson; "Modern Sculpture" by Vivien Knussi, Sunday at 1 P.M. and "Surrealist Drawings" by Ms.
Knussi, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Admission: $7( $4 for students and the elderly; under 16, free).
Information: (212) 708-9480.


Yanks Can't Keep 'em on the Farm When They're Able to Help the Club
In another year, and under another regime, this probably wouldn't have happened.
Wade Taylor would be pitching for the Chicago White Sox, Pat Kelly would still be in the minors and Jeff Johnson would be dangling in front of some team as tantalizing trade bait.
None of them would probably be where they are now: with the Yankees as part of a rebuilding process that began a year ago.


Sylvia Porter, Financial Columnist, Is Dead at 77
Sylvia F. Porter, the author and newspaper columnist who gained wide readership by making business and financial news easy for the general public to understand, died on Wednesday at her home in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
She was 77 years old.
She died of complications from emphysema, her husband, James Fox, said.


A WIDE-OPEN VOTE AHEAD FOR RUSSIA
After two years of only qualified democracy, the voters of the Russian Federation are moving headlong into the first truly wide open balloting of the Gorbachev era, a republic presidential race of ambitious rival tickets balanced by a liberal Communist here and a patriot general there.
Leading the way into this hyperbolic new world of highly competitive electioneering for the voting on June 12 is Boris N. Yeltsin, the Russian leader and apostate Communist who is popular for wanting to throttle the party's powers yet, in this race, has tapped a "reform" Communist and military hero as his running mate to broaden his own appeal.


Sales in May Up for Many Big Retailers
Many of the nation's biggest retailers reported yesterday that sales in May had improved sharply from the same month a year earlier.
While sales were helped by good weather, some analysts see the gains as another indication that the recession may be ending.
Thirteen of 20 top retail companies said that in the four weeks ended June 1, same-store sales -- results at stores that have been in business for at least a year -- rose.
The more favorable weather helped sell summer clothes, air-conditioners and garden equipment.


Israeli Peace Advocate Ends Hunger Strike
After 40 days without even a bite of food, Abie Nathan, the peace advocate, ended his hunger strike today without achieving any of his goals.
"I didn't fast to die," Mr.
Nathan said as he accepted President Chaim Herzog's plea to begin eating again.
"I want to live and make it possible for others to live, too."


Hanging On in Textile Country
Economists and free trade proponents have generally assumed that when a domestic industry shrinks, workers will do what they must to survive: pack up and seek suitable work elsewhere in a process akin to natural selection in the capitalist system.
Here in Eden, where a local blanket factory is struggling to compete with less expensive imports in a slumping economy, the mill, owned by Fieldcrest Cannon Inc., has repeatedly furloughed John M. Biggs and given only four hours of work over the last five weeks to his wife, Alma Jean.
But the Biggses are not budging.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in some editions of Business Day yesterday about a frequent-flier program run by United Airlines and First Chicago referred incompletely to the program's revenue sources.
Besides interest revenue from holders of credit cards, the program gets fees from merchants and annual fees from card holders.


Lopez on the L.P.G.A.: We're No. 2, Eventually
NANCY LOPEZ, the most glamorous name in women's golf, says she is convinced the Ladies Professional Golf Association is on the right path and will be able to combat the success of the Senior PGA Tour.
"The women's tour is very strong right now," Lopez said yesterday after practicing for the Atlantic City Classic, which begins today.
"The reason for it is that women's amateur golf is growing and producing good players."


Judges Describe Justice's Effort As Intimidation
The current and three former Chief Judges on the Federal Appeals Court in New York City said yesterday that the Justice Department was trying to "intimidate" prospective Federal judges by warning them to stay clear of the City Bar Association's attempt to evaluate them.
The department recently sent letters to nominees telling them to cooperate only with the American Bar Association, and a letter to the City Bar Association in New York said it should no longer interview candidates for the judiciary or pass on evaluations, as it has done for at least 70 years.
The letter to the group said, "Your interference must end."


Auctions
A Columbus Letter
During a raging storm on the high seas as he approached the Azores in February 1493, Christopher Columbus penned a letter to Ferdinand and Isabella describing his first trip westward seeking a route to the Orient.
"I made my way to the Indian Sea," he wrote, "where I found a great many islands inhabited by innumerable people, all of which I have claimed for our King, putting up flags of possession with no one contradicting me." Fearing that his letter might perish with him at sea and that its news would be lost, Columbus made a copy and placed it in a cask that he threw overboard.


Reebok Rebounds With the Pump
SINCE Reebok International Ltd. started selling its Pump basketball shoe 18 months ago, the company has shipped four million pairs of the inflatable sneakers.
Pump sales alone have reached $500 million, a figure that would make the Pump the fourth-largest athletic shoe company in the United States if it were a separate company.
Using savvy marketing and sports star endorsements, Reebok, No. 2 after Nike in the highly competitive athletic footwear market, is riding the Pump to what industry analysts say is the beginning of a new surge.
The company had been stuck on a three-year treadmill after a spectacular rise in the mid-1980's.
Profits were basically flat from 1987 to 1990.


Hussein Burnishes Image as Fear Brews in Iraq
At his tumbledown, five-room home on the banks of the Tigris, Falah Fajer al-Mahathidi received an unexpected guest the other day, and, when the stranger had departed, he found himself the richer by a house, a job and roughly $6,000.
The benefactor who sat with him for two and a half hours, complimented his 9-year-old daughter's doe-eyed beauty and shared jokes and chocolates with him was none other than President Saddam Hussein.


Art in Review
Alejandro Xul Solar Rachel Adler Gallery 41 East 57th Street Through June 14
The influential Argentine painter Alejandro Xul Solar was born in Buenos Aires in 1887 and died there in 1963.
From 1912 to 1924, he lived in Italy and traveled all over Europe.
The 35 paintings in this show, all on paper, demonstrate his responsiveness to European art, particularly to the dream and fantasy worlds of Chagall and Klee.
Even when painting the brightest and most translucent natural light, his commitment to an intense and concrete inner world remained.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.78
5.88
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.57
7.71
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.71
5.72
7.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.08
8.04
8.49
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.42
8.38
8.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.45
9.44
9.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.22
7.20
7.50
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Benedict Bernstein, 80, A Psychoanalyst, Dies
Benedict Jacob Bernstein, a psychoanalyst who practiced in New Jersey and New York, died last Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications after surgery, his wife said.


Islanders Sign Ferraro
The Islanders announced yesterday that they had signed RAY FERRARO, a center acquired from the Hartford Whalers last November, to a multiyear contract.
Ferraro was obtained in exchange for DOUG CROSSMAN, a defenseman.
He appeared in 61 games with the Islanders and notched 19 goals and 16 assists.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the Senate's vote to allow regional telephone companies to manufacture equipment misstated the size of the domestic communications equipment market.
It is $35 billion, not $350 billion.


Research Venture Creates Unit That Can Earn Profit
A nonprofit company started last year with $10 million in donations from I.B.M. and MCI Communications for scientific research said yesterday that it would begin a new for-profit subsidiary to permit commercial use of a national data network known as the Internet.
The network, which was originally developed with money from the National Science Foundation, is the precursor to a future high-speed national data "highway" that will some day carry a wide range of digital information, including scientific information and video images to homes and businesses.


In High School Riven by Race, Even an Honor Brings a Split
After a year of racial strife, the Newton County High School class of 1991 marched into history tonight under a Federal judge's ruling to have co-valedictorians -- one black, one white.
The banner hanging outside reads: "Welcome to America's Best. Newton High. A National School of Excellence." But after a school year that played out like the nation's worsening race relations in microcosm -- part Spike Lee's "Jungle Fever," about interracial dating, part the quota debate in Congress -- many of Newton High's 331 weary graduates felt the school had become a different sort of symbol for Graduation Day 1991.


White House Sleaze Is Back
The sleaze factor is slipping back into the White House.
During the Reagan Administration, the number of ethical transgressions by high-ranking Presidential advisers resulted in dozens of resignations, dismissals and indictments.
The Bush Administration repudiated such conduct, vowing it would tolerate no impropriety in the behavior and financial interests of its high officials.


Beliefs
Papal encyclicals on social issues are often less important for what they say than whom they bless.
That was true of the first such document, Pope Leo XIII's "Rerum Novarum" ("Of New Things").
Issued a century ago, it was commemorated last month with a major new encyclical, "Centesimus Annus" ("The Hundredth Year") from Pope John Paul II.


Charles J. Amick, Mathematician, 39
Charles J. Amick, a professor of mathematics at the University of Chicago, died Monday at his home in Chicago.
He was 39 years old.
He died of cancer, said Megan Beardsley, a spokeswoman for the university.


Corrections
A picture on May 30 with an article about economic aspects of unification of North and South Korea was published in error.
The picture, at the right in a pair, showed Lee Joung Binn, South Korea's Assistant Minister for Political Affairs, not Lee Dong Bok, a special assistant to the Prime Minister.


Extravaganza On Mall Hails Troops Today
Swarms of attack helicopters, jets and missiles nested today along the milelong Mall, where hundreds of thousands of people protested the Vietnam War 20 years ago, as this city primped for a Desert Storm celebratory parade that may set local records for size and cost.
The festivities are expected to attract 600,000 to 1.4 million spectators and will have cost at least $12 million when they end with a bang, on Saturday evening, with a huge fireworks display, organizers said.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 8, 1941


Protesters in Algeria Are Promised Earlier Elections
The leaders of Algeria's Islamic fundamentalist political movement agreed today to stop their widespread protests in return for a pledge by President Chadli Benjedid to hold presidential and parliamentary elections within six months.
Abdelhamid Mehri, the ruling party's president, was quoted by the national press agency as confirming that contacts between the Government and opposition leaders did take place, but denying that specific pledges were made.


Accord on Airline-Bookings System
The attorneys general of 27 states have agreed to defer any antitrust challenge to an Atlanta-based partnership that plans to merge the reservations systems of Delta Air Lines, Northwest Airlines and Trans World Airlines.
In return, the partnership, Worldspan, put in writing its previously stated intention to develop a neutral computer reservations system that would not favor any airline.
It also agreed to a deadline of Feb. 28, 1993, for having a working version of the system available for travel agents.
Worldspan also agreed to a timetable for converting travel agents to the new system from Datas II, the Delta system, and PARS, the Northwest-T.W.A. system, which now operate separately.
And it said that it would retain Norman Nielsen, a consultant with SRI International Inc., as an independent expert who would evaluate its progress in developing the new system.
Neutral Direction for Industry
Worldspan said the agreement was signed last month.
"We had already designed the new system to be neutral because the industry is going in that direction," said James Lundy, a spokesman.
"We think having it will give us a competitive advantage."


Guidepost; Gadgets for the Garden
There are so many gadgets for the garden these days, it just doesn't seem possible to plant anything without goatskin gloves and rubber knee pads and special smocks and five different kinds of weeding tools and a $69 precision garden seeder (a push thing on wheels that furrows the soil and drops in the seeds at set intervals and even covers them up).
Most of this stuff seems designed to keep gardeners from gardening, i.e., getting their hands in the soil.
But what are the bare basics, if you're just starting out?
Here's a list.


Death of the Condor
President Carlos Menem of Argentina has irrevocably ended his country's program to produce and export a Scud-like missile called the Condor II.
That was not only wise but brave.
The missile program, originally financed by Iraq, was sponsored by the Argentine military after the Falkland War.
It's an understatement to say that Argentina's military resists civilian control.
All but one of the nation's democratically elected Presidents in the past 60 years were overthrown by military coups.
And the one who survived, Raul Alfonsin, withstood three armed rebellions.


Executive Life Was in Red By $426.3 Million at End of '90
An auditor hired by California insurance regulators has determined that the Executive Life Insurance Company was in far worse financial condition at the end of 1990 than the insurer first reported.
The accounting firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, in a study conducted for the California Department of Insurance and made public at a court hearing on Thursday, concluded that Executive Life, which was seized by regulators in April, was well short of its required capital level on Dec. 31.


Patents; A New Device to Stop Drunken Driving
Two California entrepreneurs have developed a new device that prevents drunken drivers from starting their cars.
The product is a variation on ignition-locking devices that some courts require for convicted drunken drivers.
To start the car, these drivers must first pass a breath test to unlock the device.


INSIDE
Execution Telecast Barred
A Federal judge said San Quentin Prison could not bar all reporters from witnessing executions but could exclude television cameras.
Page 9.


Bird Has Surgery
LARRY BIRD was resting yesterday after undergoing surgery to correct a back problem that kept him out of 22 games last season.
The 34-year-old Boston Celtics forward was in surgery at New England Baptist Hospital for about two hours as doctors repaired both a congenital problem and removed a herniated disk in the lower back.
Bird is expected to be hospitalized for at least three days, then begin a rehabilitation program that includes nearly 10 miles of walking each day, said Celtics physician Dr.
ARNOLD SCHELLER. (AP)


Pope Calls on Poland to Reject Western Europe's Secular Ways
Pope John Paul II urged his fellow Poles today to reject the sensual, secular culture of a Western Europe that he contended had betrayed the roots of Christendom.
"Do not let yourself get caught up by this civilization of desire and consumption," the Pope said, his voice filled with emotion.
He offered his vision of a post-Communist Poland that could stand as a spiritual exemplar for the continent.
"Is it civilization or an anti-civilization, a culture, or an anti-culture?"


Hugh Wolff to Direct Chamber Orchestra
Hugh Wolff has been appointed music director of the St.
Paul Chamber Orchestra, the group's chairman, James Reagan, announced yesterday.
Mr.
Wolff has been St.
Paul's principal conductor since 1988.
His three-year contract as music director is to begin with the 1992-93 season, during which he is to lead the orchestra for 15 weeks in St.
Paul and on tour.
In subsequent years, he is to conduct for a minimum of 12 weeks.
Christopher Hogwood, the current music director, will be the principal guest conductor.


Fewer Keating Charges
Thirteen of 34 counts of securities fraud against Charles H. Keating Jr. were dismissed today by a Los Angeles judge, who ruled that the operator of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association could not have broken the law as stated in the case against him.
Judge Lance A. Ito of Superior Court also gave defense attorneys a chance in three weeks to again challenge the remaining counts.
Those include the heart of the case -- that elderly investors were duped into buying risky "junk bonds" at Lincoln branches instead of safe certificates of deposit.


At Belmont, Final Paces for Main Event
Strike the Gold and Hansel each galloped a mile and a half yesterday in the final tuneups for their return match in today's Belmont Stakes, the longest and richest of the four stakes on a razzle-dazzle afternoon of racing at Belmont Park.
Clear weather with a temperature in the 80's and a dry, fast track were predicted for the rematch between the respective winners of the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness.
They will be racing nine other colts a mile and a half for a purse of $695,800 and a shot at the $1 million bonus for performance in the Triple Crown series.
Corporate Report and Mane Minister also have chances to win the bonus jackpot.


Leningrad or St. Petersburg?
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today denounced an effort to restore the name St.
Petersburg to the city of Leningrad, saying such a change had no moral or political basis.
A proposal to restore the city's old name is supported by the local government and is on the ballot as part of the June 12 elections for mayor and Russian Federation president.


The Lite Light Challenge
Rap singer M. C. Hammer and his family sat alongside a bronze statue of Secretariat in the paddock at Belmont Park after yesterday's races and were introduced to New York racing as the owners of the star filly Lite Light.
They wasted no time challenging Strike the Gold and Hansel to a match race.
Hammer was flanked by his father, Lewis Burrell Sr.; his brother Louis, who spells his name differently and who runs the racing operation; and another brother, Chris.
They will all be at Belmont tomorrow to watch Lite Light race against last year's 2-year-old filly champion, Meadow Star, in the Mother Goose Stakes.


House Vote Sets Stage for Conflict Between Two Allies in Space Program
In voting Thursday to save the space station at the expense of space science projects, the House of Representatives has set the stage for a potentially bitter fight between two uneasy allies: the supporters of the manned and unmanned space programs.
The ensuing scrap may be so divisive that the space station will perish anyway.
Or, all projects will grind forward with sharply reduced financing.
"It's a watershed," Dr.
Bruce Murray, a former director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory who is now a planetary scientist at the California Institute of Technology, said yesterday.
"It's the end of a set of relationships that go back more than 30 years."


At Least 100 Die in Pakistani Train Crash
More than 100 people were killed and 250 injured when a passenger train crashed into a stationary freight train in southern Pakistan early today, railroad officials said.
The police have not confirmed the casualty toll, but doctors at a nearby hospital said ambulances were bringing in the dead and injured in large numbers.
"The dead and wounded are lying on floors," a doctor said.
"We don't have many beds."


Bankers Trust Plan
Integrated Resources Inc., a financial services company, has received a proposal from the Bankers Trust New York Corporation to acquire all of Integrated for $526 million in cash.
The acquisiton, which would be conducted by Bankers Trust and a designated affiliate, would be in connection with a reorganization plan.
The proposal, which is subject to many conditions, would require proceeds from the sale to be used to satisfy all of Integrated's outstanding debt.
No other terms were disclosed.
On the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Bankers Trust shares rose 62.5 cents, to $55.625.


Gulf War Veteran Fatally Shot
A Marine lance corporal was fatally shot early today while walking home from a bar, where he had been celebrating his return from the Persian Gulf just a few days before.
The 25-year-old marine, Tarron Dixon, was shot twice while walking alone near his home after a night out with his two brothers.


Mets Snooze Through 8, Win It in 9th
The Mets, blanked for eight innings by Jim Deshaies, struck for six runs with the aid of seven walks in the ninth inning to orchestrate a 6-3 comeback triumph over the Houston Astros and breathe a semblance of life back into their pursuit of the Pirates in the National League East.
The Mets, who had collected just five hits off Deshaies (2-6 with a 7.03 earned run average) in the first eight innings, used patience to push him toward the showers when Dave Magadan and Gregg Jefferies worked out consecutive walks with the score 2-0 and one out in the ninth.


One-Two Punch for PC Makers
For years, the personal computer industry has been regarded as one of America's most vibrant businesses.
It seemed to embody the American corporation's ability to innovate and to capitalize on cost-cutting research.
As the industry brought powerful computers within the reach of businesses and households, bountiful profits were generated for the companies and their investors.
But now the industry, and particularly its leaders -- Apple Computer, Compaq and I.B.M. -- face a real test.
A squeeze at both ends of their market has sent their profits plummeting.
The question is whether they can define strategies that will help them break out of the industry stall and produce the kind of growth and profitability they are used to.  'The Desktop Is Dead'
"The secular problem is the desktop is dead," said Roger McNamee, an industry analyst at T. Rowe Price in Baltimore.
"The PC industry is mature, and MS-DOS is aging," he added, referring to the operating system that is used by the majority of I.B.M. and I.B.M.-compatible personal computers.
"The only things that are growing are graphical interface, portable computers and network computing. If you don't have two out of three, you're dead."


F.D.A. Committee Backs Pfizer Drug
An advisory committee of the Food and Drug Administration has recommended marketing approval for Pfizer Inc.'s Norvasc drug for treating high blood pressure and chest pain from heart disease.
Pfizer is in final clinical trials of Norvasc to treat mild-to-moderate congestive heart failure.
The views of the advisory committees, though not binding, often influence the decision makers at the agency.
In trading on the New York Stock Exchange today, Pfizer's shares fell 25 cents, to $56.


Antitrust Laws Shouldn't Apply to College Aid; Take a Second Look
To the Editor:
As one who did go to Harvard, and who lives in Baltimore, right near Loyola College, I say William Desmond should take a second look ("I'm Not Going to Harvard," Op-Ed, May 22).
Loyola is a lovely school, with a nice campus and a conservative, primarily white and Roman Catholic student body, and a good faculty.
What distinguishes Harvard (or Yale or Princeton, for that matter) is the tremendous variety of individuals one can meet there, and the broad range of experiences available.
In my experience, as much learning goes on outside the classroom as in.
Facilities are good at many colleges.
But the varied background and bright minds one finds at a place like Harvard should not be taken lightly.
Yes, the price is outrageous, but there is financial aid and scholarship money available.
Mr.
Desmond may yet ask himself, "How would my life have been different had I gone to Harvard?" HELEN MONTAG BEILENSON  Baltimore, May 22, 1991


Wendy Murphy Has a Wedding
Margaretta Harrison Murphy and Robert Conde Bickford were married yesterday in New York at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
Charles A. Amstein officiated.
The bride, known as Wendy, is a daughter of Mrs.
Nelson A. Rockefeller of Pocantico Hills, N.Y., and Dr.
James S. Murphy of Santa Fe, N.M.
The bridegroom is a son of Albert C. Bickford of Ardsley-on-Hudson, N.Y., and the late Esther Horan Bickford.


Witness Details Sexual Abuse At St. John's
A St.
John's University student who pleaded guilty to sexually abusing a female student testified yesterday that he saw two naked students also molesting her at a house near the school's Queens campus.
At a trial over sexual-assault accusations that roiled the university last year, the witness, Joseph Reilly, said he watched as the two housemates hovered over the woman and repeatedly hit her on the head with their penises as she "looked like she was out of it."


Satellite Music Venture in Japan
The Nippon Television Network Corporation and companies of the Mitsubishi Group will begin a satellite-broadcast music service.
The venture is owned by 52 Japanese companies.
Nippon Television owns 8 percent, with the Mitsubishi Group companies, including the Mitsubishi Corporation and the Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, taking a 10 percent stake.
Yomiuri Shimbun, Japan's largest newspaper, which also owns 8.5 percent of Nippon Television, has a 7 percent stake in the music venture.


Antitrust Laws Shouldn't Apply to College Aid
To the Editor:
"I'm Not Going to Harvard" (Op-Ed, May 22) by William Desmond, a recent graduate of Baltimore's Loyola High School, struck me as trivial.
Not because he has chosen to pass up admission to Harvard, Princeton and Yale and instead attend Loyola College, for there are many other institutions, both large and small, where a student can seek quality education.
What left me wondering was why this young man's opinions should be of general interest.


Long-Term Rates Lifted By Job Data
Long-term interest rates continued to climb yesterday, following further indications of an economic revival.
The signs came in the form of a Government report released before the markets opened that showed a pickup in non-farm employment in May.
Although the rise in manufacturing jobs last month did not prevent the nation's overall unemployment rate from rising to 6.9 percent, from 6.6 percent in April, it eroded prices of Treasury bonds and other fixed-income securities from the start.


Agassi and Courier Put an American Accent on the Final
Two American players planted their feet firmly on the baseline and proceeded to batter their German opponents into submission today in the semifinals of the French Open, setting up the first all-American men's singles final at this Grand Slam event in 37 years.
Andre Agassi advanced to his second consecutive final here by systematically removing the sting from Boris Becker's arsenal in a 7-5, 6-3, 3-6, 6-1 victory.
Clean-shaven, blond-streaked and garbed in royal purple, Agassi provoked Becker to distraction with a steady stream of groundstrokes that probed like lasers and left Becker conducting an irritated, self-deprecatory monologue in his native tongue from the middle of the second set on.
"He spoke a lot of German out there today," Agassi said.


Dr. Antonio Rottino, Retired Pathologist, 88
Dr.
Antonio Rottino, director of laboratories and chief pathologist at St.
Vincent's Hospital for more than three decades, died on Tuesday at the hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


PENTAGON UNVEILS A STEALTH MISSILE
Taking the wraps off what had been one of the military's largest classified programs, the Pentagon said Thursday that it was building a new radar-evading missile that could cost more than $15 billion.
In outlining the Stealth missile's capabilities for the first time, the Defense Department said that there would be ground-launched and air-launched versions and that they would be used primarily against heavily defended targets.
The missile will carry conventional warheads; Pentagon officials said there were no plans for a nuclear version.


Consumer Complaints Up, Relief Down
The recession has brought a steep rise in consumer complaints, but fewer and fewer of them are being addressed because financially troubled states and cities across the country have sharply reduced the budgets of their consumer agencies.
The cuts are the deepest since the agencies were set up in the 1960's and 70's.
"Just at the time when we need to increase consumer protection for people getting ripped off by all kinds of phony credit-card and employment offers, consumer agencies are having their staffs and budgets cut way back," said Sara Cooper, executive director of the National Association of Consumer Agency Administrators.
The association, in Washington, has members in many of the nation's 400 public consumer agencies.


Corrections
A theater review on Wednesday about "Troubadour," a play at the Ubu Repertory Theater, included an incorrect production credit supplied by the play's press agent.
The repertory company has leased its theater to the show's producers, Beech Knight Productions, for the run of "Troubadour," but has no other association with Beech Knight or the show.


New Rayon Clothing Ruffles Some Wearers
Theresa Jakubik, an aspiring actress in Manhattan, recently went to brunch with some people she wanted to impress.
"I put on these adorable little culotte shorts," she said.
But by the end of the day, she didn't look adorable.
The rayon culottes were so wrinkled, she said, "I looked like I had rolled out of a 90-hour flight."
It wrinkles, it's no bargain, it has to be dry-cleaned, it spots easily and trees die for its birth.


Washington Talk; Sizzling 40-Year Streak Of Never Missing a Vote
Fearful of missing a roll-call, Representative Charles E. Bennett has ducked out of funerals, bolted from hospital beds and defied snowstorms to get to the House chamber.
This week marked the 40th straight year that the Florida Democrat has never missed a vote -- something like 17,400 of them -- on legislation.
"I'm not a brilliant person," the 80-year-old lawmaker said.
"I do produce some good legislation. But I've never been accused of being a genius. But I feel that being there and making the vote is my duty and responsibility. This 40-year thing for me is kind of a big victory."


Corporation Payrolls Inched Up In May, After Seven Big Declines
In a report supporting the growing view that the economy has already begun to pull out of the recession, Government figures showed today that corporate payrolls edged up in May after seven straight substantial declines.
At the same time, the nation's unemployment rate climbed three-tenths of a point, to 6.9 percent last month, offsetting an April decline that was viewed as a likely aberration when it was released.
As in March, the jobless rate is the highest in four and a half years.
But economists and the securities markets were largely unimpressed by the unemployment rate, which historically has tended to keep rising for some time after a recovery has taken hold, and focused instead on a new-found, broad stability in payroll jobs, which rose by 59,000.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on April 6 titled "Consumer Borrowing," about changes in outstanding consumer credit, misstated the annual rate of change for two months.
It was down 3.5 percent in January and down 0.3 in February, according to the most recent revision.
The error was disclosed last month when revised Government figures were issued, Because other discrepancies between Government figures and those in The Times's data bases were suspected, this correction was delayed so that the data could be reviewed.
The latest version of the chart, with corrected data for the two affected months, appears today on page 36.


Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
Tonight and Tuesday evening


Wholesalers Post Gain
Sales by American wholesale companies rose seven-tenths of a percent in April, to $144 billion, from $142.9 billion in March, the Commerce Department said today.
Sales of durable goods, items expected to last at least three years, dropped to $68.5 billion, from $69.3 billion in March, while sales of nondurable goods rose to $75.5 billion from $73.6 billion.


Critic's Notebook; In a Cincinnati Park, Plays About Dynamic Women
Nestled on top of a hill overlooking the city, the Cincinnati Playhouse in the Park has one of the most picturesque settings of any major American regional theater, equaled perhaps only by the Denver Theater Center, which faces the Rocky Mountains.
The playhouse is in Eden Park, which is also the home of the Cincinnati Art Museum.
Because of the theater's name, newcomers may think of it as an outdoor summer amphitheater.
In fact, it is a year-round company, performing a 10-play repertory of new works and classics on two stages.
The ample public spaces are glass-enclosed, giving the appearance of a greenhouse, and theatergoers can dine there before performances.
For each play there is an individual menu, which could be interpreted as a metaphor for the variety of theater served at the Playhouse.


Macy's Ends Tax Challenge in California
Bowing to consumer pressure, Macy's today withdrew its Supreme Court petition challenging California's Proposition 13.
The chain retreated from its attack on the landmark property-tax rollback after taxpayers' advocates called for a boycott of Macy's stores and customers mounted a letter-writing campaign and started returning destroyed Macy's credit cards to the company's chairman.
"It has never been our intention, nor do we see it as an appropriate role for a department store, to become the agent for change on this important public policy issue," Edward S. Finkelstein, chairman and chief executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, said in a statement.
"Macy's simply desires the same tax treatment for its stores as its competitors."


Review/Pop; 'El Puma' Sings of Love
Throughout Jose Luis Rodriguez's concert on Sunday afternoon at Madison Square Garden, women passed notes up to the stage, as well as flowers and, now and then, children to be kissed.
Mr.
Rodriguez, a Venezuelan known as "El Puma" after a role he played in a telenovela, or soap opera, has been making albums since 1978, and he is used to being a pop star and sex symbol wherever Spanish is spoken.
Singing ballads about tormented and enduring love, he drew sighs and squeals from an audience of families; children under 12 had received free tickets.
Mr.
Rodriguez's big, creamy baritone is stronger than Julio Iglesias's voice and just as dramatic.
He sings about love as a matter of life and death, his voice swelling with the backup group's crescendos.
Between the ballads, he also sang a version of the "Ode to Joy" from Beethoven's Ninth Symphony dedicated to pan-American friendship, and he dipped into Puerto Rican plena and Cuban rumba for uptempo songs.
For three songs, he was backed by a Mexican mariachi band, and a party song called "La Fiesta" had lyrics in Spanish and English -- the latter suggesting that the United States is his next major market.


Amid Anger and Confusion, Time Stock Declines Again
With investors angry and confused about Time Warner Inc.'s planned rights offering, the company's stock plummeted yesterday for the third day in a row.
After dropping $11.25 on Thursday, the stock lost an additional $4.875, to $94.625.
The shares have now lost nearly 20 percent of their value in the three days since word leaked out about the company's decision to make the offering.
Time Warner was the sixth-most-active issue on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, with slightly more than two million shares changing hands.


Tyson Out of Bidding
MIKE TYSON will not participate in a purse bid by the International Boxing Federation for a title bout against heavyweight champion EVANDER HOLYFIELD, Tyson's promoter said yesterday.
The former champion's decision, announced by Don King Productions, came one day after a New Jersey Superior Court judge ruled that only the I.B.F. could accept bids from promoters seeking to stage the fight for the unified title.
An injunction issued on Thursday by Judge Amos Saunders blocked the World Boxing Council from holding a purse bid today.
The I.B.F., one of three governing bodies for boxing and the lead organization for any challenge to Holyfield, plans its purse bid on Tuesday.
It has ordered Holyfield to defend his crown by Oct. 25.


Tele-Communications In United Artists Deal
Tele-Communications Inc. and the United Artists Entertainment Company, two of the nation's largest cable television operators, announced a merger deal today giving Tele-Communications the 46 percent of United Artists that it does not already own.
Under the $1 billion stock swap, 65 million shares of United Artists stock will be converted to Tele-Communications shares.


Sports of The Times; Arthur Ashe Confronts Apocalypse
We are all living in the next Spike Lee movie.
To pay for the national compulsive gambling in the 80's, the New York City is talking of closing down swimming pools just in time for summer.
Will the last librarian to be furloughed please turn off the reading lamp?
And on the border of our city, a young black man goes to party with white friends and is hit from behind by punks, cowards, racists.
The damage, economic and physical, goes around in circles.
Asians, Hispanics, whites and blacks are all being hit from behind, but one group most appears to be an endangered species from violence, from lack of jobs, from poor education, from rootlessness.


Dinkins's Strategy Is Faulted Amid Bickering on Budget Cuts
After a day of bitter confrontations with leaders of the New York City Council and the State Legislature, Mayor David N. Dinkins's strategy to get the city through one of its most difficult fiscal periods appears to be in tatters, labor and business leaders say.
Not only has Mr.
Dinkins been unable to avert the $1.5 billion cut in city services called for in what has become known as his "doomsday budget," but after the Legislature failed, according to the Mayor, to provide $250 million in aid he had sought, he may have to slash services far deeper.


Patents; 'Harvesting' Drugs Made By Bacteria
Most of the publicity in biotechnology usually concerns the discovery of another gene or the development of genetically engineered bacteria that produce a valuable new drug.
But there is a more mundane side that is also important: finding efficient ways to "harvest" a new drug from the bacteria or animal cells that produce it.
It is a ticklish job, because the drug must be purified of all toxins and other detritus produced by the host cells.
To address that, researchers at Perseptive Biosystems Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., recently patented a separation technology employing novel porous particles that they said speeded purification tenfold.


No Funds, No Planes: It's Baltia Air!
Igor Dmitrowsky, the founder of Baltia Air Lines, looked over his bare new office yesterday in Terminal 1 of John F. Kennedy International Airport.
Soon it will have a phone and desks, so this Latvian immigrant will no longer have to run his international airline out of his apartment in Rego Park, Queens.
Baltia as yet has no planes, no flight crews and no financing.
But it has had, as of Wednesday, valuable rights from the Department of Transportation to fly from New York to Leningrad and Riga, Latvia, with connections from Riga to the Soviet cities of Kiev, Minsk and Tbilisi.


Topics of The Times; Royal Lecture
Charles of Wales continues to work hard at being the Preservation Prince.
Turning from his crusade against modern architecture, in a speech at Stratford-upon-Avon marking the birthday of William Shakespeare, the Prince of Wales attacked educators for slighting the Bard in English literature classes and syllabuses.
Said the Prince, "Thousands of intelligent children leaving school at 16 have never seen a play of Shakespeare on film or on the stage, and have never been asked to read a single word of any one of his plays. . . . It is almost incredible that in Shakespeare's land one child in seven leaves primary school functionally illiterate."


Hopeful Sign in Canada
Canada's unemployment rate rose slightly last month from the April level, but Government economists said an increase in the country's manufacturing and construction sector was a sign that the economy was improving.
The Government agency Statistics Canada said that the jobless rate for May was 10.3 percent, up from 10.2 percent the previous month.
About 46,000 new jobs were created in the month, mostly in manufacturing.
"It is encouraging that we saw some upturn in employment in the bracket hardest hit in the recession," said Peter Drake, a senior economist at the Toronto-Dominion Bank.


No Funds, No Planes: It's Baltia Air!
Igor Dmitrowsky, the founder of Baltia Air Lines, looked over his bare new office yesterday in Terminal 1 of John F. Kennedy International Airport.
Soon it will have a phone and desks, so this Latvian immigrant will no longer have to run his international airline out of his apartment in Rego Park, Queens.
Baltia as yet has no planes, no flight crews and no financing.
But it has had, as of Wednesday, valuable rights from the Department of Transportation to fly from New York to Leningrad and Riga, Latvia, with connections from Riga to the Soviet cities of Kiev, Minsk and Tbilisi.


Corrections
An article in the Science Watch column of Science Times on Tuesday about efforts to devise treatments or vaccines for cholera referred incorrectly to Vibrio cholerae, the microorganism that causes the disease.
It is a bacterium.


India Refuses Pakistani A-Talks
India today rejected Pakistan's request for international talks on creating a zone free of nuclear weapons in South Asia.
Reiterating India's position that regional nonproliferation pacts are meaningless, a spokesman for the Ministry of External Affairs said India stood behind its call for a "nuclear-free world."


Bush Names New Voice of America Director
President Bush appointed Charles G. Untermeyer, his White House personnel chief, as the director of the Voice of America today, and attended the swearing in of Henry E. Catto as director of the United States Information Agency.
Mr.
Untermeyer, a 45-year-old who worked briefly as a reporter for The Houston Chronicle, has been a Bush supporter since 1966, when he was still a college student.
Mr.
Catto, 60, who is formerly a Houston businessman and who was described by the President today as "my dear friend," held a number of diplomatic posts in Republican administrations and was appointed by Mr.
Bush as Ambassador to Britain.


Dissenting Voices Before Sharpton Protest
This working-class community of blacks, Italians, Latinos and Asians is literally on the other side of the tracks from the tonier parts of Five Towns, home mostly to the area's affluent white residents.
It is here, in a community settled by those who worked for the whites across the way, that Alfred Jermaine Ewell, the 17-year-old black student who was beaten in Atlantic Beach on Sunday, reportedly by a group of whites, grew up.
And it is here that the Rev.
Al Sharpton plans to begin a protest march on Saturday into overwhelmingly white Atlantic Beach.


Court Says Lawyers Must Name Cash Clients
In a case considered a major test of the sanctity of attorney-client privilege, a Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that lawyers must disclose the names of their clients who pay large fees in cash.
In upholding the lower court's ruling, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit set the stage for a possible battle before the United States Supreme Court.
But lawyers who support the two law firms involved in the case said they were pessimistic about their chances there.


Observer; A Many Syllabled Thing
What we are up against is nothing less than the ization of the whole world.
The full extent of the threat didn't strike me until I heard of Lebanonization.
That was a few weeks ago.
Diplomats were saying it would be dreadful to allow the Lebanonization of Iraq.
"Of Iraq?" I cried.
"If you ask me, the Lebanonization of anything would be unspeakable, not to mention unpronounceable."


Saudi Explains Venture With Mobil
Loay Nazer, son of the oil minister of Saudi Arabia, said yesterday that he had received no special treatment in a venture in which a new Saudi company he heads and the Mobil Corporation plan to build a petrochemical plant in Saudi Arabia.
The New York Times reported on Thursday that Saudi Chemical Investments Ltd., headed by Mr.
Nazer and Mohamed M. Attar, son-in-law of the minister, Hisham M. Nazer, had joined forces with Mobil to build a petrochemical plant at Yanbu, a Saudi industrial port on the Red Sea.
It would manufacture a gasoline blending component, methyl tertiary butyl ether, that reduces carbon monoxide automobile emissions.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The unemployment rate climbed to 6.9 percent last month, offsetting an April drop viewed as a likely aberration.
But corporate payrolls rose slightly in May after seven straight substantial falls.
Economists and the securities markets largely disregarded the unemployment rate, which historically has tended to keep rising for some time after a recovery has taken hold.  [ Page 1. ]


Monarch Life Plan
Private Capital Partners Inc. said the investor group it heads had filed with the Massachusetts Insurance Commission to begin the process to transfer control of the Monarch Capital Corporation's Monarch Life Insurance Company subsidiary to the group.
On Monday, Private Capital, based in Purchase, N.Y., said it would form the Old Bay Life Insurance Company to acquire the stock of Monarch Life, based in Springfield, Mass.
Monarch Life was seized by state insurance regulators last week, fearing that lenders would force Monarch Capital into bankrupcty because it had defaulted on a $235 million loan.
The transfer of Monarch Life, with 250,000 policyholders, includes a $25 million cash infusion, Private Capital said.


Music in Review
Goodman Chamber Choir  Merkin Concert Hall
Andrea Goodman has recast her 12-voice Goodman Chamber Choir to include several recent Soviet emigres as well as American singers.
On Tuesday evening, Ms.
Goodman conducted a program that reflected her choir's makeup, with Russian works in the first half and American works after the intermission.


William M. Berta, Executive, 56
William Michael Berta, senior vice president and director of advertising and sales promotion for Saks Fifth Avenue, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 56 years old.
He died of lung cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Patrice Koeneke Wed in New York
Patrice J. Koeneke and M. Jay Walkingshaw were married last evening at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York by the Rev.
Gary P. Fertig.
The bride is a daughter of Dolores A. Koeneke of Westbury, L.I., and the late Robert F. Koeneke Sr.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Walkingshaw Jr. of Sewickley, Pa.
The bride is the assistant general counsel at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She graduated from Nazareth College of Rochester and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
Her father was a pharmacist.
The bridegroom is a business and financial consultant for the entertainment industry and was until recently a senior vice president of Columbia Pictures Entertainment in New York.
He graduated from Williams College and received an M.B.A. degree from Dartmouth College.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.
His father is a retired pharmacist.


Guide to the Future?
The fiscal problems that led Bridgeport, Conn., to file for bankruptcy protection yesterday in the Federal courts are common to many other cities and states across the nation.
But municipal finance experts said it was unlikely that others would risk taking such a drastic step until it becomes clear whether Bridgeport suffers severe legal and financial repercussions.
"This is going to be a landmark case," said Robert J. Froehlich, vice president of research at Van Kampen Merrit, a Chicago-based municipal banking firm.
"People will watch closely to see what happens to Bridge port."


America West In Lease Talks
The International Lease Finance Corporation said today that it was in talks with America West Airlines Inc. about the carrier's request to suspend lease payments on some of its planes.
America West, the nation's ninth-largest carrier, has 110 planes, most of them jetliners made by the Boeing Company, serving 55 cities in the United States and western Canada.
It said on Thursday that it wanted all its aircraft providers to agree to defer payments for three months, saving the carrier $75 million.


In the Nation; What Kind of Order?
In the aftermath of the Persian Gulf war, Americans offer a lot of support for President Bush's call for a "new world order." But they are sharply divided about what that means and what role the United States should play in such an order.
Ironically, opponents of the gulf war strongly favor the concept -- as long as it embodies the war's principles of allied action and U.N. support.
Those who enthusiastically backed the war, however, tend to favor the U.S. taking a lead military role with or without the support of other nations or the U.N.


Bags for Work and Play (Anybody Want a Seat?)
Sometimes you just want to sit down, right where you are.
But in the middle of the woods or in a crowd at a subway station, finding a place to sit can be a problem.
Two New York-area companies have an answer -- backpacks with seats.
And for those who already have a seat waiting in an office, another company offers a carryall made of a backpack-like fabric that offers a casual yet polished look.


Ride on Credit: Make It J.F.K. and Don't Spare the Plastic!
Eight yellow taxicabs are driving around New York City, hardly distinguishable from the 11,000 others.
But inside each is a small sign stuck to the window.
It tells you that you can pay with a credit card.
The New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission last week began testing a new high-technology taxi meter that accepts American Express cards.
In the future it could take Visa, Mastercard and other major credit cards.


Review/Music; The Berlin Drops In, With Haydn and Bruckner
The Berlin Philharmonic, routinely described as one of the great orchestras of the world, arrived on Thursday at Carnegie Hall for a three-night run (the last concert is a Mozart-Brahms bill tonight).
There were moments of beauty in the orchestral playing.
But on the whole this was an occasion that called routine opinion into question.
Although Americans have been able to keep tabs on the Philharmonic through its many recordings, its actual New York appearances have been oddly infrequent over the last decade.
The late Herbert von Karajan, its "conductor for life," brought it here in 1982, but thereafter used the Vienna Philharmonic for his New York concerts.
James Levine led a single performance at the Metropolitan Opera House in 1986, during Carnegie Hall's renovation.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
ACTV Inc., New York, named John A. Lack president and chief executive of the cable technology company. *
Advanced NMR Systems Inc., Wilmington, Mass., named Jack Nelson chairman, succeeding Charles Harr.


From Canticum Novum
Harold Rosenbaum is to conduct the Canticum Novum Singers in a Josquin Des Prez concert at 8 o'clock tonight at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.
Tickets are $8.
Information: (914) 763-3453.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.72
5.82
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.56
7.71
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.74
5.71
7.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.15
8.08
8.49
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.47
8.42
8.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.52
9.45
9.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.26
7.22
7.50
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Reporter Was There
To the Editor:
We were participants in the media seminar on Vietnam at the Naval War College in Newport, R.I., in November 1972.
Lewis Lapham (letter, May 25) has disputed David Halberstam's recollection (letter, May 18) of Mr.
Lapham's remarks and demeanor at the seminar and claimed Mr.
Halberstam was not present.


This Is Getting Serious: Yanks Trail Jays by 3 1/2
The Rangers could have walked Don Mattingly with the winning run on second base in the ninth inning last night.
First base was open and Kevin Maas was on deck.
There were murmurs in the Yankee dugout when Texas chose to pitch to him.
"We didn't want to talk too loud," said rookie Pat Kelly. "They might have heard us."


SHAMIR, IN LETTER, REJECTS BUSH PLEA
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir has rejected President Bush's call for compromises that would enable the United States to convene a Middle East regional peace conference, senior Israeli officials said today.
The unyielding position, reflected in a letter delivered to Washington overnight, raises serious questions about the future of the Bush Administration's Mideast peace initiative, which was launched in the aftermath of the Persian Gulf war.


Auto Worker Dissidents Gain
Members of a dissident labor group have ousted leaders of the United Automobile Workers union at New United Motor Manufacturing Inc., known as Nummi, a joint venture between the General Motors Corporation and the Toyota Motor Corporation in Fremont, Calif.
In elections on Wednesday, the candidate of the dissident group, the People's Caucus, defeated the incumbent president of the local.
Members of the dissident group were elected to three of five other top union positions.
The caucus, which is loosely affiliated with a national U.A.W. dissident group called New Directions, argues for a more traditional, adversarial relationship between the union and management.


Robert B. Masson, TV Producer, 75
Robert B. Masson, a radio, television and public relations executive, died on Tuesday at his home in Studio City, Calif.
He was 75 years old.
He died of lung cancer, said Herb Steinberg, a friend and spokesman for the family.


State Worker's Budget Coup: A Windfall for Massachusetts
After months of struggling to close Massachusetts's yawning budget deficit, Governor William F. Weld announced this week that the problem has been almost magically solved.
Not by the state's 200 legislators.
Not by his budget planners.
But by a part-time state employee who earns $22,000 a year.


Contractors Sue U.S. Over Jet Cancellation
Following through on their threat to do so, the General Dynamics Corporation and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation yesterday filed a multibillion-dollar lawsuit against the Government because of its cancellation of the Navy's A-12 attack-jet program.
The suit, filed in United States Claims Court in Washington, is said to be the largest ever filed against the Government by a military contractor.
It seeks to eliminate a $1.35 billion claim held by the Government against the two companies over the program.
The two also seek to recover money invested in the program and other expenses that could bring the lawsuit's total damage claim to $3 billion or more.


Rudolf Hess's Daring Flight: K.G.B. Files Tell New Tales
Top-secret documents released by the K.G.B. assert that the sensational flight of Hitler's former deputy, Rudolf Hess, to Scotland 50 years ago was no surprise at all to British intelligence, which might have lured him with false promises of a peace settlement.
The documents seem to buttress the case that Hess was convinced that Britain could be persuaded to make peace with Germany on the eve of its attack on the Soviet Union on June 22, 1941, and undertook his 900-mile solo flight to achieve it.


Bridge
Bridge players who lose a close match, like politicians who lose a close election, lie awake at night afterward, worrying about what they could have done to change the result.
The losers had plenty of worrying to do after the New York Grand National Team final on Sunday.
The final margin, after 64 deals in which neither side could establish a substantial lead, was 4 imps, one of the closest in the history of the event.
On the diagramed deal, one defender was left lamenting that his hand was too strong.
Sitting South was Bob Jones, who won the event together with Bjorn Fallenius, Rick Zucker and Jim Krekorian.
They will take part in national playoffs in Las Vegas in July, hoping to break an 18-year jinx: New York, in spite of a wealth of talent, has never won the national title.


York College Holds 21st Commencement
York College of the City University of New York awarded degrees to 400 graduates yesterday at the school's 21st commencement in Jamaica, Queens.
The speakers at the commencement were the school's acting president, Leo Corbie, and Sonia Sanchez, a poet and professor at Temple University.


About New York
Luis Ibarra Weber is one of around 100 homeless veterans expected to march in Monday's parade.
He feels comradeship with the returning warriors, pride, gratitude and something darker.
"I am very jealous," he said.
"Nothing against the guys, but the enemy we fought, fought back."


HEALTH SECRETARY TO REVAMP F.D.A.
Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, is preparing to announce a major reorganization of the Food and Drug Administration this week, officials at the department said today.
The reorganization is coming after a decade of trouble at the agency, which suffered budget cuts from the Administration even as Congress was adding to its responsibilities.
The result was what officials inside and outside the agency described as a near-collapse as the agency failed to meet even deadlines that were set down in the law.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the beating of a Long Island teen-ager misstated the address of James Peralta, a Queens man charged in the attack.
He lives at 209-37 41st Avenue in Bayside.


After the War, a New Battle (May the Best Parade Win)
In New York City, the consumers' paradise, a mark-up is the amount added to something before it is offered for sale; in Washington, it's legislators' wrangling over a bill.
In New York, where bicoastal is a measure of status, L.A. is instantly recognized as Los Angeles; in Washington, it's a legislative assistant.


No Funds, No Planes: It's Baltia Air!
Igor Dmitrowsky, the founder of Baltia Air Lines, looked over his bare new office yesterday in Terminal 1 of John F. Kennedy International Airport.
Soon it will have a phone and desks, so this Latvian immigrant will no longer have to run his international airline out of his apartment in Rego Park, Queens.
Baltia as yet has no planes, no flight crews and no financing.
But it has had, as of Wednesday, valuable rights from the Department of Transportation to fly from New York to Leningrad and Riga, Latvia, with connections from Riga to the Soviet cities of Kiev, Minsk and Tbilisi.


In-and-Out Azinger Still in the Hunt
Despite an in-and-out scoring pattern for himself and impressive play from familiar veterans, Paul Azinger held on to his share of the lead today through two rounds of the Buick Classic.
After a 68 that came in two distinct halves, Azinger remained tied at eight-under-par 134 with Chris Perry, who stopped his own roller-coaster ride with a steady 68, and Denis Watson, who picked up the torch of Westchester's golfing infirm with a second consecutive 67.


The Seekers of Unfettered Flight Are No Crazier Than Average
To the Editor:
"Adventures Into the Danger Zones" (SportsLeisure, May 11) blends insight and misconception.
Your basic assumption is that hang gliding is a high-risk sport that "could make an undertaker rich." This negative image is a holdover from the 1970's, before the development of hang-glider structural design and rigorous training programs.
Today, the annual fatalities per 1,000 participants are fewer than in scuba diving and on a par with aviation.


Throwing in the Towel: Tarkanian to Quit in '92
Jerry Tarkanian, who has compiled the most successful record in major-college basketball history while continually battling the N.C.A.A., announced today that he would retire as basketball coach at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas at the end of next season.
Tarkanian, whose announcement ended two weeks of speculation, also agreed to give up his tenured professorship at the university and will not be paid for the remaining two years of a three-year rollover contract that pays him $203,976 a year.


Ex-Retail Executive Joins Ernst &amp; Young
Burnett W. Donoho, former president of Marshall Field &amp; Company in Chicago, has joined Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting concern, as a senior adviser in retail industry services.
A former president of the Gimbel Brothers stores in the Midwest and an executive with the Allied Stores Corporation, the 51-year-old Mr.
Donoho lost his post at Marshall Field when the large department-store chain was acquired last year by the Dayton Hudson Corporation of Minneapolis.


No, Prime Minister, to French Protection
To the Editor:
We should not be so quick to applaud France's first woman prime minister ("French Leader Firm on Japanese," Business Day news article, May 20).


Lieut. Gen. Arthur Trudeau, 88, Retired Chief of Research in Army
Lieut.
Gen.
Arthur Gilbert Trudeau, retired, a former chief of the Army's Research and Development Command, died Wednesday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 88 years old.
He died of heart failure, said his daughter Joan.


Music in Review
Walter J. Turnbull  Tenor Merkin Concert Hall
Walter J. Turnbull is best known as the founder and director of the Boys Choir of Harlem.
He is also a tenor, and on Monday evening he sang an unusually wide-ranging recital program.


Wilder Says Car Phone Is Tapped
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia charged yesterday that someone had been taping conversations on the cellular phone in the Governor's limousine and passing the information on to a political rival of his, Senator Charles S. Robb, Democrat of Virginia.
In an interview reported in today's issue Washington Post, Mr.
Wilder said: "It's wiretapping and it's a criminal act.


For Mayor Moran, Bridgeport's Revival Proves Elusive
Hopes were high that November night in 1989 when Mary C. Moran took the oath of office as Mayor of Bridgeport, the first woman in history to lead Connecticut's largest city.
Perhaps this political unknown and surprise victor, with her newness, charm and effervescence, could pull the city of 141,686 -- long viewed as the Newark of Fairfield County -- away from the fiscal precipice.


Silver Continues to Rally But Closes Below Its Highs
Silver futures prices rose yesterday, extending the week's big rally.
But the market settled well below the day's highs, and some traders questioned whether the gains would hold.
Silver futures settled 4 cents to 5.3 cents higher on the Commodity Exchange in New York, with the contract for delivery in July up 4 cents, at $4.47 an ounce.


Your Money; Caution Is Urged On Retiring Early
Many employees are seeing the silver lining as companies pare payrolls.
Severance pay or early-retirement packages will enable them to strike out on their own and realize dreams of being their own bosses.
But this silver lining is likely to tarnish, financial experts say.
Diane V. Schaak, president of the Denver-based Institute of Certified Financial Planners, said a great many of the middle- and upper-level managers and executives she counsels in her practice in Bellevue, Wash., feel they are under great stress and want to retire by age 55.


New York Legislator Acted Well on Budget
To the Editor:
Your description of Ralph Marino, the New York State Senate majority leader, as the "worst offender" in the searing process of budget making ("Albany Makes a Bad Year Worse," editorial, May 29) must have been a surprise to reporters here at the Capitol.
Senator Marino validated the global size of the budget at $51.9 billion originally defined by the Governor.
Some weeks later he was joined by Assembly Speaker Mel Miller.
He rejected further increases in the personal income tax, since ours was already the highest in the country.
In this he and the Governor agreed.


Pirates' Drabek Earns Shutout As Padres Squander 13 Hits
Doug Drabek, pitching again like a Cy Young Award winner, outdueled Bruce Hurst with the defensive help of Don Slaught and Andy Van Slyke, as the Pittsburgh Pirates beat the San Diego Padres, 1-0, tonight.
The Pirates won for the 11th time in 13 games while San Diego, failing to score despite getting 13 hits, lost its second in succession after winning six in a row.


Computer Export Ban To Change


Traffic Alert
Upper Columbus Avenue Fair: Columbus Avenue will be closed today from 86th to 96th Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Puerto Rican Day Parade: Fifth Avenue will be closed tomorrow from 44th to 86th Street from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.


Dow Off 18.12; Week's Loss at 50.76
Stock prices continued their retreat yesterday, with analysts citing weak bond prices and profit taking after the record close earlier in the week.
The latest reading of the economy's pulse, the monthly job numbers, received a mixed reaction.
After sinking even lower earlier in the day, the Dow Jones industrial average closed for the weekend at 2,976.74, off 18.12 points for the day and 50.76 for the week.


Review/Film; Gay Experience in England, With an Absent Protagonist
Ron Peck's "Strip Jack Naked" is an anomaly: an autobiographical film whose subject is visually absent except for an occasional fuzzy snapshot or group photo from a yearbook.
Mr.
Peck's physical remove from a project that includes many shots of other men, some of them naked, backhandedly underscores the themes of his film, which is a chronological narrative of growing up gay in England between 1962, when he was 14 years old, and 1990.
Until 1967, when homosexuality was decriminalized in England, being gay necessitated being invisible to the rest of society.
Mr.
Peck's physical absence pointedly suggests that his awakening to gay sexuality, culture and politics be taken as representing a collective experience shared by his generation.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Atari Corp., Sunnyvale, Calif., the personal computer company, will sell its Taiwan plant to an undisclosed buyer for $60 million. *
Baker Industries, Parsippany, N.J., a maker of fire detection and prevention equipment and a subsidiary of Borg-Warner Corp., reached agreement with Federal prosecutors under which its Baker Protective Services unit will pay a $1 million fine for inaccurate billing of airline clients by former employees.


Stan Getz, 64, Jazz Innovator on Saxophone, Dies
Stan Getz, one of jazz's most influential musicians and explosively imaginative tenor saxophonists, died on Thursday at his home in Malibu, Calif.
He was 64 years old.
The cause of death was liver cancer, his secretary, Maggie Crim, said.


Mark D. Offen, Lawyer, 44
Mark D. Offen, a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Parker Chapin Flattau &amp; Klimpl, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 44 years old and lived in Kew Gardens Hills, Queens.
He died of colon cancer, his family said.


CHRONICLE
Just days after he kicked and injured a fellow dancer, RUDOLF NUREYEV broke his contract to choreograph and dance at the Roman arena in Verona, Italy.
A spokesman for the theater said yesterday that Mr.
Nureyev had returned his contract during a dispute over a pay increase.
The spokesman denied that the dancer had been dismissed for misconduct.
But relations between Mr.
Nureyev and the ballet company were strained after he kicked CELSO DE ALMEIDA, who was treated for back bruises last weekend.


John L. Thomas, 81, a Jesuit Sociologist and Family Expert
The Rev.
John L. Thomas, a Jesuit sociologist, author and former writer in residence at Marquette University in Milwaukee, died Tuesday at St.
Camillus Health Center in Milwaukee.
He was 81 years old.
Father Thomas died of cancer, a spokesman for the university said.


Judge in Florida Assault Case Considers Curbs on Publicity
The judge in the rape case against William K. Smith indicated today that she would soon issue a sweeping order to stop lawyers, investigators, witnesses and others from public discussion of the case.
At a hastily called hearing in State Circuit Court for Palm Beach County, the judge, Mary E. Lupo, said she would also consider restrictions on access by news organizations to court records and information about the jury.


Roberts Is Promoted To Coach of Whalers
Jimmy Roberts, who coached Springfield to consecutive American Hockey League titles, was promoted to the Hartford Whalers yesterday, becoming the third head coach of the National Hockey League team in four seasons.
Roberts, 51 years old, played on five Stanley Cup championship teams with Montreal in his 15-year career as a defensive forward.
He replaces RICK LEY, who was fired last week with one year remaining on his three-year contract because of differences with owner RICHARD GORDON.
Terms of Roberts's multiyear contract were not disclosed. (AP)


New England Bank Failures
Banks will continue to fail in New England for the next year, and their assets may equal those of banks that have already failed, a top official of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston said.
"Banking in New England is still in a pretty sad state of disrepair," Thomas Cimeno, senior vice president of the Boston Fed, said on Thursday.
"You could easily have enough bank failures to equal in size of assets what we've already had."


Topics of The Times; Pick Judges, Not Fights
The Justice Department, which helps President Bush pick Federal judges, has chosen an odd way to inform itself about judicial candidates in New York.
It has told prospective nominees not to cooperate with the Association of the Bar of the City of New York -- and told it to stop meddling in Federal judge selection.
The association has long been one of the most respected bar organizations.
For years it has investigated and interviewed bench prospects and volunteered its findings to Justice, which is of course free to ignore them.
Yet suddenly, that useful practice is deemed an outrage.
Murray Dickman, special assistant to Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, wrote the association recently: "Your interference in the constitutional process of selecting and appointing Federal judges must end."


Demonstrators Protest Closing of Tompkins Square Park for Renovations


Dickinson Forgets Troubles and Tees Up
Judy Dickinson has less to worry about as president of the Ladies Professional Golf Association this season, and it is beginning to show in her scorecards.
"Things have been easier for me and everyone else since Charles Mechem became commissioner," said Dickinson, who has remained president for a second term.
"I can concentrate on golf a little more now."


Evers Exhumation Was Due to Report's Loss
The prosecutor here who is pursuing the slaying of Medgar Evers says it was the loss of the original autopsy report that caused him to have Mr.
Evers's body exhumed earlier this week, 28 years after the civil rights leader was shot to death outside his Jackson home.
The prosecutor, District Attorney Ed Peters, told reporters on Thursday that he did not know what had happened to the report.
But he said that in its absence it was necessary that a new autopsy be performed before he proceeded to trial against Byron de la Beckwith, the suspect in Mr.
Evers's killing.


2 More Slain in Gainesville; Tie to 5 Killings Discounted
The bodies of two young women were found today in their apartment in the same woodsy part of this university city where five students were slain last August.
But the authorities moved quickly to discount any link between the two sets of crimes.
"There is no indication whatsoever that this is connected with the serial killings that took place last year," said a spokesman for the Alachua County Sherriff, Lieut.
Spencer Mann.


Quotation of the Day
"I'm not a brilliant person. I do produce some good legislation. But I've never been accused of being a genius. But I feel that being there and making the vote is my duty and responsibility. This 40-year thing for me is kind of a big victory." -- Representative Charles E. Bennett, who has not missed a House vote in 40 years.  [ 7:5. ]


Consumer Borrowing Increases
Consumers increased their borrowing in April for the first time in five months, the Government said today.
The report was viewed as another sign the economy was pulling out of recession.
Outstanding consumer credit rose $1.7 billion, to a seasonally adjusted $734.1 billion, after falling $4 billion from November through March, the Federal Reserve said.


Debate Intensifies as Talks Continue on Military Base Closings
The commission charged with closing military bases took another arduous step forward today, whittling away at an expanded list announced last week and debating the strategic merits of keeping some of the bases open.
In the most contentious discussion in two days of deliberations, the panel decided to spare four Navy home ports that are open but still under construction.
It also voted to continue to consider closing the Staten Island Naval Home Port.


Marion Merrell
Marion Merrell Dow Inc. said an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration had recommended approval of an intravenous dosage form of Cardizem, which is used to treat a rapid, irregular heartbeat.
The drug is now available in tablet form, which was approved in 1982, and in sustained-release capsules, approved in January 1989.


CHRONICLE
The reclusive London advertising executive CHARLES SAATCHI did an uncharacteristically unreclusive thing yesterday: he issued a statement to the press about his dispute with JAMES TENNANT.
The two are neighbors in St.
Leonard's Terrace in the Chelsea district of London.
Last October Mr.
Tennant demanded about $150,000 from Mr.
Saatchi for damage to his property that he said resulted from renovation work on the Saatchi town house.
Now Mr.
Saatchi has brought legal action against Mr.
Tennant, who he says has harassed him and damaged his property.


Extra! Bulls Rally Then Down Lakers in Overtime
It was a spectacular game, and a spectacular athlete decided it.
Adding more footage to a career full of amazing highlights, Michael Jordan scored 6 points in overtime to lead the Chicago Bulls to a 104-96 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers tonight at the Forum.
By winning Game 3 of the National Basketball Association finals, the Bulls took a 2-1 lead in the four-of-seven-game series and recaptured the homecourt advantage.


Man Held in Killing of 3 at a Bodega in Brooklyn
A 25-year-old construction worker who was on probation for carrying a gun was charged yesterday with the execution-style slayings of three men during the robbery of a Brooklyn bodega in April, the police said.
A fourth man was critically wounded in the shootings but survived.
The suspect, Theron Grinage, of 104-44 129th Street in Ozone Park, Queens, was arrested in March of last year on charges that he robbed the same grocery, but a grand jury decided not to indict him in that case, the authorities said.


Two Planes Collide in Georgia
Two antique military airplanes collided today, and one crashed and exploded, the authorities said.
Walker County Sheriff Al Millard said at least one of the two people on the T-37, an old two-seat military plane, was killed in the crash.
Recuers searched for the second person.
The other plane, an A-26, was damaged but landed safely.


U.S. AND KREMLIN FAIL TO CLOSE GAP ON NUCLEAR ARMS
Foreign Minister Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d failed today to resolve Soviet-American differences over a new nuclear arms treaty.
Both officials cautioned that the remaining problems might not be solved in time for a planned superpower summit meeting in Moscow in June or July.
At a hastily arranged meeting at the Soviet mission in Geneva, Mr.
Baker presented Mr.
Bessmertnykh with a letter from President Bush containing what he said were new American proposals and Mr.
Bessmertnykh reciprocated with "fresh" ideas from his Government.
But afterward the two men sounded more cautious than ever about the prospects for completing the nuclear arms reduction treaty in the next few weeks.


Kurd Sees Early Pact With Baghdad
The principal leader of Iraq's Kurdish minority predicted today that he and other Kurdish leaders would reach an agreement with Baghdad by mid-June, granting autonomy to his region and removing the need for American and allied forces to remain in northern Iraq.
The upbeat assessment by the Kurd, Massoud Barzani, echoed similiar statements by Government officials.
But another important Kurdish figure, Jalal Talabani, told a French reporter in northern Iraq on Thursday that "serious difficulties" remained in the discussions with Iraqi leaders.


Dollar Lifted by U.S. Report On May's Increase in Jobs
The dollar closed higher yesterday after a positive report on job growth increased prospects for firm United States interest rates.
The dollar was helped by the Labor Department's report that 59,000 jobs were added to non-farm payrolls in May.
The announcement was good news to currency traders because it indicated that the economy was regaining strength and increased the likelihood that interest rates would remain stable or move higher.


Music in Review
Paulo Santiago  Pianist Weill Recital Hall
Paulo Santiago's New York debut recital, on Tuesday evening, was a modest affair.
The slim program, consisting of Schumann's "Kinder scenen," Debussy's "Children's Corner" and a Chopin assortment, was not calculated to reveal a well-rounded musical personality, and the young Portuguese pianist's rather faceless performances suggested no unseen depths.


Agnes Waldron, 66, Research Assistant for 3 Presidencies
Agnes Waldron, a research assistant to Presidents Richard M. Nixon, Gerald R. Ford and Ronald Reagan, died Wednesday at the Washington Hospice Center.
She was 66 years old and lived in Washington.
Miss Waldron died of breast cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Tall Tale of a Day in Park With Delacorte
To the Editor:
I'd like to correct one item in the otherwise excellent obituary of the philanthropist George T. Delacorte (May 5).
Former New York City Parks Commissioner Thomas Hoving told of "a scheme he (Mr. Hoving) had devised to relieve Mr. Delacorte of some of his money" when Mr.
Hoving needed financing to set up a restaurant at the Bethesda Fountain in Central Park in 1966.


Lawmakers Approve $295 Billion For Military, but Trim 'Star Wars'
The House of Representatives today approved a $295 billion military spending package for the next fiscal year that would cut President Bush's request for money for the "Star Wars" anti-missile program and the Stealth bomber.
The appropriations measure, which passed on a vote of 273 to 105, is similar in most respects to the Pentagon authorization bill that the House approved two weeks ago.
It falls within spending guidelines established by the Administration and Congress in the five-year budget agreement they struck last fall.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Trevino Leads by Two Strokes


Anguished Plea From Bridgeport For Fiscal Relief
Connecticut officials vowed today to block the state's largest city from becoming the first in the nation to escape the recession's pressures by seeking protection in Federal bankruptcy court.
After the city filed for bankruptcy suddenly Thursday night, state officials, who have overseen the city's troubled finances for three years, resolved to do everything in their power to have the bankruptcy papers thrown out.
They then imposed their own municipal budget today, one that would close a $12 million gap by sharply cutting services and raising property taxes by 18 percent.


Judge in Florida Assault Case Considers Curbs on Publicity
The judge in the rape case against William K. Smith indicated today that she would soon issue a sweeping order to stop lawyers, investigators, witnesses and others from public discussion of the case.
At a hastily called hearing in State Circuit Court for Palm Beach County, the judge, Mary E. Lupo, said she would also consider restrictions on access by news organizations to court records and information about the jury.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Added Fernando Valenzuela, pitcher, to the 25-man roster.
Optioned Cliff Young, pitcher, to Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.


News Summary
International 2-6
Obstacles to a nuclear arms treaty remain unresolved.
Foreign Minister Bessmertnykh and Secretary of State Baker warned they might not be resolved in time for a June or July summit meeting.
Page 1


Corrections
Articles in Business Day on Tuesday and Wednesday about an agreement between the United States and Japan to extend regulations covering trade in computer chips referred incorrectly to a provision.
Only Japanese companies will be required to keep detailed records of prices and volumes of semiconductors shipped; United States companies are not subject to the requirement.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Larry Kert, singer and actor, referred incorrectly in some copies to his role in "West Side Story." He played a romantic lead, not the leader of the Jets gang.


The Wild West Rides Into Battery Park City, Bucking Broncos and All


Small Company Makes Superconducting Chip
A small Silicon Valley company said today that it had demonstrated the world's first integrated circuit made by using newly discovered high-temperature superconductors.
Experts said the development was an important step toward the commercial application of the materials, which electrified the scientific world when they were discovered a few years ago.
The company, Conductus Inc. of Sunnyvale, Calif., said it had made an ultrasensitive magnetic detector on a single chip, the most complex device ever fabricated with the new materials.


Victory Parade On TV Today
The National Victory Celebration today for participants in the Persian Gulf war will be broadcast nationally from Washington by two cable television networks.
Here are their schedules, with all times Eastern daylight:
C-SPAN Channel 1 will carry live coverage of a memorial service at Arlington National Cemetery from 8:45 A.M. to about 10 A.M. and the parade beginning at 11 A.M. and ending about 1:30 P.M.
Afterward, a viewer call-in program will be held to discuss the parade.


In Fighting Shape, 3 Diet Companies Mix It Up Over Advertising Claims
In a battle sounding like that of a family that never heard of Emily Post, three diet companies and Stanford University are reaching and grabbing and fighting each other for the biggest piece of the nation's $33-billion-a-year diet industry pie.
A week of accusations and counter-accusations ended yesterday when Federal District Judge D. Lowell Jensen, in San Francisco, granted a temporary restraining order to Stanford and Jenny Craig Inc., one of the diet companies, blocking advertising claims by Nutri/System Inc.


Emily C. Stone, Museum Official, 83
Emily Coolidge Stone, a former director of membership at the Museum of Modern Art, died on Wednesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 83 years old.
She died after a stroke, her daughter said.


Argentina's President, Praised Abroad, Finds Himself in Trouble at Home
Within months of assuming the presidency of Argentina in mid-1989, Carlos Saul Menem began surprising Western officials with proclamations that he planned to reorient his country away from the inward-looking, protective policies of its former leader, Juan Domingo Peron, and open its doors to the first world.
Mr.
Menem, who visited Washington soon after taking office, began referring to President Bush as his "good friend." Plans to privatize sacred Government-owned companies were announced.
Relations with Britain, severed as a result of the 1982 Falklands war, were restored.
Two Argentine supply ships were sent to the Persian Gulf to join the coalition against Iraq.
Argentina, at least in the President's opinion, was on its way to regaining its status among the dominant countries of the world.


U.S. Will Be Host
The United States will play Trinidad and Tobago on July 29 at the Rose Bowl in the first round of the Gold Cup, the soccer championship of North and Central America and the Caribbean.
The United States plays Guatemala on July 1 at the Rose Bowl and Costa Rica on July 3 at the Los Angeles Coliseum.
The four teams make up Group B of the tournament.


A Better Response to Hate Crimes
Once again, New York is forced to confront simmering intolerance that has exploded in a racially motivated attack.
The latest incident, in which a black youth was beaten by whites in Nassau County's Atlantic Beach, evokes the senselessness and frustration that followed similar attacks in Howard Beach in 1986 and Bensonhurst in 1989.
But unlike the responses to those earlier incidents, the residents of Atlantic Beach and surrounding communities have rallied to support and comfort the victim.
Commendably, they have not defended the attackers.
The assault reportedly developed this way: Alfred Jermaine Ewell, a 17-year-old black, attended a party last weekend where he talked with a young white woman.
Their conversation provoked a racial slur from 20-year-old Shannon Siegel.
After the party, Mr.
Siegel and several other white youths found Mr.
Ewell sitting on a boardwalk and beat him unconscious with a baseball bat and sticks.
Mr.
Ewell remains hospitalized in critical condition.


Calling New Jersey
Starting today at 2 A.M., New Jersey has a new area code, 908, in parts of what used to be the land of 201.
People who forget to dial 980 will hear a recording telling them to do so.
Here is how many telephone line were in use when each area code was introduced. 1947 -- 201: 780,674 1963 -- 201: 1,575,564  608: 467,331 1991 -- 201: 2,038,939  908: 1,516,063  609: 1,331,982


Military Targets, Close to Home
The commission on military base closings has heard the same message from virtually every community near a base on the Pentagon's hit list: Don't close ours.
But that's exactly the commission's job, to recommend which bases to shut, reduce or restructure.
The commissioners have handled their unhappy task with admirable fairness so far.
Now comes the hard part.
There are more than 400 major military installations in the U.S.
With the coming cutbacks in forces, many will become superfluous -- if indeed they are not already so.
Protective members of Congress have forced the Pentagon to keep them going at tremendous, wasteful cost.


Judge in Florida Assault Case Considers Curbs on Publicity
The judge in the rape case against William K. Smith indicated today that she would soon issue a sweeping order to stop lawyers, investigators, witnesses and others from public discussion of the case.
At a hastily called hearing in State Circuit Court for Palm Beach County, the judge, Mary E. Lupo, said she would also consider restrictions on access by news organizations to court records and information about the jury.


2 Suspended for Fight
OTIS NIXON of the Atlanta Braves was suspended for four games and WALLY RITCHIE of the Philadelphia Phillies for one game as the result of a brawl in Tuesday night's game between the teams.
The fight started when Ritchie hit Nixon with a pitch and the Braves outfielder charged the mound.
Both players were fined an undisclosed amount.
They have appealed the suspensions and fines, and will be eligible to play pending the appeals. (AP)


CHRONICLE
It may be hard to imagine BROOKE ASTOR in the hotel business, but when she married Vincent Astor in 1953 he owned the St.
Regis.
The newly refurbished hotel at Fifth Avenue and 55th Street, now part of the ITT Sheraton chain, is being shown in previews before its official reopening this fall.
On Tuesday a group from the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation got a look at the hotel, the site for its benefit on Sept. 12.
Mrs.
Astor is an honorary co-chairwoman of the benefit, along with VISCOUNT ASTOR, a distant relative, and BARBARALEE DIAMONSTEIN-SPIELVOGEL, the foundation's chairwoman.
Mrs.
Astor did not attend the preview but sent this note:


Patents; Models of New Products Built Faster in Full Color
Norman F. Kinzie, an entrepreneur and architect in Needham, Mass., has invented a technique that he said made it possible to speed the building of full-color models for new products.
Mr.
Kinzie said the technique was designed to help people build better prototypes from the three-dimensional images produced on computer work stations.
Computer-aided design systems make it possible to develop richly colored images, and the dimensions can be transferred electronically to machines that produce plastic models.


Stanley Works Is Suing Newell
Stanley Works Inc. said it had sued the Newell Company under Federal antitrust laws to prevent it from buying 15 percent of the company.
The suit, filed in Federal District Court in Connecticut, seeks to block Newell, which makes consumer hardware and housewares, from following through on its intention to buy the shares.
Last month, Newell filed its intentions under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act that it sought to buy 15 percent to 25 percent of the common shares of Stanley Works.
Newell, based in Freeport, Ill. currently owns 1 percent of Stanley, which is based in New Britain.
Stanley Works also said that employee stock ownership plans had bought about five million common shares at $37.125 each.
Their stake in the company has risen to about 25 percent of Stanley's outstanding shares.
The shares rose $3.375, on the New York Stock Exchange today, to $41.50.


Tyne Daly, on 'Gypsy' And on Roller Blades
When Tyne Daly came to Broadway to play Mama Rose in "Gypsy" after years on television's "Cagney and Lacey" as Mary Beth Lacey, the cop from Queens, theater people thought they'd seen everything.
But they hadn't: She went on to win a Tony Award as best actress in a musical.
And they still haven't -- unless they've seen her skate.
On a desperately hot recent afternoon, the 45-year-old actress, who is back on Broadway with "Gypsy" for a limited run, arrives at the Wollman Rink in Central Park equipped with roller blades.
She bought them when "Gypsy" was on the road during its pre-Broadway tryout and the cast collectively took up skating.


RJR Debt Request Reported
RJR Nabisco Inc., the maker of Oreo cookies and Camel cigarettes, reportedly wants its banks to relax terms on about $6 billion in loans so it can use its excess cash flow to invest in developing products or buying back expensive "junk bonds."
The American Banker, a trade publication, reported yesterday that RJR Nabisco was arguing to its bankers that it ought to enjoy lower interest rates and greater freedom in investing its money because of its stronger balance sheet.
The publication cited "sources with knowledge of the talks."


Managua Journal; Victor's Lament: To the Losers Belong the Spoils
When Violeta Barrios de Chamorro took over the presidential office suite a little over a year ago from her defeated Sandinista rival, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, she found on hand four rocking chairs painted violet.
And little else in the way of office furnishings, she says.


Agassi Beats Becker to Set Up All-American Final in Paris


Review/Film; A New 'Phantom,' From Miami Beach
The world probably didn't need two contemporary musicals titled "The Phantom of the Opera" and based on the 1911 Gaston Leroux novel.
But it has them.
Now, so does New York.
The more famous of the two, the one with music by Andrew Lloyd Webber, is playing on Broadway.
The other "Phantom," which opened in 1990 at the Hirschfeld Theater in Miami Beach, opened yesterday at the 57th Street Playhouse, where a videotaped live performance opens a two-week engagement.
Surprise: It is not half bad.


Immortal Masterpieces to Snooze By
As in years past, the American Symphony Orchestra League's annual convention, which begins on Wednesday in Chicago, is shadowed by worry and doubt.
Orchestras are trimming budgets, testing new marketing strategies, searching for relevance.
Two big ones, in Buffalo and Detroit, could fold.
Whether the convention's 2,000-plus delegates confront it or deny it, classical music is in decline -- and its troubles are artistic, not just financial.
The audience is old and dwindling.
Piano and song recitals are disappearing.
New music has no certain role.
Concerts, and the canonized repertory they recycle, are rituals of familiarity, marketed and consumed according to the overpriced celebrity performers they showcase.
In other art forms, interest in new works is taken for granted.
Even as a museum culture, classical music is too often second-rate, merchandising fancy reproductions of the old masters.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article and a subheading on May 26 about violence among teen-agers in New Haven misstated the number of homicides there during the first three weeks of May.
The total was 7, not 15.


4 Separate Shootings Leave 3 People Dead and 4 Others Hurt
Four separate shootings in New York City early yesterday left three people dead and four others wounded.
At Hull Street and Stone Avenue in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn, two men in a passing car opened fire on a group standing on the street corner.
Irene Alkens, 22 years old, of 245 Hull Street, was shot in the chest and pronounced dead at the scene.


Elster Says Shoulder Is Tired but Healthy
The baseball is flung from shortstop Kevin Elster's right hand and it arcs almost with an audible ache before crashing softly several feet in front of first base.
It hasn't happened often, although it has with a degree of regularity of late.
Top officials for the Mets began noticing it weeks ago.
Elster admits that it tends to occur late in games when his right shoulder and arm have tired.


Japan
To the Editor: The article on lacquerware (Travel, May 19) was interesting, but should have included a warning or at least a disclaimer.
The sap of the lac tree (Rhus verniciflua) is, like others in this genus (sometimes referred to as toxicodendron) such as poison ivy (R. radicans) and poison oak (R. toxicodendron) quite poisonous to many people.
Indeed, I know from personal experience that drinking soup or even tea from a lacquer bowl can cause painful anguish.
J.
ROBERT HUNTER Madison, Wis.
The writer is a herbarium fellow at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.


How Business Can Help in Schools
With great hoopla, American corporations are entering into all sorts of partnerships with their local public schools -- such things as awarding cash grants to excellent teachers, donating computers to classrooms, encouraging corporate employees to tutor slow learners.
But these represent scatter-shot approaches to America's core educational problem: the nation's growing number of young, unskilled workers.
The earnings of workers with only high school diplomas dropped 9 percent during the 1980's and the earnings of dropouts fell 12 percent.
Before it is too late, American business must launch a coordinated national strategy to rescue youth who are not bound for college.
Specifically:


Travel Advisory; Truman Museum in Key West
The house in Key West, Fla., that President Harry S. Truman used as his personal retreat has been opened as a museum.
President Truman first stayed in the house in 1946 when his physician advised a vacation.
The house, which was the home of the commandant of the United States submarine base at Key West, has been empty since the base closed in 1974.
So often did Truman visit his retreat -- he made 11 visits for a total of 175 days during his Presidency -- that it became known as the Little White House.
President and Mrs.
Truman also vacationed there five more times after they left the White House.
Key West officials say the recent renovations to the Little White House, which stands on 2.2 acres, return the building to its appearance in the 1940's.
Some of the interior furnishings are original.
Visitors find copies of White House correspondence on Truman's desk, some labeled "your eyes only," poker chips on the poker table and some of the President's favorite records on the phonograph.
A 10-minute video introduces visitors to Truman's experiences in Key West and there are 15-minute guided tours.
The house, (305) 294-9911, at 111 Front Street, off Whitehead Street, is open daily, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission is $6.


Playing Favorites
Architects and designers see things differently.
A staircase that to most people is just a staircase can be a fascinating structure, a thing of beauty.
The dimensions and materials, the details and placement can move them in ways that mere mortals would be hard pressed to understand.
Because designers and architects are voracious travelers, constantly looking at buildings and landscapes, they develop favorites, which often inspire their work.
"Frankie got me thinking about how to modulate space," says Philip Johnson, recalling the first time he saw Frank Lloyd Wright's Wisconsin home.


Seles Wins in Paris


Diana Culp Wed to Robert H. Bork Jr.
Diana Gayle Culp, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rollin Lee Culp of Fullerton, Calif., was married on May 18 to Robert H. Bork Jr., a son of Mr.
Bork of Washington and the late Claire Davidson Bork.
The Rev.
Edward Kryder officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Bork, 34 years old, is the senior counsel in the Justice Department's office of policy development in Washington.
She graduated summa cum laude from Occidental College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is a certified public accountant.


When Painting the Lily Was Raised to a Fine Art
At the turn of the 16th century, an Iranian artist dipped his quill first in li quid gold, then in silver and finally in a pot of blue pigment made from crushed lapis lazuli.
With hair-fine strokes he painted a fantasy landscape in which a lion sleeps, hares chase among the flowers, monkeys swing through the trees and birds lift their heads, seemingly in song.
The exquisitely depicted romp, by an unknown painter, is exhibited along with 29 other illuminations in "The Perfect Page: The Art of Embellishment in Islamic Book Design," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through Aug. 18.


Without Fanfare, Blacks March to Greater High School Success
This week Kevin Wilson will slip into a cap and gown and count himself a part of one of black America's most encouraging trends: its ever-improving high school completion rate.
While the percentage of white or Hispanic students who finish high school or pass an equivalency exam has shown little improvement for two decades, the percentage of blacks who do so has been on a constant rise.
The black completion rate has improved so much faster than that of whites and Hispanics that the experts are at a bit of a loss to explain it all.
Midnight Encouragement
They cite the general broadening of the black middle class and blacks' historic emphasis on education.
They note the contributions of early childhood programs like Head Start and the expanded availability of equivalency-exam programs for dropouts.
They discuss changes in the economy that make a high school degree more of a necessity than ever.
Then they confess a bit of pure puzzlement.


The Region; How to Translate a Civics Lesson Into Political Muscle
THE rules have now been set, at least temporarily, for a long-delayed battle to make New York City's politics catch up with its demographics.
In a process that even its strongest advocates admit was flawed, districts have been drawn along racial and ethnic lines in hopes of making a more powerful City Council reflect the reality that non-Hispanic whites are no longer a majority in the city.
In one striking aspect of the struggle to seize or keep power, the coalition that elected David N. Dinkins as the city's first black Mayor wants to make his legacy permanent, whatever his tenure, by electing allies when the Council expands to 51 seats from 35 this fall.


Making a Difference; The O.E.C.D.'s Polite Pusher
It was a busy week for Jean-Claude Paye, the soft-spoken Secretary General of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a group that seeks to promote economic growth.
Finance ministers from the 24 member nations pledged to revive international trade talks, continue economic aid to Eastern Europe and provide technical assistance to help the Soviet Union adopt a market economy.
Since taking the helm of the Paris-based organization in 1984, Mr.
Paye, a 56-year-old Frenchman, has coordinated its 1,800 employees to do studies and analyses that aim to spur change.
For example, a new O.E.C.D. report found that the industrial world's consumers and taxpayers transferred $300 billion last year to farmers, through subsidies and other means.
This finding, Mr.
Paye hopes, will help lead to a reduction in the huge farm subsidies that heavily influence agricultural trade.


Thrilling Moments in 'A Chorus Line'
AS soon as "A Chorus Line" closed on Broadway last April after 15 years, it actually did -- the inevitable blitz of small-scale reproductions followed.
Now it's time for a big-time "Chorus Line" once more -- and what theater is better endowed to produce one, with all the technical trimmings, than the Paper Mill Playhouse?
For those who were lucky enough to see the show during its pre-Broadway beginnings, after a historic two-year workshop process, the urgency, power and immediacy of those three months of performances in 1975, at the New York Shakespeare Festival's Public Theater, in a 299-seat house, cannot be re-created.
Still, "Chorus Lines," big or small, must somehow convince us of their integrity, while blending spareness, showmanship, sentimentality and toughness, without excess or mawkishness, and with perfect timing.


Horse Racing; Hansel Captures Belmont By a Head
Hansel survived a tingling stretch duel with Strike the Gold and won the 123d Belmont Stakes by the length of his head yesterday at Belmont Park.
It was five weeks after Strike the Gold won the Kentucky Derby and three weeks after Hansel won the Preakness, and their rubber match was in doubt until the final stride as they charged through the homestretch before a roaring crowd of 51,766.
And, as they raced home, Hansel managed to cling to the lead by a head over his fast-closing rival in the tightest finish in the Belmont since Affirmed edged Alydar by the same margin in 1978.


Festival Re-creates Sounds of the Past
THE ninth annual Connecticut Early Music Festival opens on Friday evening, with it new venues, intriguing repertory and the return of many favorite artists.
Under the artistic direction of two longtime Connecticut residents, John Solum and Igor Kipnis, the 1991 festival includes a lecture and 11 concerts by dozens of singers and instrumentalists recognized as authorities in historic performance practices.
Three of those events will be open to the public without charge.


Home Again


Travel Advisory; Disney Seeks Longer Stays By Expanding
Walt Disney Company executives say the strategy behind a proposed 470-acre expansion of Disneyland in Anaheim, Calif., is to persuade visitors to stay for up to a week and spend money on Disney lodging and shops.
The plan, which is expected to win local and state government approval this year, calls for the addition of an attraction modeled after Epcot Center in Florida to be called Westcot, more resort hotels and a shopping and dining plaza.
Work on the $3 billion addition is expected to begin late next year, with the opening scheduled for 1998.
The expansion, coupled with 35-year-old Disneyland, will be named Disney Resort.
Visitors will be transported from parking garages by a network of monorails, trams and moving sidewalks to a plaza with three new hotels and a boardwalk surrounding a six-acre lake with shopping, restaurants and dinner theaters.


No Ejection, Only a Victory As Clemens Baffles Athletics
Roger Clemens gave up one run and two hits in eight innings to win for only the second time in his last six starts as the Boston Red Sox defeated the Oakland Athletics, 8-1, today.
It was Clemens's first appearance in Oakland since Game 4 of the American League playoffs last October when he was ejected by home-plate umpire Terry Cooney.


RECORD BRIEFS
Brahms, Dvorak: Piano Works
David Buechner, piano. Connoiseur Society CD 4179; CD and cassette.


New Courthouse
To the Editor:
The article on the new Federal office building and courthouse to be built downtown  [ "A Spur to Slow Construction," April 28 ]  unfortunately missed some points.


Tamara A. Nagovonskaya Is Married
Tamara Anatoliyevna Nagovonskaya, an interpreter and travel consultant, was married yesterday in a civil ceremony at the Palace of Weddings in Moscow to Edward Bailey Hodgman, the program officer for human rights in the Moscow office of the International Foundation for the Development of Humanity, which has its headquarters in Washington.
The bride, 28 years old, is a daughter of Anna Nagovonskaya of Karaganda, U.S.S.R., and the late Anatoly Nagovonsky.
She graduated from the Alma-Ata (U.S.S.R.) Institute of Foreign Languages.
She works at Aerotour, a Moscow travel agency that is a Soviet-Cypriot joint venture.
Her mother is a laboratory technician at the Karaganda Industrial Flour Corporation.


Topics of The Times; At Home in New York City
Badly buffeted by the recession, New York City's economy isn't exactly thriving these days.
But nearly lost amid the gloom last week were two announcements confirming that the city remains a dynamic financial and management center.
After considering a move to Baltimore, St.
Louis, Atlanta or Cleveland, the Girl Scouts of the U.S.A. will keep their national headquarters in Manhattan, along with 400 jobs.
The Wall Street investment firm of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, meanwhile, has decided to transfer 1,500 employees early next year from three locations in Manhattan to downtown Brooklyn's new Metrotech Center.
The firm had considered relocating these workers to New Jersey.
City officials say losing these jobs would have cost the city about $200 million, justifying the tax breaks and other incentives offered Bear, Stearns to stay.


The Wall Streeter Who Runs TLC Beatrice
When Reginald F. Lewis bought the international businesses of the Beatrice Companies four years ago, most food industry experts expected him to dismantle the operation and sell off the pieces, taking his profits and proceeding to yet another megadeal.
Partly by choice and partly by circumstance, Mr.
Lewis has followed a different path.
To be sure, the company now known as TLC Beatrice International Inc. has sold nearly half of what Mr.
Lewis acquired in the 1987 transaction.
And Mr.
Lewis tried to sell 30 percent of what was left in an initial public offering in late 1989, an effort to raise cash for other acquisitions that failed when market jitters forced him to withdraw the offer.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Iranian overtures to investors described the Bahai religion incorrectly.
While it sprang from the Shiite branch of Islam, its members do not consider themselves an Islamic sect.


Review/Dance; 'Giselle' as Interpreted by Italy's Carla Fracci . . . And by France's Sylvie Guillem
Every so often in the ballet world, a dancer comes along who is so idiosyncratic that she cannot be held up as a model to others and yet who is also, by any measure, nothing short of exceptional.
Maya Plisetskaya was such a ballerina and Sylvie Guillem, it is now clear, is very much in the same category.
Now midway through her season as a guest artist with American Ballet Theater, the 26-year-old French star was seen on Friday night for the first time in New York as "Giselle." The overflow at the Metropolitan Opera House testified to the extreme interest in anything Miss Guillem dances, and she gave, in fact, a performance of marvelous extremes.


Sports of The Times; Hansel Overcomes 'X' Factor
HANSEL struck a blow for natural living yesterday, proving once again that a horse can win the Belmont after getting off the drug called Lasix.
The winner of the Preakness was able to kick the habit, go straight, get the monkey off its back, get clean, go cold turkey, just say no and still capture the $1 million bonus of the Chrysler Triple Crown Challenge.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
White on White
Q.
I've heard about all-white flower gardens in England and would like to make one myself.
What plants do you suggest?
William Dougherty, Chicago, Ill.
A.
Although the most famous white garden in Britain is the one created by Vita Sackville-West around 1949 at Sissinghurst Castle, as early as 1918 the American gardener Louise Beebe Wilder wrote about her ideas for a white garden.


Wallace Stevens Had the Right Idea
Unambitious choreographers do not get their dances out onto the stage.
One must be ambitious -- and full of tenacious belief in oneself -- to create or perform something as elusive and revealing as a dance.
A body in motion cannot lie and yet that motion is gone when it is ended.
But ambition can be a killing thing.
Fine small pieces have sunk when reworked into epics.
And it is hard not to worry when choreographers talk of deliberately staking out new territory to conquer in their dances.
It is often out of nothing, to paraphrase Wallace Stevens, that one comes on major weather.
Twyla Tharp, for instance, takes on the world in her "In the Upper Room" and comes up with a stunning and important piece.
But she cultivates a smaller plot and comes up with something just as compelling in "Nine Sinatra Songs," presented, like "In the Upper Room," by American Ballet Theater during its current season at the Metropolitan Opera House.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Cleveland; A New Luster On Lake Erie
FINAL phases are under way at a $70 million, 75-acre residential community that has transformed the grounds of two turn-of-the-century summer homes along the shore of Lake Erie just east of Cleveland.
When completed by mid-1992, there will be 32 one-family homes and 110 town-house units in the Newport project, the first major addition of housing to Bratenahl, a suburb just east of the city.


Harvesting Leads to Heart of South America
Conversations with residents here often follow a familiar pattern: first, pride over living in a frontier city located at the geographic center of South America, and then, anxiety over the isolation.
Traditionally, the rest of Brazil has cared little that buses take 32 hours to travel from this state capital to Rio de Janeiro on the Atlantic Coast.


A Cavil or Two on Raising Oil Prices
To the Editor:
I offer your reader David Marder (Letters, May 26) several cavils on raising oil prices:


The Spread Of the Starlings
In a recent column, "In the Natural State," about starlings, Pete Dunne wrote that there are some species of starlings that are reputed to "outmimic" the mynas.
This might erroneously imply to some readers that mynahs (another accepted spelling) are not related to starlings and therefore to be contrasted with them.
Actually, mynahs (including the hill mynahs commonly for sale in pet shops) are close relatives and are members of the starling family, Sturnidae.


A Weekend of Welcome
SUNDAY 9 A.M.: Fleet Week memorial service.
Intrepid Museum. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.: Naval ships open to the public.
Ships are docked at the Passenger Ship Terminal at 55th Street and the Hudson River in Manhattan, the South Street Seaport, the Staten Island Homeport and at Piers 8 and 12 along the Brooklyn waterfront. 3 to 5 P.M.: Coast Guard air and sea demonstration in New York Harbor. 4 to 6 P.M.: Ecumenical service.
Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
MONDAY 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.: Naval ships open to the public. 11:30 A.M.: Operation Welcome Home Parade. 9:30 to 10 P.M.: Fireworks display.
In the East River south of the Brooklyn Bridge.


CORRECTION
A report in the Business Diary column last Sunday about R. H. Macy &amp; Company and its expansion strategy misstated the size of the company's sales and its target for sales growth.
Macy's sales in its most recent fiscal year were approximately $7 billion and the company's strategy is to increase those sales by $3.6 billion over the next five years.


Pope Scolds Solidarity Over Issue of Abortion
Pope John Paul II took his unflagging anti-abortion crusade directly to Poland's leaders today, saying the spirit of the Solidarity movement, which led the country to freedom, should inspire them to protect the unborn.
Church bells rang and crowds waving yellow and white papal flags lined the streets as the Polish-born Pope arrived in the capital on the next-to-last day of his nine-day tour.


Postings: 'Deep Discounts'; A Monmouth Incentive
The sour residential market has bought out some pretty sweet deals for buyers in recent months as developers struggle to move inventory through price cuts and auctions.
Now, in Monmouth County, N.J., a developer has hung out a "deep discounts" sign even before the start of construction.
He offers to cut $75,000 off the price of the first 40 homes sold in a new development of 206 residences off Route 34 and Baldwin Road in Wall Township.
Robert C. Baker, chairman of National Realty &amp; Development Corporation, the developer, said the introductory offer is possible because the project's architect, construction subcontrators and engineers agreed to join in postponing their profits in the early phase of development.


TENSION IS EASING IN ALGERIAN CITIES
Army tanks and patrols were less conspicuous in the streets of Algerian cities today, and public places and shops opened for business for the first time since the violent clashes on Wednesday that led to the imposition of martial rule.
The easing of tensions came after the announcement that Islamic fundamentalists would end their strikes and demonstrations and that the Government would hold elections for both a new parliament and a new president.


Leslie R. Straut Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Barnwell Straut of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Leslie Roe Straut to Grant Murray Ward, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Smedley Ward Jr. of Unionville, Pa.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Straut, 28 years old, is an editorial assistant at Doubleday Publishing in New York.
She graduated from William Smith College and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father is a managing director of Hillside Capital Inc., an industrial holding company in New York.


Horse Racing; Gallop Was Gallant; Finish Is Frustrating
Chris Antley was getting desperate and frustrated.
Half the Belmont Stakes had been run and Strike the Gold was racing far back.
For much of the early going the favorite was last, as much as 20 lengths behind.
"I said to him at the three-quarter pole, 'Come on, you're letting the whole world down,' " Antley recalled.


Supreme Court Ignores Its Abortion Precedent; Great Leap Backward
To the Editor:
The Supreme Court's decision to stifle free speech and censor medical information in federally funded family planning clinics is frighteningly reminiscent of past laws that prohibited the dissemination of birth control information.


Theresa Bingham and Christopher H. Gallic Wed
Theresa Bingham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Bingham of Woodbury, L.I., was married yesterday in Brookville, L.I., to Christopher Harold Gallic, a son of Susan Gallic of Garden City, L.I., and the late Dennis E. Gallic.
The Rev.
John Denniston performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Paul the Apostle Church.
Mrs.
Gallic, 26 years old, is an assistant vice president in municipal securities at Paine Webber in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father is a managing director of the municipal bond department at Oppenheimer &amp; Company in New York.


Woman Slain Walking Her Dogs Near Central Park
A woman walking her dogs near Central Park at dawn yesterday was stabbed to death by a deranged ex-convict wielding a carving knife, the police said.
The screams of the woman, Alexis Welsh, brought many of her neighbors on the Upper West Side running.
As one neighbor sat by the 30-year-old woman's side, two others stalked a suspect into Central Park, where they pointed out the tall, bedraggled man to officers in a patrol car.


Isobel D. Coles Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Coles of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Isobel Derouet Coles to Struan Howard Coleman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Coleman of Locust Valley, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Coles, 25 years old, graduated from Princeton University and received a master's degree in international relations from Oxford University, where she was a Marshall Scholar.
She is completing requirements for an Oxford doctorate as a research fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington.
Her father is a limited partner at Goldman, Sachs in New York.


Samuel L. Jackson: Out of Lee's 'Jungle,' Into the Limelight
During the filming of Spike Lee's new film, "Jungle Fever," caterers thought Samuel L. Jackson was a derelict.
They kept trying to shoo him away from the buffet table until they were assured by Mr.
Lee that he was a member of the cast.
"Commercial agents say I don't look like a responsible adult," said the 42-year-old Mr.
Jackson, whose red baseball cap, T-shirt, shorts and athletic shoes made him a standout the other day among the luncheon crowd on Park Avenue.
"I've been told I wasn't African-American enough or didn't look like a 1930's Negro. That's O.K. I can still walk into restaurants and not be bothered."


Contractors Sue U.S. Over Jet Cancellation
Following through on their threat to do so, the General Dynamics Corporation and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation filed a multibillion-dollar lawsuit against the Government on Friday because of its cancellation of the Navy's A-12 attack-jet program.
The suit, filed in United States Claims Court in Washington, is said to be the largest ever filed against the Government by a military contractor.
It seeks to eliminate a $1.35 billion claim held by the Government against the two companies over the program.
The plaintiffs also seek to recover money they invested in the program and other expenses, which in all could bring the lawsuit's total damage claim to $3 billion or more.


Ms. Winston to Marry C. L. O'Donnell
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence J. Winston of Glen Head, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deirdre Anne Winston, to Christopher Long O'Donnell, a son of Victoria L. Chilton of Oceanport, N.J., and Edward J. O'Donnell of Belmar, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Winston, 26 years old, is an analyst in mortgage-backed securities at Morgan Stanley in New York.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
Her father is the director of marketing at Oppenheimer Investment Advisers in Manhattan.


Company Picnics Leaner in a Recession
IN the face of corporate cost-cutting, what is happening to that rite of spring, the company outing?
Those who plan them and those who profit by them say Westchester companies are not entirely giving them up.
"We're still doing about 20 corporate picnics a week," said William Powell, owner of Powell Catering in Mamaroneck.
"And about 80 percent of our corporate business is repeat.


Supreme Court Ignores Its Abortion Precedent
To the Editor:
Re "5 Justices Uphold U.S. Rule Curbing Abortion Advice" (front page, May 24): I am stunned and dismayed at the illogical inability of the Supreme Court to follow its own precedent, that an abortion is between a doctor and patient during much of the patient's pregnancy.


Sanctions on Iraq Exact a High Price From Poor
After 10 months of economic blockade, Iraq has been transformed from a land where oil bought guns and food and status to an outcast country where no airlines fly, no grain is bought, no spare parts fill the storerooms.
With apparently limited seepage, the international sanctions imposed after its occupation of Kuwait have sealed Iraq from the outside world.


Sebastiao Salgado: The Eye of The Photojournalist
Putting out oil well fires is a dirty, miserable, dangerous, all-absorbing business.
In the Greater Burgan Oil Field in Kuwait, burning oil wells noisily spew noxious 40-foot-high geysers of oil and gas into the air.
Up close, the din and stench and heat is almost overwhelming.
Seven days a week, firefighters struggle with hand tools to remove twisted metal and expose an undamaged piece of pipe, to which they can attach a new wellhead.
At every step, they are careful not to reignite the fire-breathing dragon they extinguished a few hours before.


The Bass Lines Tell the Tale
To the Editor:
In his Pop View commemorating the late Leo Fender  [ "The Right Instrument, at the Right Time," April 7 ]  Jon Pareles evinces a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature (and significance) of the electric bass guitar.


T-Shirts Speak Volumes About The Music Business
Let the corporate analysts use all their scientific methodology to assess the health of the recording business; I've got a gauge that's a little less rigorous.
Sales statistics just released by the Recording Industry Association of America show that 1990 was a new peak year, with total unit sales of 865.7 million (up 7.3 percent from 1989) that were worth $7.54 billion (up 14.6 percent).
But my own barometer doesn't bode well.
That gauge is the number of promotional T-shirts that arrive with my mail.
My rough impression is that more of them showed up in the first six months of 1991 than in the previous two years combined.
I haven't received so much logo-ized cotton since another peak year in the recording business: 1978, the crest of discomania, which was followed by five years of precipitous decline and stagnation, the first downturn ever for the business.
It may seem like a leap -- well, O.K., it's a huge leap -- but all the T-shirts tell me that the bubble may be about to burst again.


Play It Again, Claude-Michel
To the Editor:
Stephen Holden has provided a finely detailed account of Claude-Michel Schonberg's melodic borrowings in the construction of his "Miss Saigon" score  [ "Playing Name That Tune With 'Miss Saigon,' " May 19 ] .


Preparing Salad Days for the Summer
IT may not be considered politically correct, but come summer, in most circles, men barbecue and women make salad.
It's an agreement with which I, for one, am perfectly happy.
Let the men toil over the coals and try to guess in which direction the wind will be headed.
Let them worry about charring the food, setting fire to the side of the house, or serving chicken that is black on the outside and raw in the middle.
I shall be relaxing with a cool drink because my part of the operation -- the salads -- is completed.


Ideas &amp; Trends; A Long, Slow March Out of Storybook Land
WHEN he became a literary agent in 1972, Morton Janklow was invited to lunch by Simon Michael Bessie, then a senior editor at Harper &amp; Row.
Mr.
Bessie's summation of the principles of publishing was straightforward: "Just remember, there are never too many books about Hitler, Lincoln, Napoleon and the Civil War." For a seat-of-the-pants business, such homespun wisdom seemed to be enough.
Green jackets, it was said, do not sell, nor do short stories or books on the American Revolution or the Arctic.
Dogs and doctors, however, were reported to be subjects of inexhaustible appeal.
In an industry in which it is sometimes said that market research consists of the first printing, anecdotal evidence and even superstition still flourish.
But publishing, now a $17 billion business, is growing up, and many of its myths are crumbling.
Stiffer competition, mergers, escalating advances and declining book sales are all making publishers look more closely at reality.


Pistons Not Alone
To the Sports Editor:
Ira Berkow is right ("The Pistons Were a Disgrace," The Times, May 29): Detroit's behavior was a "disgrace." Unfortunately, however, his analysis leads in the wrong direction.
The Pistons' playoff peccadilloes were not new.
Coach Daly's Bad Boys are not the only, nor even the main, culprits here.


Talking: Insurance; Keeping Coverage Up to Date
PEOPLE who have lived in the same one-family house for more than 10 years or who own an antique or unique dwelling may need a full-scale review of their insurance.
Agents and brokers routinely find that such owners tend to have inadequate coverage because of oversight, neglect or misinformation.
Many long-term owners rely on autopmatic inflation riders to keep coverage up-to-date in current dollars.
What is missing, said Robert E. Mackoul, president of Mackoul &amp; Associates of Lynbrook, L.I., are the many changes the owner may have made to the house or its contents.


BUSINESS DIARY/June 2-7
COMPANIES Where's That Time Warner Synergy?


Answering The Mail
Q.
A sidewalk along the side of our house is cracked in several places.
This walk is slanted, so that it tilts toward the foundation.
When it rains, water runs off toward the house and into cracks through the basement wall.
Since we never use this walk, we are thinking of removing it and filling the area with soil that slopes away from the foundation.
Should we bury drainage tiles in this area, and do you have any other suggestions?
A.
Burying drainage tiles would be a good idea, but that means you would have to dig down to the bottom of the foundation wall and bury the tiles near the footing for them to be fully effective.
Then you would have to cover the tiles with a one-foot layer of gravel before filling in with soil to grade level.
Also, you should fix the cracks in the basement wall.
Otherwise, the water seeping into the soil may still result in leaks.
Digging down to the footing on the outside will give you a chance to repair those cracks properly.


Sports People: PRO BASKETBALL; Hospital Releases Bird After Back Surgery
There's less of him than there was before, and based on preliminary evidence, LARRY BIRD is the better for it.
The 34-year-old Celtics star was released from a Boston hospital yesterday, just one day after surgeons removed a fragment from a bulging herniated disk to relieve pressure on a nerve in his back.
The doctors also did other work on his back to correct a congenital condition.
A team spokesman said Bird had walked out of the hospital without the aid of a wheelchair or stretcher. -- (AP)


Rapt by Roses, Maddened by Catalogues
SECOND NATURE
A Gardener's Education.
By Michael Pollan. 258 pp.
New York: Atlantic Monthly Press. $21.95.


Preparing Salad Days for the Summer
IT may not be considered politically correct, but come summer, in most circles, men barbecue and women make salad.
It's an agreement with which I, for one, am perfectly happy.
Let the men toil over the coals and try to guess in which direction the wind will be headed.
Let them worry about charring the food, setting fire to the side of the house, or serving chicken that is black on the outside and raw in the middle.
I shall be relaxing with a cool drink because my part of the operation -- the salads -- is completed.


Q and A
Rent Status Question: I am planning on bidding on a six-family apartment building in Brooklyn being auctioned by a bank.
I need to find the status of the individual units and what the current legal rents are.
Can I get this information from the city if the rents are regulated? . . .
Anthony Cafaro, Brooklyn


Boris Kroll, 77, Owner Of a Fabrics Company
Boris Kroll, a fabric designer who was the longtime president of Boris Kroll Fabrics in Paterson, N.J., died on Friday night at his home in East Hampton, L.I.
He was 77 years old and also had a house in Tucson, Ariz.
His daughter said he died of cancer of the kidneys and colon.


Headliners; The Bucks Stopped
When Marion C. Moran was sworn in as the first female Mayor of Bridgeport, Conn., she was a self-described housewife and real-estate broker who had won as a Republican in a Democratic stronghold.
Her fief, a once-bustling urban center of 142,000 and the largest city in Connecticut, had long ago fallen on hard times, and her austerity platform promised to reduce city services -- except for police and fire -- and raise taxes only in an emergency like bankruptcy.
Last week, after city officials failed to close a $12 million gap in the $304 million budget for fiscal 1991-1992, the Mayor filed for bankruptcy, saying she couldn't balance the budget without dismissing up to 100 officers from the 340-member police force.
Mrs.
Moran was seeking to circumvent the grip of the state's financial review board and place Bridgeport in the control of a Federal judge.
But the board promptly vowed to block the Mayor's plan and imposed a budget balanced by an 18 percent increase in property taxes.


A Search for Solutions At a Possible Postal Site
A VALUABLE 41.5-acre site at Westchester County's corporate center, where I-287 and I-684 meet at the Harrison/White Plains border, could become the location of the country's newest postal sorting center.
But it will require some "creative" solutions to several major problems.
At a recent public meeting on the possible site for a Postal Service regional center, the term "creative" became a popular way to describe the combination of new ideas, hard bargaining and compromises that participants said would be required to produce agreement.


'Skinky' Shots Give Irwin Buick Lead
As if answering some seasonal call of the never wild, defending champion Hale Irwin took the lead after three rounds of the Buick Classic today on a Westchester Country Club course that turned hard, crusty and treacherous.
The 46-year-old Irwin, who won last year's tournament the week after becoming the oldest winner of the United States Open, shot a four-under-par 67, which gave him a 54-hole total of 10-under 203, one shot better than Brad Bryant and two better than Fulton Allem and Billy Andrade.


Sharpton Gets Mixed Reception in Protest March at Atlantic Beach
The Rev.
Al Sharpton led a march through this beachfront community today to protest the severe beating last weekend of a black teen-ager.
He found some annoyance and some support, but was met mostly by indifference from a community that says it has few racial problems.
Chanting "No justice, no peace," Mr.
Sharpton and his entourage -- five school bus loads of people from Manhattan and Brooklyn -- marched from Inwood, which is mostly black, to Atlantic Beach, which is largely white.
The march ended on the boardwalk where 17-year-old Alfred Jermaine Ewell, an Inwood resident, was critically injured by what the police described as a group of whites with bats and sticks after a graduation party a week ago.


Data Bank/June 9, 1991
Construction Spending
April
March
Feb.
Monthly percent change
0.8
--2.1
0.4
Consumer Borrowing
Monthly percent change
2.8
0.5
0.3
Economic Activity
May
April
March
Purchasing Managers' Index
45.4
42.1
40.0
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
8,460(6.9)
8,274(6.6)
8,572(6.8)
Employment
In thousands
116,591
117,398
116,754
30-Year Treasury Bonds
June 7
May 31
May 24
Yield in percent
8.47
8.26
8.29
Electric Power
May 31
May 24
May 17
Millions of Killowatt hours, weekly total
60,365
55,811
56,624
Percent change
0.3
--0.7
0.6


Answering The Mail
Q.
A sidewalk along the side of our house is cracked in several places.
This walk is slanted, so that it tilts toward the foundation.
When it rains, water runs off toward the house and into cracks through the basement wall.
Since we never use this walk, we are thinking of removing it and filling the area with soil that slopes away from the foundation.
Should we bury drainage tiles in this area, and do you have any other suggestions?
A.
Burying drainage tiles would be a good idea, but that means you would have to dig down to the bottom of the foundation wall and bury the tiles near the footing for them to be fully effective.
Then you would have to cover the tiles with a one-foot layer of gravel before filling in with soil to grade level.
Also, you should fix the cracks in the basement wall.
Otherwise, the water seeping into the soil may still result in leaks.
Digging down to the footing on the outside will give you a chance to repair those cracks properly.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayport 178,000
2 William Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, enclosed porch, 2-car garage, water view; taxes $3,200.
Carle Place 160,000
330 Curtis Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; new kitchen, Florida room, 1-car attached garage; taxes $2,900.
Commack 172,000
20 Crocus Lane  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 32-year- old Cape Cod; den, front porch, finished basement, pool; taxes $3,800.
Hicksville 143,500
55 Chestnut Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 2-car detached garage; taxes $3,000.
St.
James 175,000
19 Acorn Street, 4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, basement, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $5,500.
Williston Park 150,000
116 Lipton Lane  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, attic, 2-car garage; taxes $3,400.
OTHER AREAS Scarsdale, N.Y. 510,000
61 Franklin Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, family room; taxes $12,498.
Westport, Conn. 442,000
3 Bittersweet
5-bedroom, 4-bath, 28-year-old colonial; 2 family rooms, swimming pool, 1 acre; taxes $4,602.
Woodcliff Lake, N.J. 382,000
70 Indian Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 25-year-old split level; burglar and fire alarms, h/w floors, fireplace; taxes $6,118.


Melissa L. Cohn Weds Seth Paprin
Melissa Lynn Cohn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert L. Cohn of Llewellyn Park, N.J., was married last evening at the Water Club in New York to Seth Paprin, a son of Maurice S. Paprin of New York and the late Rita Paprin.
Rabbi Balfour Bruckner officiated.
The bride is 30 years old and a Smith College graduate.
She is a founder and the chairwoman of the Manhattan Mortgage Company, a residential mortgage brokerage in New York.
Her father is the senior partner in the law firm of Cohn Lifland Pearlman Herrmann &amp; Knopf in Saddle Brook, N.J.
Her mother, Sylvia Cohn, is a special counsel to the firm.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


Under Harassment, Many Palestinians in Kuwait See No Choice but to Leave
Facing ruthless police harassment, enforced unemployment and the withdrawal of social services, many of the Palestinians who stayed here after the Iraqi invasion say they now have no choice but to leave Kuwait.
Although the Government has not gone so far as to openly declare that it wants most of the Palestinians to go, at almost every opportunity this country squeezes them harder.
In conversations with Government officials, foreign diplomats, Kuwaiti citizens and the Palestinians themselves, nobody disputes that the goal is to drive them out.


Review/Dance; 'Giselle' as Interpreted By Italy's Carla Fracci . . .
Carla Fracci, as Erik Bruhn once said, gave the world a new idea of the ballerina in 19th-century Romantic ballets.
He meant that Miss Fracci's theatrical sense and quality of dancing created a magic that was all her own even if it did not fit standards of correctness passed down by others.
Bruhn, who died in 1986, and Miss Fracci formed the legendary partnership that American Ballet Theater first saw in 1967.
"Giselle" was their prime vehicle, and on Thursday night Miss Fracci returned to the title role with Ballet Theater after more than 10 years.
She received a delirious, flower-strewn ovation from a star-hungry audience.


Perspectives: Property Abandonment; The Cleanup Bills Pile Up in Harlem
A rude awakening awaits the owner of the six-story tenement at 2894 Eighth Avenue, between west 153d and 154th Streets in Harlem.
Unless he responds to a notice from the Bureau of Pest Control of the Department of Health to clean up the ankle-deep garbage and trash in the building's back alley, the bureau will send its own crew to do it.
In that case, look out for the cost.


On Language; Mailbag
"DEAR POSTAL CUSTOMER:" begins this communication from the United States Postal Service, formerly the U.S.
Mail, forwarded to me by Phyllis Agard of Amherst, MA.
"Recently you received a brochure from the U.S. Postal Service concerning the coming of automated sortation and the need for proper address hygiene."
We need not look askance, as Ms. Agard does, at
automated sortation
. I would call it
automatic
, or
mechanical
, because it does not employ the principle of feedback (self-control by machine, as in a thermostat) that is the essence of
automation
, and
sorting
is preferred on historical principles.
But these are matters of judgment and taste, and an outfit that eschews the plain word
mail
for the pompous phrase
postal service
is at least consistent in choosing the costly-sounding
automated sortation
.


Campus Life: Lehigh; Dating for Credit: Unusual Approach In Marketing Class
Welcome to Dating 101, Lehigh University style, where asking for a date, and being rejected, is a lesson that is rewarded with extra credit in class -- not enough credit to change a grade, but enough to make a point.
"There is such a glamorization of success that we lose sight that most of life is not a continuation of one success after another," said Bruce Smackey, a marketing professor who four years ago started the date-for-credit practice in his upper-level marketing class.


Why Garbage Costs More in Hempstead
I read with interest the article regarding the Town of North Hempstead  [ "Town Devises a New Plan for Disposal of Garbage," May 12 ] .
I am writing quite concerned at the inequities in the pricing of the garbage.
As a taxpayer and bondholder guarantor of our incinerator plant in the Town of Hempstead, it's unconscionable to me why we should pay more for disposal of our garbage than nonresident governmental agencies pay.
This inequity in pricing of the disposal of garbage points to the need of a higher bipartisan authority to run our incinerators.
Why should the Town of North Hempstead garbage, other village garbage or New York City garbage, pay less to dump in the Town of Hempstead incinerator than political subdivisions within the Town of Hempstead?
The taxpayers have a right to revolt over this inequity.


Good Seafood and Oh, What a View!
NOTHING says Long Island better than a restaurant with panoramic water views.
At the Riverview in Oakdale, there is the added bonus of a link to Long Island's glory days.
The restaurant has at its core the former teahouse built by William Vanderbilt for his daughter Consuelo.
Here, where the Connetquot River empties into Great South Bay, turn-of-the-century visitors docked their boats before being transported by carriage to the main house, now Dowling College, a few blocks away.


Tennis; Seles Wins Again In Paris
It was a final-round match between two teen-age French Open champions, the defending champion Monica Seles and the 1989 winner, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario.
Each is prone to figuring out footwork from the baseline and communicating effort and enthusiasm with a barrage of gutturals, grunts and groans.


Joan L. McIlroy Weds W. A. Briggs Jr.
Joan Louise McIlroy, a bank vice president in Boston, and William Adolphus Briggs Jr., an architect in Boston and Newport, R.I., were married yesterday at St.
Columba's Chapel in Middletown, R.I.
The Rev.
John S. Rogers performed the Episcopal ceremony.
Mrs.
Briggs works in marketing and client services at State Street Bank and Trust Asset Management.
She received a bachelor's degree and a joint master's degree in German and education from Indiana University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard H. McIlroy of Pueblo, Colo.
Her father is a retired surgeon.


Putting Up With the Joneses
IT seems like a good idea at the time.
You reason that since the constant togetherness of a family vacation can grow stifling, if you share your vacation with another family there will be more people for both kids and adults to interact with, making for a more enjoyable time.
You figure that if you share the cost of a vacation house or condominium, and the cooking as well, the trip will be less expensive for everyone.
In short, the vacation will be a better one all around.
But will it seem like such a good idea after all is said and spent?
Chances are that it will only if, from the outset, you're well versed in the thorny art of vacation sharing.
Yes, this is a cautionary article.
But it won't be a litany of weird vacation-mates we have known and lived through.
That's because if such an article were to be written, several parallel articles could, in all fairness, by written about
us.
After all, my family is the one in which the kids never use silverware -- except for finger food, such as bananas and pizza.
We're the ones who leave numerous kids' beverage glasses in the condo refrigerator with two ounces of juice in each, "to finish later." So we lay no claim to perfection.


Tech Notes; Just What the Eye Picks Up
Perception Research Services, a market research company in Englewood, N.J., has come up with an electronic eye-tracking system that tries to measure exactly which parts of an advertisement or a product's package is attracting the attention of consumers.
To measure packaging's effectiveness, for instance, a volunteer of the sort that the product should appeal to -- a woman in her 30's, say -- sits in front of a television screen and looks at shelves stocked with products.


Together


As Operation Get Ready Comes to an End, Operation Welcome Home Begins
Big yellow bows were painted on lower Broadway overnight.
Tons of ticker tape had arrived in the skyscrapers.
Work crews were hammering up grandstands in City Hall Park.
Extra subway trains were set to ferry the crowds.
Bands, floats and troops were on the way, a dozen warships were in the harbor and sailors in dress whites were on the town.
New York City is on the verge of a blowout celebration.


Golf; Alcott Has 1-Stroke Lead in Atlantic City
A victory away from induction into the Hall of Fame of the Ladies Professional Golf Association, Amy Alcott is the player many people are rooting for at the Atlantic City Classic.
Inspired by enthusiastic support from the galleries, Alcott shot a three-under-par 68 today for a one-stroke lead going into Sunday's finale of the $300,000 tournament at Greate Bay Country Club here.


COMMON DECENCY
Susan Jacoby addresses the hottest topic on college campuses today -- date rape.
What we are trying to do on our campus at Queensborough Community College is to educate students and faculty to be aware of their rights and responsibilities.
Most of this consists in using what our mothers would call common sense.


Quotation of the Day
"There can be no change when the man in the street doesn't get bread to eat. There can be no transition when the man in the street doesn't have a place to sleep." -- Siphiwo Vimbi on the poverty in Soweto-by-the-Sea, South Africa.  [ 9:1. ]


Businesses Recoil at Energy Tax Increases in Albany Budget
State legislators referred to last year's $1.8 billion tax package as "The Big Ugly." But after passing new energy taxes this week that threaten to close factories and weaken businesses, they now may be facing something even uglier.
Much of the 65-day delay in passing this year's state budget was spent in a search for a tax compromise that would satisfy the state's need for revenues without unsettling its recession-racked economy.
Unable to agree on raising the personal income tax or the gasoline tax, the Legislature by default settled on raising the tax paid by producers and importers of petroleum, and it created a similar tax on natural gas.
The taxes would raise $600 million of the $1.2 billion in new taxes and fees included in the budget.


Wendy Kuniholm Wed in Delaware
Wendy Elisabeth Kuniholm, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Kuniholm of Chadds Ford, Pa., was married yesterday to John Barker Sullivan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Sullivan of South Freeport, Me.
The Rev.
William B. Lane officiated at Christ Episcopal Church Christiana Hundred in Greenville, Del.
Mrs.
Sullivan, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from Amherst College, as did her husband.
She was until recently the associate admissions director at the Fessenden School in West Newton, Mass., and is to become associate dean of admissions at the Convent of the Sacred Heart School in Manhattan.
Her father is the assistant general counsel at Hercules Inc., the Wilmington chemical company.


New Yorkers, etc.
Most of the time there is a modicum of guilt, but it doesn't matter because it's so quickly banished.
And maybe there are individuals who are so thoroughly good that such thoughts would never enter their minds.
But for most people, there is often a tiny bit of glee at the small misfortunes of others.


Greenburgh Democrat Rallies the Republicans
ANTHONY F. VETERAN, the most experienced Democrat in Westchester politics and the dominant power in Greenburgh for 18 years, has decided to run for Town Supervisor for what he says will be the last time -- on the Republican ticket.
Last Monday, Mr.
Veteran accepted the nomination of a badly divided Republican committee to run for an unprecedented 10th term as Supervisor.
Calling on party loyalists to "bury past differences," the crusty 74-year-old politician vowed to lead a Republican Party thirsty for power back into Town Hall.


Miss Bornhuetter Is Wed in Darien
Linda Jean Bornhuetter, the daughter of Ronald L. Bornhuetter of Greenwich, Conn., and Cynthia D. Bornhuetter of Darien, Conn., was married in Darien yesterday to Paul Bronson Gridley, the son of Jean K. Gridley of New York and the late Donald B. Gridley.
The Revs.
Edward Danks and Kenyon J. Wildrick performed the ceremony at the Noroton Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Gridley, 30 years old, is a vice president in investment banking at Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College, where she also received an M.B.A. degree.
Her father is the chief executive of the Nacre Corporation, a reinsurance company in Greenwich.


Encounter With a Beneficial Creature
THERE'S a toad in my garden.
And it is welcome.
But we scared each other, because neither one knew the other was there.
While rummaging around the border where there were some old leaves from last autumn, I heard a sudden rustling noise.
Something hopped forward.
It was the toad's quick escape to avoid being trampled by an old tennis shoe with a foot inside.


Mutual Funds; Catching Up With Peter Lynch
About this time last year, Peter Lynch, the legendary stock picker who led Fidelity's Magellan Fund, retired at the age of 46 as head of the nation's largest and most successful stock fund.
These days, Mr.
Lynch still keeps an office at Fidelity, and he works there anywhere from two to five days a week.
He leaves home at 8 A.M. instead of 6:45, after making breakfast and lunch for his daughters.
He leaves the office at 5 P.M., not 7, and does not work weekends.
But he still eats lunch at his desk, he says, and "I go like crazy" during the work day.


Kim Greenberg to Wed C. F. Roellke
Mr. and Mrs.
Lester Greenberg of New York have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Kim Greenberg and Christopher Forbes Roellke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Roellke of Dennis, Mass.
Ms.
Greenberg, 25 years old, and her fiance, 26, graduated from Wesleyan University and are graduate students at Cornell University, she in veterinary medicine, he in education.


New York City Pursues Early-Retirement Plan for Principals
New York City school officials are holding delicate negotiations on a plan to entice as many as one in five principals to retire within a year.
The plan is intended to save on salaries and open slots for more black and Hispanic administrators.
Even proponents of the early-retirement plan, which would provide generous pension incentives, worry that it could churn up more turmoil in a system already bracing for hundreds of teacher layoffs and steep cuts in maintenance and supplies.


Wendy Sibert Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Pearson Sibert of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Gwendolyn Sibert to David Halfyard Secor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Alton Secor of Wayland, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Sibert, 26 years old, is known as Wendy.
She is a senior assistant director of admissions at Wellesley College.
A graduate of Miss Porter's School and Lake Forest College, she received a master's degree in student personnel administration from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of the Bank of New York.


INSIDE
A Killing at Dawn
A woman walking her dogs near Central Park was stabbed to death by a deranged ex-convict, the police said.
He was later arrested.
Page 32.
Hansel Wins the Belmont


The World; Iran Gingerly Tries a Bit of Pragmatism
AFTER 12 years of turmoil and war, Iran appears relaxed.
Mayors are busy cleaning up their cities.
Merchants are doing a sometimes thriving business, and the Teheran airport has a new green "nothing to declare" door, through which people can enter the country less intimidated than they once were made to feel.
In such respects, the heirs to the militant Islamic revolutionary regime of the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini appear confident enough to ease some of the rigor of their revolution.
Yet for Iranians, life remains a struggle.
Personal freedoms are severely curtailed.
Through systematic segregation at work and in public places, women remain the second-class citizens that they became in Ayatollah Khomeini's years.
And with an average income of $100 a month, the Iranian middle class is straining in the face of 40 percent inflation rates.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Mediating the Federal War On Wildlife
FEDERAL hunters gunning from airplanes late last month swooped down on the plains of central Wyoming, leaving a trail of dead coyotes.
Government trappers in neighboring Montana suffocated coyote pups by igniting gas cartridges at the mouths of their dens.
In New Mexico, mountain lions were tracked and dropped by Federal marksmen.
Even as wildlife biologists publish studies that say the slaughter is doing more harm than good, and animal welfare groups protest that it is wasteful and cruel, the Agriculture Department's army of 400 hunters is killing ever greater numbers of livestock predators.
In 1989, the latest year for which figures are complete, Government hunters killed 86,502 coyotes, 10,000 more than in 1988.
The take included 1,220 bobcats, 7,158 foxes, 237 mountain lions, 236 black bears and 80 gray timber wolves.


A Noteworthy Collection
This selection of paperbacks is from the New &amp; Noteworthy column since the 1990 Christmas issue.
AFTERLIFE, by Paul Monette. (Avon, $8.95.) In this novel, three soon-to-be AIDS widowers meet in the hospital where their lovers are dying.


Victoria Wirth, Gemologist, Wed
Victoria Wirth, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hans J. Wirth of Allentown, Pa., was married yesterday at the Stanwich Congregational Church in Greenwich, Conn., to Thomas Hun Reynolds, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marcus T. Reynolds of Appleton, Wis.
The Rev.
Neeley Towe performed the ceremony.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
She is a diamond analyst at Tiffany's in New York and expects to receive her graduate gemology degree from the Gemological Institute of America this summer.
Her father is a consultant for Groz Beckert, a textile company in Charlotte, N.C.


More Than a Glorified Lawn
DRIVING THE GREEN
The Making of a Golf Course.
By John Strawn.
Illustrated. 344 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $25.


In Gentler Times, 'The Subject Was Roses'
You can't blame the playwright Frank Gilroy for the fact that the American family has come apart at the seams since he wrote "The Subject Was Roses." It's hardly his fault that children stand up to their parents, parents abuse their children, and the life span of the average marriage has dwindled to about six months.
But neither can you deny that his drama, the winner of the 1965 Pulitzer Prize, now seems to dwell on the far side of a great divide.
It was always a modest play, this account of three days in the life of the Cleary family of the Bronx.
The son has just returned from World War II, no longer the sickly mama's boy he was when he left.
Once the initial euphoria of homecoming has worn off, he and his parents must come to new terms with one another.
That means dismantling a few fictions, settling a few lingering accounts and uttering a few truths, including "I love you," that have gone too long unspoken.
The work was as homely as the kitchen table, around which much of the action takes place, but, perhaps because Mr.
Gilroy was drawing on his own life, it had the ring of authenticity for the mid-1960's.
If no great dramatic heights were scaled, understandings were nonetheless struck and decency prevailed in the end.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
HOPPER RECALLED
Arthayer Sanborn will talk about his long friendship with Edward Hopper, Hopper's wife, Jo, and his sister Marion today at Hopper House in Nyack.
The art center at 82 North Broadway was converted from the birthplace and boyhood home of the noted American artist 20 years ago this month by the Edward Hopper Landmark Foundation.
Mr.
Sanborn is the former rector of the First Baptist Church on North Broadway, which the Hopper family attended.
He will take with him some of "Eddie's" early drawings as a student at Nyack High School, and various Hopper memorabilia that he has collected over the years.
"He was a giant of a man, physically," Mr.
Sanborn said, "but a very quiet giant. His wife and sister did most of the talking for him." The simplicity and sensitivity that mark Hopper's work, Mr.
Sanborn said, were an integral part of his personality.
He died in 1967 at the age of 85.
An exhibition of reproductions, to remain through the summer, will trace the development of Hopper as an artist.
"We can't afford to buy his paintings or even his works on paper," said Lawrence Heyl Jr., director of the center.
"A small black and white steel engraving that I saw in Manhattan recently was $50,000."
According to Mr.
Heyl, Hopper was not a very prolific artist, having painted a few hundred oils and watercolors and some graphics that are distributed throughout 30 museums in the United States and numerous private collections.
"They are rarely on the market," Mr.
Heyl said.
For more information, call 358-4381.
CARTOON EXHIBITION
The Museum of Cartoon Art's traveling exhibition at the White Plains Library, opening Saturday and running through Sept. 14, is a reminder that the museum will be moving from its Rye Brook quarters to Florida, probably by the end of the year, said Barbara Hammond, the director.
"Masters of Cartoon Art," as the exhibition is called, features original drawings and colored photoengravings dating from 19th-century satirical drawings by Honore Daumier to the contemporary cartoons of Garry Trudeau.
Among the dozens of legendary cartoonists represented in the show are Thomas Nast, the father of political cartooning; Richard Outcault, creator of "Hogan's Alley" and "Buster Brown"; Rudolph Dirks and his "Katzenjammer Kids," Walt Kelly's "Pogo," Rube Goldberg's "Boob McNutt," Bud Fisher's "Mutt and Jeff," Hal Foster's "Prince Valiant," works by Pat Oliphant and Al Hirschfeld, and "Beetle Bailey" by Mort Walker, who founded the museum in Greenwich in 1974.
The 9,000-square-foot museum, a former private mansion on Comly Avenue, is up for sale at $1.6 million, "but we would probably take less," Ms.
Hammond said.
A city-owned site in Boca Raton, Fla., has been selected as a new location, available on a long-term lease.
The museum must raise the money to build a 40,000-square-foot site that will house a theater for screening cartoons and holding special events, as well as substantial exhibition space for all the material it now keeps in storage.
Gallery hours in White Plains are Mondays through Thursdays, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; and Fridays, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.
The library is downtown at 100 Martine Avenue.
TRIBUTE TO DANES
In October 1943 more than 7,000 Danish Jews and some non-Jewish spouses were transported in hundreds of small boats to safety in Sweden, avoiding a scheduled Nazi roundup of the total population of 8,000 Jews for shipment to concentration camps.
In appreciation of the courage shown by the Danes who organized and carried out the exodus in defiance of Nazi authorities, an Act of Courage Award will be presented by the Rockland Center for Holocaust Studies to a member of the Danish Consulate in New York City this week.
The ceremony will take place at 8 P.M.
Tuesday in the center headquarters at 17 South Madison Avenue, Spring Valley, N.Y.
Dr.
Leon Falik, president of Tribute to the Danes and Other Rescuers, an American-Israeli organization based in Manhattan, will be the speaker.
The public is welcome to attend.
Call 356-2700 for more information.
REAL EARTH TONES
Sticks, stones, earth, trees, bark, mud, water, shells, natural light and an occasional bit of paint or other art material are the components of works in the exhibition opening today at the Katonah Museum on Route 22 at Jay Street.
"Sticks and Stones: 10 Artists Work with Nature" is an indoor-outdoor exhibition by artists who are accustomed to seeking their materials in the landscape, rather than using manmade materials to reproduce a landscape.
They are not part of a school, nor do they necessarily know each other.
Patrick Dougherty, Kim Jones, Ilan Averbuch, Mel Kenrick, Robert Lobe, Giuseppe Penone, Alan Sonfist, Michaelle Stuart, James Surls and James Turrell are the 10 artists.
The more malleable materials are shaped into two- and three-dimensional forms that are free-standing, or hang off the exterior walls of the museum or are mounted in the galleries.
Rigid materials are arranged into forms or combined with other things to alter their characteristics.
Because the process of installation was as wild as the works themselves, a video was made of it, featuring interviews with the artists.
It is to be shown daily on a multi-monitor setup in the lobby.
The show will run through Sept 1.
Museum hours are Tuesdays, Thursdays, Fridays and Sundays from noon to 5 P.M., Wednesdays from noon to 8 P.M., and Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Call 232-9555 for more information.
CALL FOR VOLUNTEERS
Volunteers from the age of 13 to adults of any age are needed at the Greenburgh Nature Center to devote one morning or afternoon a week to helping out in one of three areas.
More than 140 animals are housed at the center, from mice to pythons.
Many are there temporarily, having been rescued from the wild.
Volunteers are needed to assist with their care, in showing them to the public, and helping to improve the wildlife exhibits.
In the 500-square-foot greenhouse completed three years ago, there are tropical, subtropical and desert plants, exhibitions that are mounted and changed seasonally, and displays relating to propogation, all needing attention.
Outdoors the rock and herb gardens, a wildflower garden, lawn shrubs and flower beds require more tending than the staff can provide.
Finally, those with administrative, typing or computer skills would be of help in the office, or working on publicity, or staffing the gift shop.
Staff professionals supply all the initial instruction and ongoing guidance.
The center, on Dromore Road off Central Avenue, is open daily except Friday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
The grounds are open from dawn to dusk.
Call 723-3470 for more information or to sign on as a volunteer.


U.S. Is Counterweight To Germany and Japan
To the Editor:
William G. Hyland, editor of Foreign Affairs magazine, is wrong in calling on the United States to "Downgrade Foreign Policy" (Op-Ed, May 20), although he is certainly right in urging a more systematic and forceful approach to our domestic problems.


Headliners; Literary Criticism
Ted Turner was asking for quite a pile to sort through when he announced a year and a half ago that he would pay $500,000 to the writer who came up with the best novel about life in the future.
The catch was that the story had to have a happy ending.
Last week, a 55-year-old Texan, Daniel Quinn won the Turner Tomorrow Award after his novel, "Ishmael," which is based on philosophical discussions between a man and a great ape, was picked from more than 2,500 submissions from 58 countries.
"To find someone who really likes it is beyond my wildest hopes and dreams," Mr.
Quinn said.
But some judges thought the prize was excessive.
"It was the best of the 12 manuscripts we were asked to judge," the author William Styron said, "but we didn't feel it was worth anything remotely like $500,000." But another judge, Ray Bradbury, disagreed.
"This is a fine piece of work," he said.
"If Kitty Kelley can make $5 million to $6 million, why not half-a-million for a real book?"


Miss Cullman Has a Wedding
Alexandra Miriam Cullman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh Cullman of New York and Pine Knoll Shores, N.C., was married in Beaufort, N.C., yesterday to Edward William David Haslingden, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Bruce Haslingden of Cooma, New South Wales, Australia.
The Rev.
Matthew Stockard performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Church.
Mrs.
Haslingden, 31 years old, was until recently the director of account services at Goldsmith-Jeffrey Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Stanford University.
Her father is a retired vice chairman of Philip Morris Companies in New York.


Shadow of a Trout
THE WAY OF THE TROUT
An Essay on Anglers, Wild Fish, and Running Water.
By M. R. Montgomery.
Illustrated. 270 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


World Markets; New Highs for South African Stocks
Inflation in South Africa is around 14 percent.
Last year the economy declined about 1 percent, and this year the forecast is for little or no growth.
Gold prices are weak, which is no help for the world's leading gold producer.
And the violence between the followers of the African National Congress and the Zulu-dominated Inkatha Freedom Party has complicated the negotiations over movement toward a new Government.
But despite these factors, the South African stock market, the 10th largest in the world, has managed to climb this year.
In fact, the market's industrial index, which includes manufacturers, retailers and consumer goods companies, has consistently hit record highs in the last several months.
On Friday, it closed at 3,682, another new high, which is up 22 percent for the year.
The overall local index, which includes gold stocks, is up 18 percent since the end of 1990.


In Soweto-by-the-Sea, Misery Lives On as Apartheid Fades
For the 80,000 or more slum dwellers of this teeming shantytown near the Indian Ocean, the dismantling of apartheid undertaken by President F. W. de Klerk promises only continuing unemployment, homelessness, malnutrition and despair.
These walking casualties of four decades of apartheid are among the seven million of South Africa's 28 million blacks who scrape out an existence in shacks and squatter camps across the country.
Their number easily exceeds the white population of five million.


Baseball; Galarraga Sidelined
Montreal Expos first baseman Andres Galarraga will be sidelined for four to six weeks after undergoing arthroscopic surgery on his left knee today.
Galarraga, who was placed on the 15-day disabled list on May 28, returned to Montreal from Atlanta earlier today after experiencing minor swelling of his knee following a workout Friday.
Galarraga, who is hitting .255 with three home runs and 11 runs batted in, was examined by the Expos' physician, Dr.
Larry Couglin, who then performed the surgery.


Audubon Society Pursues An Identity Beyond Birds
The National Audubon Society is worried about its old-fogy image.
So it asked some California conultants to find out what came to mind when people heard the word Audubon.
The bad news: "Birds."
And there was worse to come.
The consultants reported that the society, 105 years old, was regarded as "old-fashioned and exclusive," not "compelling." Many, the consultants said, thought it had a narrow "bird oriented" focus.


Results Plus
ROWING Penn Captures Title  Penn's varsity eight-oar shell won the United States Rowing Association's national collegiate men's championship yesterday at Lake Harsha 30 miles east of Cincinnati.
Before the victory by Penn men's crew, Boston University won the Ferguson Cup, given to the women's national eight-oar champion.


Miss Cleary Wed To P. J. Colligan
Maureen Mary Cleary and Paul Joseph Colligan were married yesterday at Immaculate Heart of Mary Roman Catholic Church in Scarsdale, N.Y., by the Rev.
Robert J. Aufieri.
The bride, 29 years old, is a daughter of Mrs.
Thomas J. Cleary of Bronxville, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Cleary.
The bridegroom, 28, is a son of Mrs.
George A. Colligan of Hanover, N.H., and the late Mr.
Colligan.


Headliners; Night Owls
In announcing last week that Jay Leno would succeed Johnny Carson next year as the host of "The Tonight Show," NBC made a point of praising its other late-night star, David Letterman, as "one of America's most creative personalities." But perhaps he was considered a little too creative to move from his insomniac's perch on "Late Night" to Mr.
Carson's earlier, more civilized hour.
"Dave and I are still good friends," said Mr.
Leno, whose career was launched in the early 1980's with appearances on "Late Night." Although there were reports that Mr.
Letterman wasn't amused at being passed over, his official statement said he "couldn't be happier." "I know he'll do a great job," he said.
"But who's going to take care of Doc?" (Like Ed McMahon, Doc Severinsen will leave the show with Mr. Carson.) On his show Thursday night, Mr.
Letterman joked that he would inherit some of Mr.
Carson's routines.
"We get 'Stump the Band.' " he said.
"And I'm negotiating now for 'Aunt Blabby.' "


Books for Vacation Reading
Autobiography and Biography
BLACK ICE.
By Lorene Cary. (Knopf, $20.) Ms.
Cary recounts her two years as a black student at a New England boarding school, analyzing both her new environment and her developing life in it.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Texas City, Tex.; 7-Year Hiatus On Malls Ends
THE Mall of the Mainlands, the first shopping mall built in the Houston area in seven years, has leased 60 percent of its 768,000 square feet and lured stores away from Galveston and Texas City.
The mall, which opened in March in this small town 35 miles southeast of Houston, is a joint venture of the Edward J. DeBartolo Corporation of Youngstown, Ohio, and the MGHerring Group of Dallas.


Meddling by Any Other Name
To the Editor:
The article by Ben C. Ball Jr., "Unlock American Energy Policy" (Forum, May 12), showed a misunderstanding of Government interference and control that one would never expect from a retired vice president of Gulf Oil.
He was right all the way to the penultimate paragraph, and then completely lost his logical reasoning.


Delinquencies in Co-ops and Condos Are on the Rise
MANY co-ops and condominiums in the New York region are feeling the pinch of growing delinquencies in monthly payments from their residents, real estate experts say, a result of loss of income in the recession plus sharp rises in the cost of keeping an apartment.
"It's occurring everywhere,"said Mary Ann Rothman, executive director of the New York Council of Cooperatives, which represents 130,000 dwellings in the city and suburbs.
"Someone who bought at the tippy-top of the market in the 1980's may not still have their same wonderful job, or may not get the big raise and bonus they anticipated."


Travel Advisory; Mississippi Steamboat Race
The Delta Queen and the Mississippi Queen, the only paddle-wheel steamboats in the United States offering overnight trips, will be matched in the Great Steamboat Race of '91 from New Orleans on June 23.
They finish their race -- which re-creates the 1870 competition between the Natchez and the Robert E. Lee -- at the Great Arch in St.
Louis on July 4.
Passengers aboard the vessels will compete in kite-flying, costume and other contests on board and ashore that will play a part in determining the winner, says the New Orleans-based Delta Queen Steamboat Company, which operates both.
Stops include Natchez, Vicksburg and Greenville, Miss., and Memphis.
The cruising speed of the two Queens is about 5 miles an hour.


Goodbye to All That


Correction
A report in the Postings column on May 5 about the renovation of 223 West 80th Street for Phoenix House described the building's original architect incompletely.
It was the firm of Kaminsky &amp; Schiffer.
An architect with the firm pointed out the omission in a letter dated May 6, which was delayed in reaching The Times.


Dr. Varlotta Wed To T. A. Bergkvist
Dr.
Laurie Varlotta, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard A. Varlotta of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Thomas Allen Bergkvist, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Bergkvist of Orleans, Mass.
The Rev.
Gerard J. DiSenso officiated at St.
Aloysius Roman Catholic Church in Great Neck.
The bride, 30 years old, is a fellow in pediatric pulmonology at Children's Hospital in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Emory University and received her M.D. from the State University of New York Health Science Center in Brooklyn.
Her father is a civil engineer.
Her mother, Isabel Varlotta, is the chairwoman of the Village of Great Neck Housing Authority.


Topics of The Times; Leaner Truth at F.D.A.
David Kessler, the new Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, is committed to revamping his agency.
Not only has he been instrumental in designing an upcoming reorganization, but he has shown commendable zeal in challenging misleading food labels.
Soon after he took office in April, the F.D.A. seized processed orange juice that was reconstituted but labeled "fresh." The agency also banned the "no cholesterol" phrase from certain fat-laden oils, signaling an end to the days of winking at misleading food claims.
In another welcome initiative, Dr.
Kessler now asks companies to stop using misleading fat-free percentage claims.
These claims, expressing fat content as a percentage of weight, are a gimmick used to make products appear to have little fat.
But the implication that a product is low in fat can be highly deceptive.
For example, a frozen lasagna dinner advertised as 95 percent fat-free is hardly a health food when it contains 13 grams of fat per serving -- more than six times the F.D.A. definition of low fat.


Mutual Funds; Once a Winner, Always a Winner?
Do winners repeat?
In a classic 1968 study, Michael Jensen, a Harvard professor, concluded that the past performance of mutual funds did not predict future performance.
In fact, regulators require funds that advertise performance to include disclaimers stating this in their advertisements.
Nevertheless, most investors rely heavily on track records to select funds.
A recent study by Roger Ibbotson, a professor at Yale University, and William Goetzmann, at Columbia, found support for investors' behavior.
Looking at 728 funds for a dozen years ending in 1987, they found "strong evidence" that "both winners and losers are likely to repeat" their performances in subsequent years.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Times Magazine on May 26 with a series of photographs by David Graham from the book "Only in America" included an incorrect location supplied by the photographer for an Ohio grain silo behind a row of miniature barns.
It was in Maumee, not Findlay.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Apr. 91
Mar. 91
Apr. 90
New York
2,827
1,676
2,692
New Jersey
1,447
929
1,872
Connecticut
702
410
632
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.69
9.73
10.48
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.32
7.32
8.63
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.52
9.56
10.29
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.24
7.28
8.34
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.56
9.57
10.41
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.05
7.08
8.51
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.88
9.95
10.66
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.71
7.73
8.70 Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages* 1-yr. Treasury security
6.13
6.15
8.18 National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.24
9.24
9.82
*
Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes (Source: HSH Associates)


How to Crush Communism
The Soviet Union stands at the turning point of the century; careful injections of Western assistance could lead it decisively toward the free market and a free society.
Yet a harsh chorus in the West now proclaims "No aid before reform."
Since no one seriously proposes unconditional giveaways, what the slogan really means is no promise of aid until
after
reform.
That would mean no aid at all.
And that would be a mistake as monumental as is the moment.


Making a Difference; Sony Is Betting Big on Its Man From Iceland
Iceland is not one of the world's great consumer electronics markets.
Nonetheless, the Sony Corporation has tapped a 29-year-old native of Iceland to spearhead its attempt to storm the $4.7 billion video game business.
President of Sony's Electronic Publishing Company, which was created just three months ago, Olaf Olaffson now finds himself in the middle of Sony's battle with the Nintendo Company over who will profit from the next generation of video games.
The dispute between Sony and Nintendo erupted a week ago, when Sony announced that it planned to enter the game market with a machine called the Play Station.
In effect, Sony said it would be adding a compact disk player to Nintendo's new video game machine, the Super NES.
Sony said that a contract it signed with Nintendo last year to develop the Play Station gave it the rights to profits from compact disk games made for it.


In Two Cities, Asian Art Comes Out of the Cellar
There is a fantasy, widespread in almost every developed nation, that beneath every major museum there are cellars packed with masterpieces that no one gets to see.
Though usually without substance, this fantasy has lately turned out to be true of two very considerable museums.
One of them is the Musee Guimet in Paris, which, for more than 100 years, has been a flagship for the study of Asian art at the highest level.
The other is a major miscellaneous museum, the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore, which in relation to its available spaces has always been almost unmanageably rich in Chinese and Japanese art.


In Hartford, 'From the Mississippi Delta'
IN the first moments of "From the Mississippi Delta," the playwright, Dr.
Endesha Ida Mae Holland, describes the place where she grew up in the 1950's as "a testament to African-American inferiority." In this curious autobiographical stage piece, being produced by the Hartford Stage Company, Dr.
Holland declares, "I was always conscious of our inferiority, until the civil rights movement came."
From then, she appears to be indulging in a reverse show-and-tell exercise, vacillating between discourse and drama, without fusing the styles of the pedagogue, the poet and the self-appointed publicist.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending May 25 MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 355,000
43 Fifth Avenue (11th St.)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; part-time doorman, dining room, renovated kitchen, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,246, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn Weigner Real Estate)  Flatiron District 732,500
105 Fifth Avenue (17th St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,100-sq.-ft. penthouse in a loft building; library, 12-ft. ceilings, 1,200-sq.-ft. of private roof space; maintenance $1,400, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Meisel Real Estate)  SoHo 520,000
514 Broadway (Spring St.)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 3,500-sq.-ft. duplex penthouse in a loft building; dining room, 1,500-sq.-ft. of private roof space; maintenance $1,500, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: J.I. Sopher Co.)  Sutton Place 2.95 million
14 Sutton Square  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 5-story, brick and stucco town house; dining room, den, library, powder room, sitting room, wine cellar, garden, East River view, 16.8- by 52-ft. lot; taxes $27,157 (Broker: Sotheby's International Realty) Upper East Side 500,000
1070 Park Avenue (88th St.)  2 bedroom, 3-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $1,170, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 287,000
56 West 71st Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; large living room, fireplace, high-ceilings; maintenance $1,109, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Clara Madlin Real Estate) BRONX  Hunts Point Area 175,000
1024 Longfellow Avenue  4-family, 4-story, semi-attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms in 3 units; 1 bedroom in other, eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale 117,500
2530 Independence Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining foyer, den, terrace, Hudson River view; maintenance $645, includes gas, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher) BROOKLYN  Park Slope 607,500
249 Garfield Place  2-family, 4-story limestone; 6 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; original moldings in both; 2-car garage, 20- by 92-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Realty Group)  Prospect Park South 340,000
214 Marlborough Road  7-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, detached house; center hall, dining room, 1-car garage, landmark district, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Mary K. Gallagher) QUEENS  Forest Hills Gardens 705,000
51 Shorthill Road  6-bedroom, 4-bath, single-family, detached, English Tudor; dining room, butler's pantry, powder room, fireplace, circular driveway, 2-car garage, 86- by 103-ft. lot; taxes $3,900 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  Jackson Heights 228,000
73-10 32d Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 92-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Century 21/Metalios Real Estate) STATEN ISLAND  Graniteville 130,000
100 Jules Drive  2-family, semi-attached, townhouse; dining room in 2d floor unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; 38- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,614 (Broker: Rand Properties)  West Brighton 158,000
311 Bement Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, sitting room, finished basement, 45- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


Into the Woods


Travel Advisory; Rates Change At Newark Lots
Parking rates at Newark International Airport have been increased to a minimum of $4, from $3, in both the hourly and long-term lots.
But the initial fee now buys four hours of parking, up from two hours.
The new rates, which took effect June 1, are intended to increase the availablity of short-term spaces by encouraging use of long-term parking lots.
The rate for staying beyond the four-hour base period in the hourly lot has been doubled to $4 an hour.
The hourly rate had been $3 for the first two hours, and $2 an hour thereafter.
The maximum for each 24 hours remains at $48, however.


For Oregon's Health Care System, Triage by a Lawmaker With an M.D.
As an emergency room physician, Dr.
John Kitzhaber has spent much of his professional life in the fast-motion treatment of bleeding patients.
Now, as the author of a plan that could make Oregon the first state to insure that health care is provided for all its citizens, Dr.
Kitzhaber is trying to use triage on a system that he considers shamefully ill.


Baseball; Managers Try to Ignore Casualty Rate
Tom Trebelhorn has managed the Milwaukee Brewers for more than four years and yet he had never heard anything quite like it.
As Trebelhorn stood signing autographs for fans in the stands at County Stadium, a boy about 13 or 14 years old was saying over and over: "Treb's on the bubble. Treb's on the bubble. Treb's going to be fired."


Corrections
An article in the Long Island Weekly today about the International Theater Festival at the State University at Stony Brook misstates the schedule.
After the opening attraction on Friday, Saturday and Sunday, performances will be given Wednesday through Sunday, not Thursday through Sunday.


The World; In the Trade Wars, China Has Learned Guerilla Tactics
WHEN a truck from China pulled into the neighboring Portuguese enclave of Macao late last year, American officials happened to be on hand to take a peek at the cargo.
They were surprised to find Chinese-manufactured ski jackets bearing labels reading "Made in Macao."
Business executives in both China and Macao were clearly trying to evade the limits imposed by China's quota of garment exports to the United States.
American officials say that it was one incident in a pattern of unfair trading by China, and that in 1990, such practices brought China $2.5 billion in extra sales to the United States that were not counted in the bilateral trade statistics.
"They got away with this for years and no one did anything about it," said an American official.
"They thought they could continue getting away with it."


Laura Cook Weds John P. Booth Jr.
Laura Fellows Cook, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic William Cook of Peekskill, N.Y., was married yesterday at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Scarborough, N.Y., to John Patrick Booth Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Booth of Farmingdale, L.I.
The Rev.
William R. Harper officiated.
The couple, both 26 years old, graduated from Williams College, the bride cum laude.
The bridegroom was a Herbert Lehman scholar.


What's New in the Northeast? Silvermine Offers the 42d Answer
THE 42d edition of "Art of the Northeast U.S.A." is on view at the Silvermine Guild Art Center in New Canaan.
The juror this time was Charlotta Kotik, curator of contemporary art at the Brooklyn Museum.
From a thousand or so entries, she selected 125, awarding prizes to 17.
Though it is a presentable lineup and one that includes artists who made it into the previous display, not to mention past prize winners, this year's Nor'easter does not have the punch of last year's.


Patricia Saraniero Weds
Patricia Lynn Saraniero, the manager of the Sean Kernan Photo Studio in Stony Creek, Conn., was married yesterday to Benjamin Warder Thoron 2d, a student at the Yale University School of Drama.
Deacon Thomas Seith officiated at the St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Chapel at Yale.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Saraniero of Wilton, Conn.
Her husband, also 24, graduated from the University of California at Santa Cruz.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Thoron of San Francisco.


Al Fresco


WAYNE HUIZENGA'S GROWTH COMPLEX
On a mild winter's afternoon in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., H. Wayne Huizenga slams the door of his Mercedes and bounds into a video store on U.S. 1.
The stocky, 53-year-old chairman of Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation is engaged in an unannounced inspection of a part of his empire, and he is not one for dawdling.
In shirt sleeves, red tie swinging, he marches along the spotless blue-carpeted aisles under bright fluorescent lights.
Every so often Huizenga stops -- to punch up a film preview on a television monitor or to ask the store manager about potato chip sales -- and then he soldiers on.


All About/Billboards; An American Icon's New Marching Orders
Few businesses have such a long list of enemies and such a short list of friends as the billboard industry.
Local activists and a broad range of special-interest groups regard billboards as clutter, disfiguring roads and buildings across the country.
Health-conscious activists hate the big signs because they are often used to push tobacco and alcohol.
And now -- the biggest threat of all -- Congress, in a bill recently emerged from committee, is considering banning billboards along some 350,000 miles of Federal interstates and primary roads.
That is a grim prospect for what in recent years has been a low- to no-growth business.
Last year, the industry, which rarely uses the word "signs," had revenues of just under $1.5 billion -- virtually unchanged from the year before -- according to the Outdoor Advertising Association of America, a Washington-based trade group.


The World; Arms Control: An Update
WASHINGTON and Moscow are near agreement in three major areas of arms control.
Here is where the talks stand: Conventional Forces: A treaty among 22 nations, including the United States and Soviet Union, to limit conventional land and air forces in Europe was signed Nov. 19 in Paris, but a dispute arose over whether some Soviet forces should be exempt.
That was settled last week between Washington and Moscow, subject to approval by the other nations.
NATO has also made a commitment to negotiate limits on short-range nuclear forces in Europe once it is clear that the conventional-forces pact will enter into force.


Campus Life: Massachusetts; Fans and Rivals Win a Reprieve For Men's Soccer
Men's soccer at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst was saved from extinction with a little help from its friends, including local citizens, businesses and even archrivals like Rutgers University, when the Board of Trustees announced last week that it would reinstate the program for one year.
The board also agreed to honor soccer players' athletic scholarships for as long as they attend the university and to keep the coaches on for another year.


Fluoridating For Whose Benefit?
I find it ironic that as the county legislators desperately seek ways to reduce a tremendous budget deficit and as the impact of severe cuts in state and Federal funding are felt on Long Island, Suffolk County decides to focus its attention on fluoridating the water supply  [ "Fluoridation Fight Arrives in Suffolk," April 28 ] .
Does the fact that the estimated start-up costs for this proposal are nebulously quoted as ranging anywhere from $1.5 to $25 million, and the annual operating costs from $350,000 to $3.5 million seem to bother our elected officials?
Apparently not.


De Klerk Visits Kenya's Chief, Urging Normal Ties
South Africa's long closed door to the rest of Africa swung open wider today when President F. W. de Klerk flew to Kenya for a brief but significant visit with President Daniel arap Moi.
Kenya became the 10th African country to receive Mr. de Klerk in the two years since he replaced P. W. Botha as National Party leader and then President and promised to dismantle apartheid.


Mary E. Taylor Weds C. C. Behrens
Mary Elizabeth Taylor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur G. Taylor of Bronxville, N.Y., was married in Bronxville yesterday to Christopher Charles Behrens, the son of Herbert H. Behrens of San Jose, Calif., and Barbara A. Behrens of Kailua, Hawaii.
The Rev.
Christopher Laurence Webber performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Ms.
Taylor, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, is an associate in investment banking at Merrill Lynch in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the associate general counsel of Texaco in Harrison, N.Y.
Her mother, Carol H. Taylor, is a placement consultant with the American Field Service, a student exchange program, in New York.


Kathryn Tabner, Lawyer, Is Wed
Kathryn Lynn Tabner and Michael Mather Boardman were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Messiah in Glens Falls, N.Y., by the Rev.
Robert E. Clarke.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Tabner of Latham, N.Y.
The bridegroom is a son of Mrs.
Richard Craven of New York and William M. Boardman of Woodstock, Vt.
The bride, 25 years old, and the bridegroom, 27, are 1986 graduates of Middlebury College.
She received a law degree from the Albany Law School this month and is to start work in August as a clerk for Chief Judge Thomas C. Platt of the Federal District for the Eastern District of New York in Brooklyn.
She is keeping her name.
Her father is the senior partner in the Albany law firm of Tabner &amp; Laudato.
Her mother, Lee Tabner, is a nurse.


Gwyn Rachel Osnos, Analyst, Married To John Stanford White, Engineer
Gwyn Rachel Osnos and John Stanford White were married last evening at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park by Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel and the Rev.
Patrick A. Heelan, a Roman Catholic priest.
The bride, 31 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert J. B. Osnos of New York.
The bridegroom, 37, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
L.
Peter White of St.
James, L.I.
The bride is a senior management analyst in the office of the senior vice president of Columbia University.
A graduate of Yale University, she received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia.
Her father is the chief of psychiatry at Bird S. Coler Memorial Hospital in New York.
Her mother, Naomi Osnos, is an art director at Random House in New York.


Sheri M. Levitt and Kevin J. Danehy Are Married
Sheri Michele Levitt, the merchandising manager for Interview Magazine, and Kevin Joseph Danehy, a real-estate developer, both in New York, were married there last evening at the Helmsley Palace.
Rabbi Charles Lippman and the Rev.
Hal Stanger, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Danehy, 29 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Levitt of Oakbrook, Ill.
Her father founded and heads the Dynamark Corporation in Chicago, a maker of outdoor appliances.


NEW COST CONTROL ASKED ON MEDICARE
In a new effort to rein in soaring Medicare costs, the Bush Administration has devised a plan to pay hospitals standard fees for outpatient services as routine as X-rays and laboratory tests and as elaborate as chemotherapy and surgery.
Since the Government put similar controls on payments for in-hospital care in 1983, doctors have shifted many services to hospitals' outpatient clinics, which are not covered by the controls.
From 1985 to 1990, Medicare spending for outpatient services grew three times as fast as spending for patients admitted to hospitals.
Congress Approval Expected
Under a proposal described in a recent report to Congress, outpatient services would be subject to the same type of price controls as inpatient care: the Government would make a flat payment for all services that a Medicare beneficiary normally receives in a single visit for a particular illness or injury.


Christie Densen Weds T. B. Root
Christie Jane Densen, the daughter of Peter M. Densen of Tenafly, N.J., and Mrs.
James A. M. Douglas of Bedford, N.Y., was married in Bedford yesterday to Theodore Bobrick Root, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Elihu N. Root of Houston.
The Rev.
Thomas Dix Bowers performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Mary's Church.
Mrs.
Root, 24 years old, graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is a senior vice president and the chief of staff of Alexander &amp; Alexander, insurance brokers in New York.
Her mother, Gail Douglas, is a real-estate broker with Houlihan/Lawrence in Bedford.


Andrea Hill Borden Weds Douglas Edler
Andrea Hill Borden, a financial manager at Time Warner, and Douglas Paul Edler, a portfolio manager for J. P. Morgan in New York, were married yesterday at the Presbyterian Church in Shrewsbury, N.J.
The Rev.
David Muyskens officiated.
Mrs.
Edler, 28 years of age, graduated from Northeastern University and works for Time Americas, a Time International publication.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Borden of Fair Haven, N.J.
Her father is a manufacturer's representative in the clothing industry and her mother is a saleswoman at Burgdorff Realty in Rumson, N.J.


'Gypsy Woman': Of Pathos and Pride
Summers are usually defined by one great song.
This season's is shaping up to be Crystal Waters's "Gypsy Woman (She's Homeless)," which has leaped from the club scene to the No. 1 position on Billboard's dance chart and is rapidly climbing the pop singles chart.
The tune, which blasts from boom boxes and cruising Jeeps, has become seemingly ubiquitous.
"Gypsy Woman" describes a homeless woman as she dresses and applies makeup, fastidiously preparing for the day.
Ms.
Waters modeled the song after a homeless woman who sings gospel music on the streets.


France
To the Editor: I enjoyed reading Ian McMahan's article (Travel, May 5) on French chambres d'hotes and took note of his recommendations.
I was sorry to see, however, that a charming French chambre d'hote in the Loire Valley was not mentioned: La Pension de l'Abbaye, Rue de L'Abbaye, Villeloin-Coulange, 37460 Montresor, France; (212) 255-5961 for a representative in New York.


The Executive Computer; A Familiar Programming Language Enters the Windows Age
The Microsoft Corporation has created a version of the Basic programming language, called Visual Basic, which promises to make it much easier for businesses to develop customized applications of Windows and similarly friendly facades for older programs.
Some programmers are hailing the new language as a breakthrough.
Visual Basic will be available later this month at a list price of $199.
It is not going to replace C or C++, the other computer languages currently used to write Windows applications, and a fluency in those powerful but arcane languages will still be required to do the most complicated Windows programs.


Old Soldiers


Parade Unfurls Symbols of Patriotism in the Capital
This bastion of worsted summer wools and diplomatic demeanor tossed off its suit jacket and let out a yell today, glorying at length and en masse in a celebration of the nation's lopsided triumph over the army of Iraq.
Thousands of people jammed a route studded with patriotic symbols -- from the Capitol past the Washington Monument and Lincoln Memorial, then across the Potomac River to the Pentagon -- to witness a huge parade of American armed might.


COMMON DECENCY
I'm sure Susan Jacoby means well, but I must correct her simplistic caricature of my position on date rape, upon which I have been writing and speaking extensively (Hers: "Common Decency," May 19).
First of all, I am not, as she claims, an "antifeminist." I am a feminist who wants to radically reform current feminism, to bring it back to common sense about life.
Her article is a good example of the warm, fuzzy, genteel thinking about sex that has been emanating for 20 years from privileged, white, middle-class feminists.
The dream man in this scenario is literate, sensitive, introspective, cooperative.
Such men are a minority in America, much less in the world.
Intelligent, ambitious, but overprotected young women, brainwashed by this view of life, are arriving at college and screaming bloody murder when reality doesn't jibe with their expectations.


The Kuwaiti Inferno
As they retreated from Kuwait, the Iraqi occupiers created a new cataclysm: an oil firestorm.
New combatants, civilians, now struggle to smother the flames that war brought.
Like ants moving a mountain, the oil workers struggle from well to well.
On arrival, they estimated that a tenth of the oil being extracted throughout the world was flowing unchecked in Kuwait.


A Birth, a Near-Suicide, And It's Not Lunch Yet
Moments after helping bring one life into the world yesterday by delivering a baby in a Brooklyn subway station, two transit police officers rushed to a nearby stop and saved another by rescuing a woman who had thrown herself under a train.
"It was nothing short of a couple of minor miracles," said Albert W. O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.


Sunday Dinner; Where Casual Finally Meets Reasonable
If there are two words that characterize the New York City dining scene these days, they are casual and reasonable.
After the showy excess of the 1980's, diners yearn to loosen their ties, lean back and relax, and economy is a major concern.
The restaurant industry has been quick to heed the call with many establishments that combine both qualities.
Here are three of them.
Claire
156 Seventh Avenue, near 20th Street, (212) 255-1955 -- Modeled after a restaurant by the same name in Key West, Fla., this pleasing seafood house in Chelsea is a big, aqua-toned place with bare wood floors, paper-covered tables, skylights, wood latticework room dividers and palms.
Appetizers on the Sunday menu include blackened tuna sashimi with a wasabi-soy sauce; roasted portobello mushrooms with pesto vinaigrette; Bahamian conch chowder; and roasted andouille with creole mustard sauce.
Among entrees are sauteed softshell crab with tartar sauce; Bayou crayfish patties with cayenne-cilantro sauce; broiled Key West grouper Provencal; Norwegian salmon with a cucumber-dill sauce; and roast duckling with a sauce of fresh plums and hot peppers.
For desserts, Key lime pie and mango crumb pie.
Appetizers range from $3.95 to $8.95; main courses, $14.95 to $16.95; desserts, $3.50 to $4.95.
Sunday dinner is from 5:30 P.M. to midnight. (Review, Sept. 23, 1988.)


A Collaborator Is Sentenced to Death by Kuwait Tribunal
The martial law court trying people accused of collaborating with Iraqi occupiers imposed the death sentence today for the first time.
The defendant had never spoken with his defense lawyer.
Mankhi al-Shimmiri, a 33-year-old radar technician in the Kuwaiti Air Force, was charged with joining the Iraqi Popular Army and providing information that hurt Kuwait during the seven-month occupation.
His lawyer said that he had enlisted in the paramilitary force out of fear.


Victoria Shirley Plans to Marry
George Frederick Shirley and Mrs.
Ray Speier Hausler, both of Portland, Ore., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Victoria Coke Shirley, to George Winslow Mead, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Grimston Mead of Brooklyn, N.Y.
The wedding is planned for next year.
Ms.
Shirley, 29 years old, is an administrator for the New York law firm of Hughes Hubbard &amp; Reed.
She graduated from the University of Washington in Seattle and received a master's degree in journalism from New York University.
Her father is a lawyer with Nationwide Insurance in Portland.


Encounter With a Beneficial Creature
THERE'S a toad in my garden.
And it is welcome.
But we scared each other, because neither one knew the other was there.
While rummaging around the border where there were some old leaves from last autumn, I heard a sudden rustling noise.
Something hopped forward.
It was the toad's quick escape to avoid being trampled by an old tennis shoe with a foot inside.


Why Patriot Didn't Work as Advertised
To the Editor:
"Patriot Failures" (editorial, May 26) poses questions about the Patriot antimissile missile in the Persian Gulf war that you say the Pentagon has yet to answer.
Such questions have been answered by Theodore Postol, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology defense analyst, in an article by Eliot Marshall in the May 3 issue of Science magazine.


Ms. Wu, Student, Wed in California
Lena Wu, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James T. Wu of Salt Lake City, was married yesterday to Dr.
Michael V. McConnell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent M. McConnell of New York.
The Rev.
John M. McConnell, an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at St.
Thomas Aquinas Roman Catholic Church in Palo Alto, Calif.
Mrs.
McConnell, 27 years old, graduated from Stanford University, where she is a doctoral student in pharmacology and where her husband received his M.D.
Her father is a professor of pathology and her mother, Lily Wu, is an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City.


Baseball; Rough Night for Rookie Hurlers, But a Fine Evening for the Yanks
They are two rookie pitchers who were toiling in minor league towns like Columbus and Oklahoma City only last month.
Last night, on the big stage known as Yankee Stadium, Wade Taylor and Mark Petkovsek pitched just the way rookies usually do: nervously and ineffectively.
Taylor made his second career start for New York, Petkovsek made his major league debut for Texas and neither was receiving any calls to appear on Broadway after their messy outings.
Both are 25 years old, both are right-handers and both were roughed up.


Mute in Manhattan: A Politically Correct Building
If the Swiss Bank Tower just behind Saks Fifth Avenue in midtown Manhattan were a piece of academic discourse, it would have to be called politically correct.
This building does everything right; its fundamental quality is an unwillingness to offend.
And like the P.C. of academia, it is so successful at not offending that it ends up having nothing to say.
This is the architecture of blandness.
It is also the architecture of good intentions, but good intentions alone can rarely carry the day, especially when they are interpreted as much in terms of pulling punches as they have been here.
This tower looks as if it was designed out of hesitation more than conviction -- out of fear that it might disturb its powerful neighbors.


Christine Fleming Weds Cameron Hall
Christine Chapman Fleming, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Burton A. Fleming of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Cameron Kirk Hall, a son of E. C. Kirk Hall of Berwyn, Pa., and the late Nancy Maxwell Hall.
The Revs.
John Schule and Charles McCollough, United Church of Christ ministers, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Federated Church in Edgartown, Mass.
Mrs.
Hall, 29 years old, is a nurse.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a psychiatrist in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Lynn Fredricka Otter Fleming, a fashion designer, owns Fredricka Inc., a manufacturing company in Philadelphia.


Tennis; Men's Final Is American All the Way
The only anticlimactic aspect of the final-round clash between Andre Agassi and Jim Courier in the French Open on Sunday will be the nationality of the event's next champion.
No matter what, he will hail from the United States, something that hasn't happened here since Tony Trabert defeated Arthur Larsen in 1954.


Cellular Phone Stirs Politics in Virginia
The political game in Virginia is traditionally played with a certain civility -- sharp elbows permitted, but deliver the blows in a gentlemanly manner, please.
Lately, however, the game has become unsportingly rough and tumble, no quarter asked or given.


Wall Street; Loose Lips at the N.A.S.D.?
One red flag that regulators at the National Association of Securities Dealers watch for is unusually heavy trading in a company's stock just before some wonderful piece of news -- a deal, let's say, that promises to generate new business.
That pattern suggests that news of the deal leaked out in advance of the formal announcement.
Just such a flag is waving right now over the recent Nasdaq trading records for a small Philadelphia-based company called Judicate, which sells commercial arbitration and mediation services.
But in this wacky case, the source of the leak is the N.A.S.D. itself.
Indeed, Frank Wilson, the self-regulatory organization's own general counsel, shared some good news about Judicate with dozens of brokerage industry executives at a big regional meeting in Miami two weeks before the information became public.


Answering The Mail
Q.
A sidewalk along the side of our house is cracked in several places.
This walk is slanted, so that it tilts toward the foundation.
When it rains, water runs off toward the house and into cracks through the basement wall.
Since we never use this walk, we are thinking of removing it and filling the area with soil that slopes away from the foundation.
Should we bury drainage tiles in this area, and do you have any other suggestions?
A.
Burying drainage tiles would be a good idea, but that means you would have to dig down to the bottom of the foundation wall and bury the tiles near the footing for them to be fully effective.
Then you would have to cover the tiles with a one-foot layer of gravel before filling in with soil to grade level.
Also, you should fix the cracks in the basement wall.
Otherwise, the water seeping into the soil may still result in leaks.
Digging down to the footing on the outside will give you a chance to repair those cracks properly.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Another Griffey Drafted
Another Griffey could be in the Seattle Mariners' future.
The Mariners, who already have KEN, 41, and KEN JR., 21, picked 20-year-old CRAIG GRIFFEY in the 42d round of the amateur draft last week, and he was scheduled to be in Seattle yesterday for a workout.
Griffey, a sophomore defensive back at Ohio State, has not played organized baseball in more than five years. (AP)


No Headline
Colonia 134,000
131 Lake Avenue 3-bedroom, 2-bath, 3-year-old ranch; partially finished basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,890.
Ramsey 250,000
83 Ronald Court  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 27-year-old ranch; fireplace, sauna, deck; taxes $4,713.
South Amboy 120,000
247 David Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, century-old colonial; dining room, partially finished attic, sun porch; taxes $2,128.
Wayne 140,000
32 Linden Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 50-year-old ranch in lake community; 3-zone heat, fireplace; taxes $2,728.
Westfield 165,000
9 Mohawk Trail  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; cathedral ceiling, fireplace in bedroom, full basement; taxes $3,205.
Woodcliff Lake 382,000
70 Indian Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 25-year-old split level; burglar and fire alarms, h/w floors, fireplace; taxes $6,118.
OTHER AREAS Scarsdale, N.Y. 510,000
61 Franklin Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, family room; taxes $12,498.
Westport, Conn. 442,000
3 Bittersweet
5-bedroom, 4-bath, 28-year-old colonial; 2 family rooms, swimming pool, 1 acre; taxes $4,602.
Carle Place, L.I. 160,000
330 Curtis Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, new kitchen, Florida room, 1-car attached garage; taxes $2,900.


The New Intellectuals at the Fed
Last July, when the Federal Reserve Board's powerful Federal Open Market Committee met to decide the central bank's next move in managing the nation's money supply, a new member, Fed governor David W. Mullins Jr., did not hesitate to speak up.
On the eve of the meeting, which is always conducted in strict secrecy and in as formal a manner as a Japanese Kabuki play, there were signs that the nation's banks were becoming unusually reluctant to make loans to business.
The worry was that credit-starved companies would be forced to slash spending, weakening the already-sluggish economy.
The F.O.M.C. had to decide whether to nudge interest rates down, a move that would loosen credit and might keep the economy from slowing more.
The risk was that easier credit might fan inflation fears and push up long-term interest rates.


Answering The Mail
Q.
A sidewalk along the side of our house is cracked in several places.
This walk is slanted, so that it tilts toward the foundation.
When it rains, water runs off toward the house and into cracks through the basement wall.
Since we never use this walk, we are thinking of removing it and filling the area with soil that slopes away from the foundation.
Should we bury drainage tiles in this area, and do you have any other suggestions?
A.
Burying drainage tiles would be a good idea, but that means you would have to dig down to the bottom of the foundation wall and bury the tiles near the footing for them to be fully effective.
Then you would have to cover the tiles with a one-foot layer of gravel before filling in with soil to grade level.
Also, you should fix the cracks in the basement wall.
Otherwise, the water seeping into the soil may still result in leaks.
Digging down to the footing on the outside will give you a chance to repair those cracks properly.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Larchmont, N.Y. 425,000
3 Concord Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 64-year-old English stucco; 1-car garage, gardens, sun room, full basement; taxes $6,783.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 510,000
61 Franklin Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, family room; taxes $12,498.
Tuckahoe, N.Y. 228,000
209 Dante Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 68-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, terrace, yard, 1-car garage; taxes $3,779.
Ridgefield, Conn. 209,000
5 Fox Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old split level; new furnace and appliances, wooded lot, 1 acre; taxes $2,581.
Stamford, Conn. 395,000
111 Sawmill Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 31-year-old ranch; hardwood floors, wide decks, views of river, 3 acres; taxes $5,065.
Westport, Conn. 442,000
3 Bittersweet
5-bedroom, 4-bath, 28-year-old colonial; 2 family rooms, swimmingpool, 1 acre; taxes $4,602.
OTHER AREAS  Hicksville, L.I. 143,500
55 Chestnut Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 2-car detached garage; taxes $3,000.
St.
James, L.I. 175,000
19 Acorn Street, 4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $5,500.
Westfield, N.J. 165,000
9 Mohawk Trail  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; cathedral ceiling, fireplace in bedroom, full basement; taxes $3,205.


RECORD BRIEF
Richard Thompson: 'Rumor and Sigh'
Capitol CDP 7 95713 2; all three formats.


Correction
An article on May 19 about lacquerware in Japan misstated the genus of the lac tree.
It is Rhus verniciflua.


Track and Field; Still Racing With the Wind
Could it be that the best of Jackie Joyner-Kersee is now recalled from memory?
She has been regarded as the finest female athlete of the United States for so long that merely suggesting the possibility might be considered folly.
Nowhere in the world looms another woman capable of matching her scores in the grueling heptathlon, the throne room of her remarkable career since 1986.
In that time, she has extended the heptathlon world record four times, shared a world long-jump record once and earned recognition as few other track and field athletes have in the United States: as a role model for young people through success, charitable works and commercial endorsements.


Charge Filed Over Silence on AIDS
When her fiance collapsed from a heart attack one day last month, Connie Lewis rushed desperately to a stranger and pleaded for help.
She did not say the dying man carried the AIDS virus.
Now the off-duty police officer who gave Ms.
Lewis's fiance, James Cobern, mouth-to-mouth resuscitation fears that he was infected.
And Ms.
Lewis faces felony charges of reckless endangerment for not warning rescuers of what doctors and Federal health officials consider a remote risk: contracting AIDS from saliva.


Going to the Track and Finding Religion
Jesus Christ shares the walls with Secretariat in the chapel of the Rev.
James Watson of Elmont.
As chaplain of the Belmont Park Race Track, Mr.
Watson decorates his surroundings with pictures of his two priorities, the Christian King of Kings and the sport of kings.
Horse racing and prayer unite at Belmont, especially this weekend.
As tens of thousands of Long Islanders flock to the park for the Belmont Stakes and the festivities that accompany it, many may seek divine assistance in picking a winner.


Tough Calls
To the Editor:
Something is askew in Francis V. O'Connor's attack on the 17-member Pulitzer board.
Mr.
O'Connor is no stranger to powerful committees.
He served, along with Eugene V. Thaw, William S. Lieberman, Lee Krasner, Pollock and Donald McKinney, on a committee that decided on the authenticity of some 1,096 works by Jackson Pollock.
Mr.
O'Connor and Mr.
Thaw went on to edit the four-volume, 1,228-page "Jackson Pollock Catalogue Raisonne." It includes a section called "False Attributions," in which more than 30 works of art are relegated to oblivion as fakes.


How Not to Be Stumped
Although the earth did not shake a few weeks ago when former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts announced his availability for the Democratic Presidential nomination, that mild event may be said to have begun the 1992 campaign season.
Other hopefuls, the eager and the coy, will soon emerge; exchanges between Democrats and Republicans will grow more testy; Iowa and New Hampshire will be rediscovered.
And remembrances of much criticized coverage of campaigns past must weigh on network news departments as they prepare for the new one.
"Eighty-eight was an awful year," says William O. Wheatley, who was then executive producer of "The NBC Nightly News" and is now the network's director of political coverage.
He echoes the common complaint that the chance to explore significant issues was wasted on personal attacks, photo opportunities and sound bites.


Preparing Salad Days for the Summer
IT may not be considered politically correct, but come summer, in most circles, men barbecue and women make salad.
It's an agreement with which I, for one, am perfectly happy.
Let the men toil over the coals and try to guess in which direction the wind will be headed.
Let them worry about charring the food, setting fire to the side of the house, or serving chicken that is black on the outside and raw in the middle.
I shall be relaxing with a cool drink because my part of the operation -- the salads -- is completed.


Sports People: FOOTBALL; Browns Acquire Green
The Cleveland Browns yesterday acquired wide receiver ROY GREEN from the Phoenix Cardinals and obtained tight end K. D. DUNN from the Montreal Machine of the World League of American Football.
The Cardinals traded Green, a two-time All-Pro, to the Browns for an undisclosed draft choice. (AP)


With 'No Hard Feelings,' Craig Moves On
A few weeks after Roger Craig's fumble help set up the Giants' game-winning field goal in the National Football Conference championship game and dashed the 49ers' dream of a Super Bowl "three-peat," the San Francisco running back hit a low in his career.
That situation got deeper after the 49ers punctuated his injury-plagued season by leaving him unprotected on their Plan B free-agent list.
The double whammy left him emotionally numb.
He described the feeling as "devastating."


Seeing Mahler Mahler's Way
The conductor Maurice Abravanel says that he hates the word "style." He is speaking, specifically, about Mahler's nine symphonies, which he recorded with the Utah Symphony for Vanguard in the 1960's and 70's and have now been digitally remastered for compact disk.
The cycle was one of the first integral recordings of the Mahler symphonies.
Three have been released so far, with the others to come.
Mr.
Abravanel says he felt then and feels now that too many conductors overinterpret the works, and on their own terms rather than Mahler's.
"Three days before I recorded a symphony," he said recently from his home in Utah, "I did not even look at the score, so that my interpretation would not be cerebral. My interepration was based on my emotional state and my response to the music."


Supreme Court Ignores Its Abortion Precedent; Victory for Democracy
To the Editor:
Contrary to "Bad Abortion Advice, Court-Approved" (editorial, May 24), the Supreme Court's decision in Rust v.
Sullivan represents a victory for conscience and democracy.
The guidelines that bar federally subsidized family planning clinics from providing abortion referrals respect the conscience of each citizen on abortion.
It is cynical for the abortion lobby to insist on the "freedom to choose" when it routinely denies the right of each citizen to choose whether or not to finance abortions, facilities that perform abortions or abortion-related counseling.


A Hoosier Hurrah on Cole Porter's Centennial
Unbowed by 35 years of carrying the mail, Al Dunn stood up and sang the national anthem this morning.
Except for "America the Beautiful" and "Happy Birthday," which everybody sang, all the other music here at Peru High School auditorium was by Cole Porter.
The great songwriter was born 100 years ago in this tidy community of 14,000 (the name is pronounced PEA-roo), and the town was celebrating a hometown son and a new commemorative stamp that bears his face.


A la Carte: Migration To the Island Continues
THE big restaurant news of last year was a minimigration of Manhattan celebrity chefs to Long Island.
Now the second phase of the invasion is occurring.
The restless chefs are starting Long Island ventures of their own, looking elsewhere and putting down deep roots where they are.


North Korea Agrees to Nuclear Plant Inspections
North Korea has told the International Atomic Energy Agency that it would sign an agreement allowing international inspection of all of its nuclear installations, including those that the United States said were part of a project to build nuclear weapons, the agency said today.
The announcement, which came after a meeting on Friday in Vienna between the agency's director, Hans Blix, and a group of senior North Korean diplomats, is potentially the first break in the standoff over the mysterious plant at Yongbyon, just north of the North Korean capital, Pyongyang.
In the past North Korea has said it would allow international inspection only if the United States removed all of its nuclear weapons and its troops from South Korea.


The World; Latin Nations Get a Firmer Grip on Their Destiny
FOR most of its history, the Organization of American States has been more the brunt of jokes than an instrument of policy, at times used by Washington as a vehicle for imposing its will on its Latin American neighbors, or as a platform for third-world countries to fulminate against the bully to the north.
But times do change.
And suddenly, the much-maligned O.A.S. appears to have transformed itself into the most promising hope for self-help that Latin America has, if it is to preserve its nascent democracies from a return to authoritarian rule.


CHRIS WHITTLE'S CAPTIVE AUDIENCE
I tried to conjure up the reaction I'd have if I discovered one of Whittle's video systems in my doctor's waiting room.
The result was a sense of revulsion and annoyance -- like finding a large black fly or other pest buzzing around the waiting room.
Also, I expect I might feel like finding another doctor.
Most ads are boring and stupid -- that's why people zap them.
Whittle seems to think that he has invented a way around this with his concept of a captured audience.
What he has invented is a form of torture.
JOHN E. CASNELLIE
Rochester


Sunday Menu; Sauteed Soft-Shelled Crabs With Salsa
At least once a season the urge to indulge in soft-shelled crabs that have been sauteed in significant amounts of butter overcomes me.
The process begins in March and by May or June it is so irresistible I give in.
Having just discovered a way to cook soft-shelled crabs without butter, the only indulgence now is the price, not the fat.


Car Rental
To the Editor: Here is a suggestion you might want to share with your readers.
Last year I started my European vacation by renting a car at Orly Airport in Paris.
The clerk asked if I wanted extra insurance (the "collision damage waiver") and I told her, No, it was already covered by my credit card.
She checked a box marked "suppression de franchise," and I initialed it.
After I got home I discovered that this meant I owed $350 for unnecessary insurance.
Many letters to the rental company have failed to get them to make an adjustment.


Legislators See Little Change in Spending Plan
AS the state's lawmakers resume their special session this week, they are expected to analyze Connecticut's tax system in minute detail, as they claw their way toward an answer to the historic question of whether there should be a tax on wages.
But they are not expected to dwell long on the question of where that money will go -- or not go.
Legislators say that the preliminary $7.7 billion spending plan hammered out in the final weeks of the regular session will probably not be changed greatly, despite what some lawmakers have criticized as heartless cuts in spending for social programs and the ambivalent and uncertain affects of the plan's package of long-term spending controls.
The reasons for the anticipated spending gridlock are bound up in both the political dynamics of the General Assembly and the simple function of the clock.
The spending plan was the centerpiece of a coalition budget that passed both the House and Senate before being vetoed by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. last month, and leaders of the Republican minority have repeatedly said since then that they would immediately reject any replacement budget that does not resurrect the spending plan.


Summer a Good Time To Repair a Window
TROUBLESOME windows are best repaired in the summer, when they can be opened or removed without discomfort.
For drafty double-hung wood windows that stick or need new sash cords, a quick easy repair for both problems is to install replacement window channels.
The simplest and probably most-common replacement channels are Window Fixers, made by the Quaker City Manufacturing Company, 701 Chester Pike, Sharon Hill, Pa., 19079.
They consist of shallow metal troughs that fit vertically on each side of the window frame, creating smooth, close-fitting channels in which the sashes can slide.


Basketball; For Scott Misery Is Playing in Final
For Byron Scott, the National Basketball Association championship series has been a miserable experience.
Defensively, Scott is guarding Michael Jordan, perhaps the most thankless job in basketball.
Offensively, Scott has lost his shooting touch, a major reason why the Los Angeles Lakers have lost the last two games to the Chicago Bulls.


COOKING
Travel around the country and you'll find -- and this is astonishing given how relentless and strident the exhortations have been -- that the advice to eat less fat in favor of more fruits and vegetables has been largely ignored in huge pockets of the nation.
Yet the message is getting out -- if not as a clarion call, at least as a whisper.
Even in those areas where the deep fryer is still the pot of choice, a few cooks are finding culinary adventure in vegetables they'd never tried before, or in using meats with innovative moderation.
Certainly, the new batch of cookbooks this spring and summer will lure more home cooks into the garden or send them off to the local farmers' markets and specialty shops in search of tubers and roots and greens.


Fund Established to Help Pay Legal Fees for President's Son


Northeast Notebook: Philadelphia; Rejuvenating A Train Station
SUBURBAN STATION, once the downtown nexus and headquarters of the Pennsylvania Railroad, may be reincarnated as a hybrid commuter rail station and marketplace.
The Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, developer of the plan, is seeking bidders to renovate the station at 16th Street between Arch Street and John F. Kennedy Boulevard.
The company selected would come up with ideas for improvements and would receive, in return, a long-term lease for a subterranean retail arcade of 250,000 square feet.


No Truman Either
To the Editor:
R.
G.
Kehoe's "Harry Who?" (letter, May 24) compares our 33d President's background unfavorably with Dan Quayle's.
Harry Truman never went to college.
His boyhood ambition was to be a soldier, but West Point turned him down because of his eyesight.
He spent all his free time in the Independence, Mo., public library, reading every history book.
He entered the National Guard as a private and was promoted to captain in the artillery in France in World War I.


British Health Service, Much Beloved But Inadequate, Is Facing Changes
Ever since the inception of the National Health Service just after World War II, Conservative Party politicians have found that meddling too much with a system that provides health care for all Britons was political suicide.
Prime Minister John Major's Government says it is trying to put the system on a more businesslike basis and improve its services to customers, and it is paying for it this year.


Sunday Outing; Where Canal Defied Nature and Won
Behind houses and tall grass, several old canal locks stand here as a reminder of an engineering feat of pre-industrial America: the old Delaware and Hudson Canal that carried coal from Pennsylvania to New York City.
From 1828 to 1898, mules pulled barges laden with anthracite coal 108 miles along river valleys from Honesdale in northeastern Pennsylvania to Kingston on the Hudson River, where the coal was shipped downriver to the city.


Saddam Hussein's Inferno
Saddam Hussein's decision to torch more than 600 oil wells in Kuwait, an act of insane vindictiveness, may yield his grimmest legacy.
A photographic essay in today's New York Times Magazine vividly portrays the appalling mess: oil-soaked workers toiling in 12-hour shifts, struggling with hand tools to stanch the burning flow.
What the pictures cannot convey are the costs of Saddam Hussein's inferno.


Style Makers; John Mayer, Van-Service Owner
"Have Van. Will Travel" would be a suitable advertisement for John Mayer's company.
But he has never advertised his business, Superior Location Van Services Ltd., of Brooklyn.
It has flourished by word of mouth.
In 1982, Mr.
Mayer and his wife, Denise, started a car service.
Later that year a fashion photographer hired them to transport his equipment to and from work locations.


Will the Gulf War Produce Enduring Art?
When on that great day in 1918 Americans and others celebrated the end of World War I, they could not have known that the dreadful conflict was going to produce great art -- the poems of Rupert Brooke, such films as "Grand Illusion," plays like "What Price Glory?" and hundreds of other works.
Once again, Americans are celebrating.
A traditional ticker-tape parade will be held in New York tomorrow for the victors of the Persian Gulf war.
But if this war has produced a surge of national pride reminiscent of 1918 and 1945, there is no guarantee that it will, like the Civil War, the two World Wars, and the conflicts in Korea and Vietnam, produce a commensurate art.


Chess
To become famous as a virtuoso of the mating attack, you must not be put off by apparently solid enemy king positions.
They must be regarded as the raw material to show off your penetrating imagination, which reduces them to castles in the sand.
If you look only a little way ahead when considering an attack and find yourself stultified by the formidable obstacles your opponent erects, you must drive yourself further and further to unearth the keys to the decisive combinations of tactics that can overcome them.
Meanwhile, you must remain alert to your opponent's attacks in other sectors of the board so that you are ready to contain them or haughtily ignore them as trivial compared to your own.


Why He Seeks an Education: 'So Much I Want to Do'
Wayne Hawkins says he knows what most Americans picture when they see him.
And it isn't a cap and gown.
He is an 18-year-old black man who talks in inner city accents.
White women, he says, clutch their purses when he passes on the streets.
But this week he will do something he said most Americans don't see black men do: he will graduate from high school.


METRO DATELINES;
The Port Author ity police discovered 223 kilograms of cocaine in a tractor-trailer parked on the side of the Fort Lee, N.J., off ramp from the George Washington Bridge early yesterday.
A Port Authority worker found the truck about 1:30 A.M. and noticed two kilograms of cocaine inside the cab, said a Port Authority spokesman, Allen Morrison.
The rest of the cocaine was found in the trailer.


Hollywood's Superhunk Heads for Nottingham
Kevin Costner is in a bad mood.
He does not want to be trivialized.
He does not want to be analyzed.
He does not want to be criticized.
He does not want to be "titillized," as he puts it, much less titillated.
He stalks down a street on the cusp of the French Quarter, wearing jeans and a bright green shirt, his hair slicked back and his scorching blue eyes shaded behind dark sunglasses.
The heels of his brown cowboy boots tap an impatient tattoo, and he is annoyed when a group of middle-aged women hesitantly beg him to pose for a photograph while he waits at a red light.


Under the Spell Of Scary Stuff
I have just spent a long rainy weekend buried under a quilt, devouring salty peanuts and a stack of John Bellairs mysteries.
It was heaven.
Do I
hafta
get up from the couch and grow up?
The catchy titles of these chiller-dillers -- all 12 of them, beginning in 1973 with "The House With a Clock in Its Walls" and including "The Spell of the Sorcerer's Skull" and "The Revenge of the Wizard's Ghost" -- sound like something a kid might think up in the dark.
The creepy Edward Gorey illustrations -- of tumbledown mansions and inclement weather and frightful creatures peering out from thickets of crosshatched pen strokes -- look like something a kid might tape to his walls.
The stories themselves, in a sense, are also the work of a child's mind.


U.S. Women's Team May Be World's Best
The ball is round, and cannot be touched with the hands.
Soccer has another rule, unwritten but tradition-bound: Teams from the United States make accommodating doormats for the world's more talented feet.
Yet on Sunday at the Yale Bowl in New Haven, local fans will have the chance to see an American squad that is one of the top soccer teams in the world.
Before the United States men's national team faces Juventus of Italy, (minus World Cup players Salvatore Schillaci and Roberto Baggio), the United States women's national team will play an exhibition against an amateur squad.


MISSION + MARGIN: The Nun as C.E.O.
In the walnut-paneled mansfield room of the Capitol building in Washington, some 90 guests had eaten their fill of chicken with lemon sauce and a troop of white-coated waiters had begun clearing the dishes.
As the decibel level rose, a woman slipped away from her table and, thick white hair peeking from the coiffe of her navy-blue habit, started to make her rounds.
Pausing at a nearby table, Sister Irene Kraus said a few words that set off peals of laughter.
Then, linking arms with a diner, she led him briskly across the room to greet another guest.
A moment later, chatting with two nuns, she broke into an impromptu dance.
Sister Irene, 66, is the chief executive of the Daughters of Charity National Health System, the largest private, nonprofit hospital chain in the country.
In fact, with its 36 acute-care hospitals, 19 other health-care facilities and net revenues last year of $3.1 billion, the Daughters are right behind such for-profit giants as Hospital Corporation of America and Humana.


Travel Advisory; Train-Driving School in Wales
Those who have always wanted to play engineer on a speeding locomotive can still realize their ambition, thanks to a five-day course offered by the Fairbourne and Barmouth Steam Railway in Wales.
The privately run narrow-gauge steam railroad offers a five-day package course for about $680 that includes accommodations in a local hotel with breakfast and dinner.
An intensive one-day course, with a guarantee that each student drives the engine the full three-mile length of the line, costs $85.
Trainees learn how to run a steam locomotive, how one works, and safety regulations, an official says.
All the railway's engines and cars are copies of famous but now defunct narrow-gauge trains.
Fairbourne is a seaside resort on Cardigan Bay on the west coast of Wales.
More information: Fairbourne and Barmouth Steam Railway, Beach Road, Fairbourne, Gwynedd LL38 2PZ, United Kingdom; telephone (341) 250362.


Washington Celebrates Gulf War Triumph With Parade of Military Might


Making a Difference; A Passion for Networking
For Allan H. Weis, building computer networks has been a hobby and a passion for more than 20 years.
So last year, when the computer designer told Jack Kuehler, president of the International Business Machines Corporation, that he was leaving the company to build a national high-speed data network, Mr.
Kuehler joked that Mr.
Weis wasn't going to be working, "he was going to be on vacation and enjoying himself."
A 30-year veteran of I.B.M., Mr.
Weis left with $10 million in donations from his former employer and the MCI Communications Corporation.
He used the money to found Advanced Network and Services Inc., a nonprofit corporation with a mandate to push the private and public sectors to build a highly sophisticated "data highway."


FISHING
TARPON QUEST
By John N. Cole. 106 pp. New York: Lyons &amp; Burford. $16.95.
WHERE THE TROUT ARE ALL AS LONG AS YOUR LEG
By John Gierach. Illustrated. 84 pp. New York: Lyons &amp; Burford. $15.95.
ON THE SPINE OF TIME
An Angler's Love of the Smokies.
By Harry Middleton. 237 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.
UPLAND STREAM
Notes on the Fishing Passion.
By W. D. Wetherell. 204 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


Campus Life: UC, Santa Cruz; Faculty Votes to Raise Teaching Requirements
Some critics think university professors spend too much time doing research and not enough teaching.
The University of California at Santa Cruz moved last week to nudge the pendulum back toward teaching.
In a mail referendum, the 461-member Faculty Senate approved, 158 to 146, a proposal to require all professors to teach one extra course for one term every three years.
Faculty members who object to teaching the added course -- usually a seminar -- in the residential colleges can offer it in the academic departments.


Tarnish on the Golden Arch?
To the Editor:
As a 16-year -- now former -- McDonald's franchisee I can readily attest to the veracity of "An American Icon Wrestles with a Troubled Future" (May 12).


First World Bowl Bewilders the Prince
When Mike Lynn, the president of the World League of American Football, met Prince Charles at a charity dinner on Thursday night, he asked the heir to the British throne if he would be going to the game on Sunday, referring, of course, to World Bowl '91, in which the London Monarchs will play the Barcelona Dragons for the first World League championship.
The Prince replied: "What game?"


Horse Racing; Hammer Will Be in the Stands Rapping for Lite Light
In a sport enlivened by the arrival of cult heroes like Magic Johnson and Wayne Gretzky, nobody is creating more waves these days than Lewis Burrell Sr. of Oakland, Calif., who spends and bets and races with joy and who also happens to be the father of the rap singer M. C. Hammer and the owner of the dashing filly Lite Light.
They will all be there at Belmont Park today when Lite Light challenges Leroy Jolley's champion filly, Meadow Star, in the climactic event on Belmont Park's busiest and best weekend of thoroughbred racing.
And Louis Burrell Jr., who has a different spelling than his father but the same outlook, says: "This is what racing needs: new blood."


S. J. Keegan Wed To Miss Gebelein
Anna Perkins Gebelein and Stephen John Keegan were married yesterday at the Evangelical Congregational Church in Grafton, Mass., by the Rev.
Timothy Hanley.
The bride is a daughter of Mrs.
Bruce Crawford of Grafton and the late George C. Gebelein Jr.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Keegan of Greenwich, Conn.
The bride, 33 years old, graduated from Middlebury College.
She was until recently an interior landscape designer for the Providence Plant Company in East Providence, R.I.
Her father was a vice president and a director of the Lawrence McCoy lumber company in Worcester, Mass.
Her stepfather, who is retired, was the personnel manager of the Woods Hole (Mass.) Oceanographic Institute.
Her mother, Louise Crawford, is a landscape consultant.


T.W.A. IS CONVICTED IN JET BOMB BLAST
A Brooklyn jury found Trans World Airlines guilty of willful misconduct last week for failing to take adequate precautions to prevent a bomb explosion on a jetliner near Athens five years ago.
The jury's verdict, delivered Thursday in the second phase of a civil trial, confirmed the jury's earlier award of $2.8 million to the family of a passenger who was killed and $250,000 to a passenger who was injured as a result of the midair explosion.


The S.E.C. And the Death Of Disclosure
Disclosure has been the foundation of American securities laws ever since the Securities and Exchange Commission was created, in the aftermath of the 1929 crash.
But while the people at the S.E.C. still talk a good game when it comes to disclosure, the fact is that the rules requiring it are being sacrificed at the altar of internationalization.
It is getting easier for foreign companies to get American money without bothering to comply with America's accounting standards, which are generally more strict, and require more information, than their overseas counterparts.


Kristin Crowder Weds in Darien
Kristin Lie Crowder, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Norman Crowder 3d of Darien, Conn., was married in Darien last night to Christopher Richard Dollase, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Henry Dollase of Needham, Mass., and Middlebury, Vt.
The bride's uncle, the Rt.
Rev.
R.
Stewart Wood Jr., the Bishop of the Diocese of Michigan, and the Rev.
Frederick T. Bender officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Dollase, 24 years old, graduated from Middlebury College, as did her husband.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Alexander &amp; Alexander Consulting Group Inc., an insurance benefits consulting firm in Lyndhurst, N.J.


Editors' Note
An article on page 30 of The Times Magazine today discusses the career of the saxophonist Stan Getz, renewed in spite of his long illness with liver cancer.
On Thursday, after the magazine had gone to press, Mr.
Getz died at the age of 64.


Corrections
A picture caption on the Evening Hours page on May 26 about a dinner for the Ms.
Foundation for Women misidentified a guest shown with Bella Abzug.
She was Alma Rangel, the wife of Representative Charles B. Rangel of Manhattan.


Commercial Property: South Street Seaport; At Last, a Plan Wins In Landmark District
WHAT could the following six projects possibly have in common?
A 23-story office building designed by Ulrich Franzen.
A 43-story apartment tower, also by Mr.
Franzen.
Jan Hird Pokorny's design for a 30-story residential tower.
A bulky commercial structure of 14 stories, by Emery Roth &amp; Sons.
A more complex, multifaceted office building, by Platt &amp; Byard, with 15 stories.
And a 12-story version of that composition by the same firm.
Answer: All were proposed by Paul and Seymour Milstein for their parcel at 250 Water Street, in the South Street Seaport Historic District.
And, over eight years, none of the plans was deemed appropriate by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.


A Party Fleet Tries Not to Founder
Chris Coronesi stood at the stern rail of the Pastime II amid a half-dozen cronies fishing for flounder three miles off the Rockaway jetty near the Brooklyn-Queens border.
He had one hand on a fishing rod and the other on a cellular telephone with an extension cord that snaked into a portable battery pack as his feet.
Mr.
Coronesi, the president of Aspen Associates, a Manhattan construction management and contracting company, was talking to a client.
"Hold it a minute," he said into the phone after feeling a tug on his rod.
"I've got some business on the other line."


For Flag Maker, Patriotic Renewal Brings Star-Spangled Sales
IN 45 years in the flag business, Harold D. Burns has watched sales wax and wane with patriotism.
"The Bicentennial was a busy time, and so was the time when Alaska and Hawaii were admitted to statehood," he recalled.
"But Desert Storm has surpassed them all."
As the country prepares to celebrate Flag Day on Friday, an era of flag-waving patriotism appears to be sweeping the country, said Mr.
Burns, who has spent 23 years as general manager of the Sirtex Printing Company in Old Mystic, a division of Dettra Flag Company of Oaks, Pa.
It began when troops fired the first rockets at Iraq during the Persian Gulf conflict, and it has not subsided "one iota," Mr.
Burns said.


Sports People: BOXING; Foreman Reveals Offer
Former heavyweight champion GEORGE FOREMAN says he has been offered $15 million to fight former champion MIKE TYSON this fall.
Foreman, who was in Minneapolis for the high school graduation of his daughter, Michi, told The St.
Paul Pioneer Press that Tyson's promoter, DON KING, had made the offer. (AP)


SUMMARY
International 3-16
The impact of South Africa's reforms has eluded the millions of blacks who remain in the country's shantytowns.
The dismantling of apartheid promises only continuing homelessness, malnutrition and despair.
Page 1


WHEN A.T.&amp;T. PLAYS HARDBALL
Standing on the stage of the Arie Crown Theater in Chicago's McCormick Place convention center on April 17, addressing his stockholders, the 56-year-old chairman of A.T.&amp;T. sounded a plaintive note as he described the uneven course of his attempt to buy the NCR Corporation.
"What we had hoped for," said Robert E. Allen, "was a heady courtship of wine and roses, and a quick elopement." What he had experienced, far from a smooth romance, was a very public dust-up in which the object of his affection had told him in no uncertain terms to get lost.
Yet even on this April morning, several months after A.T.&amp;T. had made its first concrete offer and been turned down, one could detect a note of surprise in Allen's voice.
The leaders of American Telephone and Telegraph had expected that NCR would welcome their bid, and some of them were said to believe that NCR might be tailoring itself for an A.T.&amp;T. merger -- a notion that Charles E. Exley Jr., the 61-year-old chairman of NCR, attributes to "self-hypnosis."


COMMON DECENCY
Jacoby's appeal for common decency in dating situations is as eloquent as it is, alas, unhelpful.
Her essay reminds me of the words spoken by Blanche DuBois, in "A Streetcar Named Desire," as she is ushered off to the madhouse after being raped: "I have always depended on the kindness of strangers."
Wiser for Jacoby to have cautioned women to date in the way that people with common sense drive their cars -- defensively and sober.
HERBERT TARR
Brooklyn


GULF WAR AFFECTS FATE OF HOSTAGES
The invasion of Kuwait and war that followed created opportunities and obstacles for the release of Western hostages still held in Lebanon, Administration officials and independent experts on international terrorism say.
But despite the positive signals, unfulfilled demands of the captors continue to block any release of the 12 Western hostages, including six Americans, held by the Shiite Muslim Party of God, an Iranian-backed organization believed to be the umbrella group for the kidnappers.


Linda Hoffman to Wed Brian Sterling
Dr. and Mrs.
Gerry A. Hoffman of Islip, L.I., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Linda Sue Hoffman and Brian Richard Sterling, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold G. Sterling of South Orange, N.J.
Ms.
Hoffman, 30 years old, is a director of marketing for Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University, where she also received an M.B.A.
Her father is a dentist in Islip.


Bridge
Thousands of bridge enthusiasts in the New York area have lamented the death of the world's most famous club.
The Cavendish Club closed nine days ago at 105 East 73d Street, a victim of rising rents and other financial problems.
The Cavendish included in its membership rolls nearly all the best players in the New York area.
The Wednesday night Imp game regularly included a handful of players who had won world and national titles, probably the only club game in the country of which that could be said.
The annual Charity Invitational Pairs attracted experts from other continents as well as all parts of North America, and raised more than $200,000 for the Children's Cancer Fund and other charities.


No Laugh Track, No Deal
Irrelevant.
The label has been slapped on television periodically over the decades, but now it threatens to become permanent as the industry, led by the commercial networks, brazenly denies even the slightest pretense it might have had to social and cultural responsibility.


Keyboard Variety


Kathryn Spier Is Wed To James D. Dana Jr.
Kathryn Elizabeth Spier, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter E. Spier of Shoreham, L.I., was married in Wading River, L.I., yesterday to James Dwight Dana Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dana of Appleton, Wis.
The Rev.
Louis Tuleja performed the ceremony at the Wading River Congregational Church.
Ms.
Spier, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, is an assistant professor of economics at Harvard University.
She and her husband graduated from Yale University and received doctorates in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father writes and illustrates children's books.


Doris Braun Wed To John Taboada
Doris Elizabeth Braun, the daughter of Melitta Braun of Barryville, N.Y., and the late Willi Braun, was married yesterday in Yulan, N.Y., to John E. Taboada, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Juan Taboada of Kew Gardens, Queens.
The Rev.
Timothy Gritmon performed the ceremony at St.
Anthony's Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 29 years old, is an assistant vice president at the Denorske Bank in New York.
She is a graduate of the State University at Binghamton.
Her parents owned the New Highland Hotel and Motel in Yulan; her mother is now retired.


Japanese Volcano Erupts Anew


Headliners; Food Fight
Sometimes it seems that the Food and Drug Administration is more concerned with drugs than food.
But the agency's commissioner, David A. Kessler, is trying to change that image by enforcing regulations that have been on the books for years.
In April the agency went after processed orange juice that was labeled "fresh" and cooking oil that was marked "no cholesterol" when it contained other fats that were just as bad.
Last week he said his next target will be manufacturers who mislead consumers into thinking their products are low in fat.
"A product that says it is 97 percent fat free but has 50 percent of its calories from fat is misleading," Dr.
Kessler said.
"This is a marketing gimmick and I'd like to see all of them gone." In their place, he wants labels comparing the amount of fat and sodium in a product with the recommended daily doses, and even comparing one company's product with another.
"The label is the most important form of nutrition education," Dr.
Kessler said.


This Week: Garden Patrol
Dig and divide spring-blooming bulbs as foliage yellows.
Prune spring-flowering shrubs after bloom, but don't prune summer or fall bloomers, because flowers would be lost.


Miss Pantaleoni, Actress, Marries
Elizabeth Tea Pantaleoni, an actress, and Neil Joseph Tardio Jr., a producer of television commercials, were married yesterday at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Hope, N.J.
The Rev.
William Martin officiated.
Mrs.
Tardio, 25 years old, attended Sarah Lawrence College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Pantaleoni of New York.
Her father is a partner in the New York office of the Fulbright &amp; Jaworski law firm of Houston.
Her grandmother the late Mrs.
Guido Pantaleoni was a president of the United States Committee for Unicef.


Who in the End Pays for Free Trade? The American Worker
To the Editor:
In "Who Champions the Working Class?" (Op-Ed, May 26), Robert B. Reich presents the stunning statistic that two-thirds of American wage earners have lost 12 percent in real wages (hence in purchasing power) in the last 15 years -- and then proceeds to deplore protectionism.
But global free trade is the very phenomenon that produced that statistic.
No other explanation is convincing.


Coins
June seems to be a month of coin sales, with no fewer than three major sales to take place in the next few days.
The two most important sales are undoubtedly Sotheby's auctions of the final portions of the Nelson Bunker Hunt collection of Greek and Roman coins and the collection of Byzantine coins amassed by his brother, William Herbert Hunt.
The other parts of these coin collections, perhaps the greatest collections of ancient coins ever, were sold for some $18 million at previous auctions.


Farewells and an Anniversary
IT has been two years and two months since the Phyllis Rothman Gallery appeared on the Fairleigh Dickinson University campus here, housed in a part-classical temple, part-bungalow made of plastic foam.
The first show focused on artist-teachers, like Josef Albers and Hans Hofmann, and the opening was attended by the New Jersey Establishment, including Gov.
Thomas H. Kean and Senator Frank R. Lautenberg.
On view now is the 17th show -- of paintings and drawings by Keith Smith -- and when it ends, on June 21, the gallery will die, the victim of the art "freeze," and without so much as a memorial service.
Needless to say, the Center for Entrepreneurial Studies, with which it shares the premises, lives on.
As for Arie Galles, the gallery's director, he remains a professor of art on the university faculty.


Technology; The Hologram Computers of Tomorrow
Researchers here are developing a computer memory system that could store the contents of thousands of books in a piece of material the size of a Scrabble tile.
Moreover, the new system could be fast enough to retrieve in one second an amount of information that would keep today's computer disk drives occupied for five hours.
The experimental memory device stores information using holograms, those shimmering three-dimensional images that are commonly seen on credit cards.
It is under development at the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation, a computer-industry consortium here usually known by the initials M.C.C.


BEST SELLERS: June 9, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
2
2
63
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
3
3
5
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) Inspired by his grandfather, a London vendor, a man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
4
4
13
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
6
3
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
6
5
6
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of two perpetrators of an insurance scam.
7
9
5
BRIGHT CAPTIVITY, by Eugenia Price. (Doubleday, $20.) Romance comes to a plantation owner's daughter during the War of 1812. (LP)
8
7
16
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman enables them to solve romantic problems. (LP)
9
12
2
IMMORTALITY, by Milan Kundera. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) Through the lives of characters in 19th-century Weimar and present-day Paris, the author reflects on contemporary life.
10 *
10
4
THE CROWN OF COLUMBUS, by Michael Dorris and Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $21.95.) A couple who have long disagreed about everything find understanding on a Caribbean research trip.
11
8
9
THE SEERESS OF KELL, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) The fifth volume in the "Malloreon" fantasy saga.
12
9
DAMAGE, by Josephine Hart. (Knopf, $18.) A British gentleman is mesmerized when he meets the woman his son plans to marry.
13
15
4
OBJECT LESSONS, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $19.) An Irish-Italian girl comes of age in suburbia during a summer in the late 1960's.
14 *
11
2
THE CAT WHO KNEW A CARDINAL, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $16.95.) To save a friend who is a prime suspect, Jim Qwilleran investigates the murder of a town's most despised man.
15 *
16
7
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $21.95.) An insurance company investigator probes the murder of a millionaire.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How the President and his high military commanders made their decisions during the first two years of the Bush Administration.
2
3
29
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
3
2
7
NANCY REAGAN, by Kitty Kelley. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized biography of the former First Lady.
4
6
4
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
5
4
11
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Random House, $22.) A producer's experiences in Hollywood.
6
8
4
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated on campus.
7
7
7
THERE ARE NO CHILDREN HERE, by Alex Kotlowitz. (Talese/Doubleday, $21.95.) Two brothers growing up on Chicago's mean streets.
8
5
2
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) The murder of a young Orange County, Calif., woman and the tangled family relationships that brought it about.
9
9
10
A HISTORY OF THE ARAB PEOPLES, by Albert Hourani. (Belknap/Harvard University, $24.95.) A comprehensive account by an Oxford scholar.
10 *
14
7
MOVING PICTURES, by Ali MacGraw. (Bantam, $20.) The movie star of the 1970's looks back on her checkered career.
11
15
2
THE DAY AMERICA TOLD THE TRUTH, by James Patterson and Peter Kim. (Prentice Hall, $19.95.) Americans' beliefs about sex, drugs and many other matters, as revealed through a poll.
12
11
IN OUR DEFENSE, by Ellen Alderman and Caroline Kennedy. (Morrow, $22.95.) How the Bill of Rights affects Americans' lives today.
13
1
COUNSEL TO THE PRESIDENT, by Clark Clifford with Richard Holbrooke. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the lawyer who served as adviser to several generations of Democrats.
14 *
1
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events and machinations that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
15 *
16
10
SLEEPWALKING THROUGH HISTORY, by Haynes Johnson. (Norton, $24.95.) A social history of America during the Reagan era.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
4
31
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
2
2
43
HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal with today's problems.
3
19
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) An illustrated book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
4 *
1
2
LIGHT HER FIRE, by Ellen Kreidman. (Villard, $18.95.) Ways by which men can excite women romantically.
5
3
74
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,204 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
A LIFE OF HER OWN: A Countrywoman in Twentieth-Century France, by Emilie Carles, as told to Robert Destanque. (Rutgers University, $19.95.) Rural canniness is conveyed in the voice of a peasant in this memoir, immensely popular in France, of a sharp-tongued country teacher who fought to keep the Alps unspoiled.
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) Afraid of rocking the boat, too many American Jews see themselves as guests in someone else's land, an attorney and civil libertarian argues; the solution, he says, is more chutzpah!
THE BOOK OF SAINTS, by Nino Ricci. (Knopf, $19.) A beautifully paced first novel, almost mythological in its impact, about a poor Italian mountain village and a family left behind by immigration.
FROM LENIN TO LENNON: A Memoir of Russia in the Sixties, by David Gurevich. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $21.95.) A dryly witty account of totalitarian life along the Volga offers an important lesson: the most typical horrors are not savage repressions but the routine humiliations of the average citizen.
CRIMES OF CONSCIENCE, by Nadine Gordimer. (Heinemann, Paper, $8.95.) Tricky moral ground is deftly negotiated in 11 tales of contemporary South Africa, its politics and its betrayals.
THE MONEY MACHINE: How KKR Manufactured Power &amp; Profits, by Sarah Bartlett. (Warner, $24.95.) A readable and insightful examination of the company that perfected the leveraged buyout, by a Times reporter who doesn't hesitate to identify heroes and villains.
THE SEARCH FOR GOD AT HARVARD, by Ari L. Goldman. (Times Books/Random House, $20.) A Times reporter's engaging account of a year at the Harvard Divinity School.


Another Rap on 'Wrap Arounds'
To the Editor:
The article "Are 'Wrap Arounds' Overpriced?" (Your Own Account, May 19) failed to mention the fundamental issue concerning the high fees being charged for wrap accounts.
The need for hand-holding or the frequency of trading may be factors for consideration but the real question is whether the money managers involved are able to consistently outperform a market index such as the Standard &amp; Poor's 500.


No More Pencils, No More Books: A Quiz
"There is nothing on earth intended for innocent people so horrible as a school," George Bernard Shaw maintained.
Plenty of writers have agreed with him.
Maybe they were too rebellious, too imaginative or just too ornery.
Even as millions of students take wing for a summer of freedom, the editors of The Book Review have sprung a pop quiz.
Match the memories of anxiety and loathing (and occasional bliss) with their authors.
Answers are upside down on the opposite page.


Postings: 11 of 'the Best'; Landmarks Citations
Designations, it gives.
Certificates of appropriateness, it gives.
But the Landmarks Preservation Commission had never before given awards.
Last Tuesday, however, in City Hall, 11 commendations were handed out to developers, architects, homeowners and city officials for preservation projects involving individual landmarks or buildings in historic districts.
"We looked for the dynamic," said Laurie Beckelman, chairwoman of the commission.
"We looked for the exquisite. We chose the best."


Making a Difference; New Policy On Pollution
The legacy of environmental contamination has become a growing problem for the real estate industry.
Buyers and lenders have shied away from many deals because they are leery of acquiring property that may cost millions of dollars to clean up.
Few have been able to find insurers willing to protect them against future liability at a reasonable price because insurance companies have too little experience to predict what the risks are at any given site, even after engineers have performed an inspection known as an environmental audit.
Now comes Paul K. Freeman, a 41-year-old Harvard-educated lawyer and founder of the Environmental Risk Insurance Company Group.
The five-year-old company, based in Englewood, Colo., got its start writing insurance for asbestos contractors.
In the last two years, Mr.
Freeman and his staff examined 9,000 environmental audits as well as engineering firm operating practices, lender protocols and records of cases in which audits failed to turn up problems.


Miss Kelting Wed In East Hampton
Anne Carolyn Kelting, a daughter of Howard W. Kelting of New York and Mrs.
Fred J. Keen of Tenafly, N.J., was married in East Hampton, L.I., yesterday to Dr.
Eric Leslie Kronenberg, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Kronenberg of Skillman, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert F. Capon officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Kronenberg, 31 years old, is known as Nancy.
She is a senior investment banking associate in the London office of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
She graduated from Brown University, as did her husband, and received an M.B.A. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where her husband received a doctorate in physics.
Her father is a portfolio manager at M. J. Whitman &amp; Company, an investment banking concern in New York.
Her mother, M. Whitney Keen, is a fund-raising consultant in Tenafly.


Abortion Foes Seek Ties With Groups for Disabled
Leaders of the nation's most prominent anti-abortion organization vowed this week to work to strengthen ties with advocates for the rights of the disabled, saying that the two movements had common goals.
"I am concerned with the theory gaining in popularity that it is better to be dead than to be disabled," said Robert Powell, a paraplegic from Galveston, Tex., who was elected vice president of the National Right to Life Committee at the group's three-day annual convention, which ended here today.
"Many of us find it alarming that it is considered acceptable to abort an unborn child just because of disability."


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
Living in the Wider World
We should read the classics, Jacques Barzun reminds us, because they liberate us from the constrictions of work and everyday life.
This is from "Begin Here: The Forgotten Conditions of Teaching and Learning" (University of Chicago).


The Region; The Outer Boroughs Come Closer to the Inner Circle
IMAGINE if Saul Steinberg had been facing east instead of west when he caricatured the typical Manhattanite's map of the world.
The four other New York City boroughs might have been depicted as an inconvenient cultural gap -- consisting of two airports, two baseball stadiums, a bulging landfill, a sliver of beach, the former homes of the fictional Archie Bunker and the larger-than-life Rev.
Al Sharpton and acres of one- and two-family homes -- separating the city from the Hamptons and Europe.
In contrast, for nearly a century the four counties known collectively and often dismissively as the city's outer boroughs have regarded Manhattan with ambivalence: they have coveted its wealth and access to upstate water, but resented its predominance, bristled at the arrogance of its self-perpetuating highbrows and shrank before the aggressiveness of its lowlifes.


Encounter With a Beneficial Creature
There's a toad in my garden.
And it is welcome.
But we scared each other, because neither one knew the other was there.
While rummaging around the border where there were some old leaves from last autumn, I heard a sudden rustling noise.
Something hopped forward.
It was the toad's quick escape to avoid being trampled by an old tennis shoe with a foot inside.


Summer a Good Time To Repair a Window
TROUBLESOME windows are best repaired in the summer, when they can be opened or removed without discomfort.
For drafty double-hung wood windows that stick or need new sash cords, a quick easy repair for both problems is to install replacement window channels.
The simplest and probably most-common replacement channels are Window Fixers, made by the Quaker City Manufacturing Company, 701 Chester Pike, Sharon Hill, Pa., 19079.
They consist of shallow metal troughs that fit vertically on each side of the window frame, creating smooth, close-fitting channels in which the sashes can slide.


Getting a Refund When Your Airline Slashes Fares
RIDDLE: When is an ad for an air-fare reduction bad news?
Answer: When you have already bought your ticket.
The airline has had the use of your money all this time, and theoretically it should be willing to offer you a deal equal to the one it is offering to a perfect stranger, but it ain't necessarily so.


Notebook; White Sox Want A Hit, Not a Dirge
If there was one thing the Chicago White Sox wanted to make perfectly clear before the season began, it was that they did not intend to do a reprise of the 1990 Baltimore Orioles.
One-third of the way through the six-month run, though, Andrew Lloyd Webber couldn't have made the tune sound more similar.
The Orioles, who so melodically nearly stole a division championship in 1989, played gratingly off-key last year and rendered meaningless the stunning progress they had made as a young, aggressive band of players.
In 1988, the Orioles staggered to a 54-107 record, finishing last, 34 1/2 games out of first.
The next season they had an 87-75 record and were in the division race until the next-to-last day.
Last season, they finished fifth, at 76-85.


Canoeing
To the Editor: A picture on your section's front page (Travel, May 12) shows people incorrectly carrying a canoe.
A canoe should be carried in a balanced way, to make the load equally distributed.


Jane Bradley and Richard Blau Wed
Jane Dysart Bradley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Bradley of Manchester, Mass., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Richard Newton Blau, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Blau of New York.
Hilary Bacon, a justice of the peace, officiated.
The bride, 31 years old, graduated from Harvard University.
Her father, a chemical engineer, retired as the president of Polyset Inc., a solar research company in Manchester.
He is a director of the Cabot Corporation, a diversified industrial company in Waltham, Mass.


The Suits of Summer Look Fresher Than Ever
Seersucker, that summer fabric with the pucker of fresh lemonade, is even fresher this season.
The washable striped cotton fabric, usually blue and white, is being stitched into updated silhouettes, often with stripe widths and colors that seem to spoof the old standby.
"Seersucker was always billed as the poor man's suit," said Tom Julian, a spokesman for the Men's Fashion Association, a trade organization.


Scores Killed in Pakistani Train Crash


Amy Bloch Weds G. A. Horowitz
Dr.
Amy Lynn Bloch, a resident in psychiatry at the Payne Whitney Clinic of New York Hospital, was married last evening to Gregory Aaron Horowitz, a New York lawyer, at the Hudson River Club in Manhattan.
Rabbi Martin Zion officiated.
Dr.
Bloch, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College and received her M.D. from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald C. Bloch of New York and Belmont, Vt.
Her father is chairman of Bloch Bros.
Paper Company in New York.
Her grandfather, the late Charles C. Bloch, founded the company.
Her mother, Nedra Bloch, is a real-estate broker.


Whether Shy Or Flamboyant, A Style for All
Sunglasses do more than protect the eyes from ultraviolet rays.
The right pair can shield the wearer from the public and confer mystery.
Worn indoors, they create an air of remoteness and are a nonverbal way of saying, "I want to be alone."
Depending upon the shape of the frame, sunglasses can evoke an era or a celebrity.
Small round frames suggest the 30's.
Cat's eyes, studded with rhinestones, are 50's kitsch.
Big black dark frames are reminiscent of Jacqueline Kennedy or Audrey Hepburn.


Topics of The Times; Exit Miss Le G.
Eva Le Gallienne's quiet exit last Tuesday at 92 was less dramatic than her many entrances in a theater career that began in 1914.
But not less memorable.
"Miss Le G.," as she was known affectionately, came closer than anyone to providing the American stage with what it lacks: a national repertory theater.
It was called the Civic Repertory Theater, and it flourished on West 14th Street from 1927 until its demise during the Great Depression.
She not only directed but acted in most of its 34 productions, among them Ibsen plays in her own translation.
The tickets were cheap, the performances outstanding -- including a "Peter Pan" in which Miss Le G. flew to the balcony on a wire.


Hot Coffee Journal; There's Little to Do, But the Name Is a Big Draw
At the front of Knight's General Store, between the jars of pigs' lips and pigs' feet and the case of live crickets, sits a simple, scarcely noticeable Bunn coffee maker.
On a steamy Southern afternoon there are few takers for the brew, whose octane level four hours after it was made is worthy of the Chevron pumps outside.
But the Bunn coffee machine, with its canister of artificial sweetener nearby, is the descendant of the steaming pot that gave this town its name.
And the name is pretty much the only reason anyone ever stops in Hot Coffee.


A Little Truck Stop in the South of France
TOUJOURS PROVENCE
By Peter Mayle. Illustrated. 241 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


Stan Getz Through the Years
A SUMMER EVENING IN MANHATTAN.
Stan Getz is stretched out on his bed in a plush suite at the Parker Meridien Hotel, exhausted, chain-smoking Gauloise cigarettes.
He is a barrel-chested, raspy-voiced man with a fondness for sharp clothes, intimidating when he wants to be, but tonight his face is as round and devoid of malice as a baby's.
Getz is happy about last night's show at Carnegie Hall.
It was the first public airing of some tricky new material from his new album, "Apasionado," and the crowd responded warmly.
At first the tenor saxophonist addressed the audience with an unfamiliar quaver in his voice, but typically, he cut the solemnity of the moment with an offhand remark about being thirsty, having just eaten some lox.
The lox was a way to bring things down to earth and for Getz, who has moved to California, a way to say hello to the hometown friends and family.
Also typically, the new material, which added two synthesizers to Getz's usual quartet, had gone over perfectly well.


Bidding Adieu to the Classic French Film
Three American film critics, stopping off here after the Cannes International Film Festival, rushed first not to the Louvre, the Musee d'Orsay or the Pompidou Center, but to a tiny movie theater in the Rue Champollion near the Sorbonne.
The attraction: "Hellzapoppin," the manic 1941 film adaptation of the Ole Olsen-Chic Johnson Broadway show.
Their explanation: you can't find "Hellzapoppin" at home.
Paris is still Paris, the greatest moviegoing city in the world, where lost movies are found even when you're not looking for them.
In this one week, Paris theaters are offering more than 350 different films, everything from "Alexander Nevsky" and "Salo, or the 120 Days of Sodom" to "Hairspray," "The Rules of the Game" and retrospectives devoted to, among others, the Central Asian cinema of the Soviet Union and Gerard Philippe.


Linda S. Zelenko Wed in Vermont
Linda Simmons Zelenko, a daughter of Harry Zelenko of New York and the late Marion Zelenko, was married in Putney, Vt., yesterday to Stephen Michael Piscuskas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vitold Piscuskas of Lawrenceville, N.J.
Jeffrey Schumlin, a justice of the peace of the State of Vermont, performed the ceremony in his home.
Mrs.
Piscuskas, 31 years old, is a shoe designer for Reebok International in Stoughton, Mass.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father is the president of Zelenko Associates, a New York advertising and graphics company.


Jack Resnick, 83; He Helped Shape New York Skyline
Jack Resnick, a real-estate investor and developer who helped reshape New York City's skyline by putting up dozens of towering apartment and office buildings, died yesterday in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
He was 83 years old and for the last several years had lived in a building named in his honor at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale.
In 1928, Mr.
Resnick opened a real-estate business in the Bronx with one employee, a secretary who was paid $8 a week.
With an aggressive flair for buying, renovating and selling office buildings, he built Jack Resnick &amp; Sons Inc. into one of the city's premiere real-estate businesses.
Along the way, he became one of Manhattan's most active apartment builders.


Slowly, Democracy at Council on Foreign Relations
Nearly two dozen members gathered in a dark wood-paneled parlor of the Council on Foreign Relations Wednesday morning to ponder democratization in the Soviet Union.
They were for it -- up to a point.
The night before, nearly two dozen members of the organization's board had met in the same dark room to consider democratization in the Council on Foreign Relations.
They voted in favor of democracy -- up to a point.


Medgar Evers College Hears From Spike Lee
Spike Lee spoke yesterday at the 20th commencement of Medgar Evers College of the City University of New York, telling the 300 graduates that he has a mission to put the "vast richness of black culture on film."
The two-year college's commencement was in the school's amphitheater on Bedford Avenue in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.


Living Will: Difficult Challenges
UNDER a Federal law that takes effect in December, patients entering nearly every hospital in New Jersey will be advised of the right to make decisions that many would perhaps rather avoid: the right to make living wills and specify the circumstances under which extraordinary means should be used to prolong their lives.
And though most hospital officials in the state support the law, some say that the lack of a statute in New Jersey has stymied their attempts to set guidelines for complying with the Federal law.
The State Assembly is expected to vote this month on living-will legislation.


The Executive Life; Competitive Croquet? You Better Believe It
Twilight settled over the manicured greensward in Central Park that serves as headquarters for the New York Croquet Club.
Dressed in fresh-pressed whites -- polo shirt, Bermuda shorts, socks and sneakers -- Mike Gibbons concentrated hard on his last shot.
"Yellow's dead on red and blue's dead on black," explained Mr.
Gibbons, who is an executive vice president of Estee Lauder, the New York-based cosmetics giant.
"I'm going for a rush."
Click.
A tap of his mallet sent the red ball rolling.
Click.
It hit the blue ball, sending blue through the final wicket.
He raised his mallet in victory.
"This game is all about summing up a situation and making a quick decision," said Mr.
Gibbons, a nationally ranked croquet player.
"That's why executives are good at it. We're always strategizing."


COMMON DECENCY
Feminists seem obsessed with bashing the lunatic fringe of males who contend that a woman's dress, bearing or actions invite date rape.
Fine, if they can stamp out these guys.
But the only issue worth discussing is how to determine who is telling the truth, when there are only two witnesses to an act.
FRED POGUST
Oyster Bay, L.I.


GARDENING
Although there is no shortage this spring of slick and glossy books on gardening that are long on toothsome photography and short on thoughtful text, the season has been a good one for readers who don't need pictures to prompt them to look at their gardens with fresh eyes.
That said, I would like to call attention to two books that do combine photography and text.
The first is DESIGNING WITH PERENNIALS by Pamela J. Harper (326 pp., Macmillan, $40).
Writing from long experience as a gardener, first in England and then in Tidewater Virginia, Ms.
Harper speaks with authority on such matters as color combinations and thoughtful use of foliage textures in the herbaceous perennial border.
She manages, however, to avoid the bossy tone that often creeps into books that dispense advice about selecting plants.
Her book is lavishly illustrated with her own color photographs.
These are extremely attractive and seductive, but a bonus, as the prose would stand up well without them.
In the last few years, there have been several excellent books on perennials, such as Frederick McGourty's "Perennial Gardener," Ruth Rogers Clauson and Nicolas H. Ekstrom's "Perennials for American Gardens" and Allan M. Armitage's "Herbaceous Perennial Plants." Ms.
Harper's book rounds out this quartet, and is quite the best illustrated.


SEX REPORT FAILS AT CHURCH MEETING
In a tense session, a committee of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) unanimously recommended late Friday night that a widely publicized report on human sexuality be rejected.
The decisive action, by the 67-member Assembly Committee on Human Sexuality, makes rejection of the report highly likely when the full General Assembly of 602 elected delegates, known as commissioners, takes up the topic on Monday morning.
The General Assembly, which meets annually, is the highest governing body in the 2.9-million-member denomination.


The Cultivated Gardener; In Growing Strawberries, It Helps to Have Generous Friends
Last year in late August, my friend George gave me some strawberry plants.
They were Surecrop June-bearers, he said, guaranteed to be big, juicy and incredibly sweet.
If I planted them in late summer, the "daughter" plants from an old bed could establish themselves in the fall and produce good berries the next June.
At least, that's the way it worked in George's garden.
I called him up last week to see how his were doing.


CUOMO THREATENS TO VETO $1 BILLION IN STATE SPENDING
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he planned to veto about $1 billion in spending out of the budget passed by lawmakers last Tuesday if the State Comptroller confirmed his belief that the budget is significantly out of balance.
Such a veto would open a new and volatile stage in the protracted struggle here over a state budget.
In some ways it would return the debate to where it began with Mr.
Cuomo's proposed budget in January -- but because the vetoes would leave oficials here agreeing that the budget was at least balanced, most critically needed state aid could soon begin flowing to New York City and other municipalities.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Swarm Busters
Bees are the business of Peter Bee, whose real last name is Bizzoso and who lives in Ronkonkoma.
Mr.
Bizzoso and his partner, John LaRocca of Smithtown, are the beekeepers you reach when you call the Suffolk County Bee Emergency Hot Line, 265-6531, a number as busy this time of year as a tuxedo-rental shop.


A Mixture of Spoof and Homage
EVEN though its summer season is easygoing, the Phoenix Theater isn't about to forsake the classics -- not totally.
Instead of Ibsen, faithfully done last year, the company's new agenda makes room for fractured Chekhov.
That's the second half of the musical double feature "A Day in Hollywood/A Night in the Ukraine," a slight, affectionate spoof of and homage to the movies.
Not film or cinema, but movies: pure, corny, glamorous and fun, 1930's style.


Laura E. Spearman Weds
Laura Elizabeth Spearman and Samuel Bradford Tingley Jr., vice presidents at Chemical Bank in New York, were married yesterday in Atlanta at the Episcopal Cathedral of St.
Philip by the Very Rev.
David B. Collins and the Rev.
Bruce M. Shortell.
Mrs.
Tingley, 28 years old, graduated from Williams College.
She is the daughter of Laura Smith Spearman and Dr.
William B. Spearman, both of Atlanta.
Her husband, 29, graduated from Amherst College.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel B. Tingley of Barrington, R.I.


A 75th-Birthday Bash. Hold the Blockbusters.
Few museums in the United States inspire as much admiration as the Cleveland Museum of Art, which celebrated its 75th anniversary on Friday.
This is partly because Cleveland is not like most art museums either in the way it has been run or the way it has assembled what is on view.
And what sets it apart tells a good deal about how museums construct a history of art.
On display in Cleveland are mainly objects that the institution's directors and staff have selected.
There have been and continue to be plenty of important bequests, but the private collections that form the core holdings of so many other museums play a comparatively modest role here.
This is a place where patrons, through good luck and good sense, hired outstanding people and then gave them the money and leeway they needed.


NASA Rules Out Weekend Repair of Shuttle
Astronauts aboard the space shuttle Columbia will not be required to perform an emergency space walk this weekend because it is unlikely that a loose seal on a cargo bay door will prevent the door from closing properly at the end of the flight on Friday, NASA officials at the Johnson Space Center here said today.
If a problem developed at the last minute when the doors are closed for landing, the nine-day medical research flight would be extended a day and a space walk would then be done, the space agency said.


Rogue Cyclist Seeks Direction
To the Sports Editor:
As a regular cyclist in Central Park, I was disturbed by your June 2 headline, "A Rogue Cyclist Can't Detour Kenyan." When I entered the park at Eighth Avenue and 110th Street at 9:40 A.M. last Saturday, there was no indication that a race was in progress.
Riding counterclockwise in accordance with traffic regulations, I came perilously close to interfering with the race.


Puerto Rican Group Sues to Halt Election
Opening what promises to be a long and bitter legal fight over New York City Council redistricting, the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund has filed a suit to halt the election process until the Justice Department approves the new district boundaries.
The complaint, filed in Federal court in Brooklyn on Friday, charges that New York City is required under the Federal Voting Rights Act to have the Justice Department approve the redistricting plan before any steps are taken toward holding elections using the new boundaries.
The election process is set to begin on June 17, when candidates can begin submitting nominating petitions.


Review/Theater; Several Slices of Life In Festival of One-Acts
There are five diverse one-act plays in Series B of the Ensemble Studio Theater's Marathon 1991.
The works include an earthy slice of urban life, a fantasy about a wife's very nervous breakdown, and an operatic musical that takes place on Air Force One over Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963.
By a narrow margin, Edward Allan Baker's "Face Divided" is the most interesting of one-acts.
It is another street-smart study by this chronicler of the stresses in working-class relationships.
Through neglect or by accident, a young girl has been injured -- or perhaps the cause was parental abuse.


Q and A
Hiking the Appalachian Trail
Q.
Are there organized walking tours of the Appalachian Trail? -- Virginia Hammel, San Francisco
A.
The Appalachian Trail runs 2,144 miles between Maine and Georgia, and hiking the whole trail would take four to six months.
There are 31 clubs that maintain the trail, and each organizes hikes in its section.
These are usually day hikes, but sometimes they involve weekends or longer, according to the Appalachian Trail Conference, the umbrella organization for all the clubs.
When you know which area you wish to hike, you can find the right club through the conference, at Post Office Box 807, Harpers Ferry, W. Va. 25425; (304) 535-6331.


Final Curtain


Westport Gets an Indian Restaurant
WITH Indian restaurants popping up elsewhere in Fairfield County, it was probably only a matter of time before one opened in Westport.
Enter Sheesh Mahal.
Its name means mirror palace, something of an exaggeration for the long, narrow storefront restaurant in a small shopping complex.
A mirror is evident on the left wall, and other mirrors are the glittering glass bits in the many Kashmiri fabrics displayed along the cream-toned stucco walls.
Though small, Sheesh Mahal is modestly attractive, and the single staff member is gracious.
Service is often painfully slow, though, and you can plan on spending a considerable amount of time at either lunch or dinner.
The menu, largely from north India, presents numerous fine choices.
You might begin with chicken chat, a well-spiced mixture of chicken chunks simmered in a tart, tangy tamarind sauce.
For an appetizer sampling, try the Sheesh Mahal assortment.
It contains vegetable samosa (a deep-fried turnover with potato-and-pea stuffing), chicken tikka (tandoori-cooked chicken pieces subtly spiced -- also available as an entree), pakora (deep-fried, vegetable-filled fritters), seesh kabab (a frankfurter-shaped patty of ground meat) and pappadum (paper-thin, spicy lentil wafers).
Both the samosa and pakora can be ordered separately, but the $6.95 assortment platter was generous enough for four guests to sample.


Wildflowers' Perfume Sweetens a Life Devoted to Nature
"I'VE always been what you might call a primitive," said Mary Pasco Sherwood, reaching for a peanut butter cookie.
"I never wanted a pile of money. Just a place in the woods where I could listen to the birds and smell the wildflowers."
Ms.
Sherwood, 85 years old, was enjoying late-morning tea at her two-room house in Storrs.
Sketches of flowers, a wall map tracing Central American Indian tribes and a bookcase lined with nature classics highlighted an otherwise Spartan setting.


Schumanniana


Californian Wins Gymnastics Title
Chris Waller of U.C.L.A. held on through the option routines to win the senior men's title at the United States gymnastics championships today.
Waller outlasted his teammate Chainey Umphrey and Nebraska's Patrick Kirksey to win by .14 points.
Umphrey's second-place finish was the highest ever for a black man at a United States seniors event.


Travel Advisory; Flight Guide For Executives
East/West Network, the publisher of inflight magazines, has launched an executive traveler's handbook called On Time.
The guide features 65,000 flight schedules, updated monthly, with departures, arrivals and connections.
Unlike the bulky Official Airline Guides, which are the size of telephone directories, the handbook, 9 by 3 inches, can easily be carried.
It also contains guides to 20 American cities and 5 of the most popular foreign destinations, with information on hotels, restaurants and executive services.
A European edition of On Time will appear shortly.
Single copies cost $9.95, and subscriptions are $69 a year plus $6 for mailing.
To order, call (800) 765-8463.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LANDMARK EXHIBIT
Last fall, J. Alden Weir's farm in Branchville became the first home of an American artist to be designated a national landmark.
In celebration of that honor, and of the 37 years that Weir painted there, the University of Connecticut has mounted an exhibition of 60 pastels, oils and watercolors that will remain on view in the William Benton Museum of Art at Storrs through Aug. 18.
It is the first major showing of Weir's work in the state.
While he was characterized as an American Impressionist, the exhibit, "J. Alden Weir: A Place of His Own," covers a wide range of styles and techniques.
The subject matter draws on homey, commonplace things in and around the rocky, 150-acre farm, indicating its influence and inspiration.


Campus Life: Grinnell; Class That Missed A Commencement Returns to Campus
Grinnell College's class of 1970 never had a a commencement ceremony.
Rocked by student demonstrations against the Vietnam War and the killings at Kent State, the Grinnell campus closed early in the spring of 1970, and commencement exercises were canceled.
Last weekend, nearly 30 percent of the class of 1970 made some headway in filling the two-decade void.
Older, many with children and looking like any other baby boomers, 60 of the 206 members of the class returned for the dedication of a grove of trees to the maintenance of peace.
It was also a day for reunions and remembering the chaotic spring of 1970.
The peace grove, which was financed by donations from the class, was a result of several months of debate among class members.
Some alumni favored a traditional commencement ceremony with caps and gowns.
Others were opposed to any kind of formal ceremony that might detract from the actions and goals of 20 years ago.


Miss Harvey, Producer, Wed
Elizabeth Anne Harvey, the daughter of Robert Campbell Harvey of Cocoa Beach, Fla., and Mrs.
Paul Patrick Woolard of New York, was married last evening in New York to John Henri Van Merkensteijn 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marius A. Van Merkensteijn of Naples, Fla.
The Rev.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest.
Mrs.
Van Merkensteijn, 33 years old, is a television producer at Young &amp; Rubicam in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in English literature from Columbia University.
Her father is a consultant at John Loehr &amp; Associates, business analysts in Las Vegas, N.M.


Cross-Endorsement: Questions of Protection
The story on the highly controversial cross-endorsements case  [ "Lawyer to Pursue Suit on Cross-Endorsement," May 19 ]  gives rise to serious questions: who is being protected, by whom and why?
There are significant errors and omissions, even omission of the name of the case, Castracan v.
Colavita, now headed for the Court of Appeals based on issues including constitutionally protected voting rights.
No information was given as to the genesis of the Ninth Judicial Committee, its purpose, the credentials of its chairman, Eli Vigliano, a lawyer of 40 years standing, or to my own extensive credentials in law reform.
No reference was made to the ethical mandates of the Code of Judicial Conduct, requiring a judge to disqualify himself "in a proceeding where his impartiality might reasonably be questioned" -- clearly the situation where three of the five judges who decided the appeal failed to disclose their own cross-endorsements.


Doing Business; In Washington, Moscow's Moment Has Arrived
A SEIZE-THE-MOMENT psychology has suddenly taken hold in Washington, a feeling that the moment has arrived to finish a lot of unfinished business with Moscow, before electoral politics or some crisis somewhere distracts everyone's attention.
"Washington is a one-issue town, as we've all known for a very long time" says Robert Legvold, a leading Soviet scholar at Columbia University, "and this month, once again, it's the Soviet Union. Moscow has gotten desperate, thrown a lot of fishing lines in the water, and that has Washington all astir."
Already, the United States has settled a potentially disruptive dispute with the Soviets over the interpretation of the new treaty setting limits on troop levels in Europe.
That opened the way for a major new effort, launched in Geneva last week by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and his Soviet opposite number, Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh, to wrap up at last an agreement on long-range missiles.
If that works, President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev plan a summit meeting in Moscow this month or next.


Streetscapes: The Dickerson Houses; By McKim, Mead &amp; . . . Who?
THE McKim, Mead &amp; White exhibit, which opens Wednesday at the New-York Historical Society, covers all the firm's great works, among them the Villard Houses of 1884, the colossal Penn Station of 1906 and the Fifth Avenue wings of the Metropolitan Museum of Art of 1926.
It is a rich show about America's most famous architectural partnership, but there is a commission missing -- the 1877-79 Dickerson Houses at 62-64 East 34th Street, generally referred to as the firm's earliest surviving New York building.
This is not surprising since it predates Stanford White's arrival in the partnership in September 1879.
The Dickerson commission was not McKim, Mead &amp; White's, but McKim, Mead &amp; Bigelow's.


New Orchestra Salutes Cole Porter's Centennial
THE New Orchestra of Westchester is throwing Cole Porter and itself a birthday party tomorrow on the campus of the State University of New York at Purchase, with a dinner and concert to celebrate the composer's centennial and the symphony's eighth season.
Among the pieces to be performed are selections from "Anything Goes," "Kiss Me Kate" and other pieces from Porter's film and Broadway scores.


Wall Street; Better Information for Muni Investors
The Securities and Exchange Commission approved a plan on Thursday for a central library for municipal-bond offering statements, which are notoriously uneven and may omit important revenue trends.
But it tabled a plan calling for voluntary financial updates by issuers.
Both measures are supported by the municipal bond market as a way of improving information for investors.
But there are signs that the local governments that issue muni bonds are starting to get the message that the market wants more, and better, financial information, said Robert Froehlich, vice president of municipal research at Van Kampen Merritt in Chicago.


Encounter With a Beneficial Creature
THERE'S a toad in my garden.
And it is welcome.
But we scared each other, because neither one knew the other was there.
While rummaging around the border where there were some old leaves from last autumn, I heard a sudden rustling noise.
Something hopped forward.
It was the toad's quick escape to avoid being trampled by an old tennis shoe with a foot inside.


Preparing Salad Days for the Summer
IT may not be considered politically correct, but come summer, in most circles, men barbecue and women make salad.
It's an agreement with which I, for one, am perfectly happy.
Let the men toil over the coals and try to guess in which direction the wind will be headed.
Let them worry about charring the food, setting fire to the side of the house, or serving chicken that is black on the outside and raw in the middle.
I shall be relaxing with a cool drink because my part of the operation -- the salads -- is completed.


Fire's Deadly Dance Is No Accident in 'Backdraft'
"The Silence of the Lambs" had its moth wrangler, an amateur entomologist who harnessed moths with fine wire and flew them around a basement.
"Arachnophobia" had spider wranglers, people armed with hot-air guns to blow spiders hither and yon.
So who was on the set of the new film "Backdraft" -- a movie where fire teases and taunts and bursts forth, then hides, seemingly alive with malign intelligence -- to unleash and rein in the flames?
Well, strictly speaking, it wasn't a wrangler; it was Allen L. Hall, a special effects expert who masterminded illusion on several effect-heavy films -- "Top Gun," "The Untouchables" and "Popeye," among them -- and for whom the fireworks of "Backdraft" were a first.


Summer a Good Time To Repair a Window
Troublesome windows are best repaired in the summer, when they can be opened or removed without discomfort.
For drafty double-hung wood windows that stick or need new sash cords, a quick easy repair for both problems is to install replacement window channels.
The simplest and probably most-common replacement channels are Window Fixers, made by the Quaker City Manufacturing Company, 701 Chester Pike, Sharon Hill, Pa., 19079.
They consist of shallow metal troughs that fit vertically on each side of the window frame, creating smooth, close-fitting channels in which the sashes can slide.


Miss Adam Wed To Hub Langstaff
Margot Adam, the daughter of Sydney Cook Adam of New Canaan, Conn., and Yaounde, Cameroon, and the late Peter Adam, was married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass., to Dr.
Samuel Husbands Langstaff 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Langstaff 2d of Littleton, Colo.
The Rev.
Louise Conant performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Langstaff, 35 years old, and her husband, 32, received M.B.A. degrees last week from Harvard University.
The bride also graduated from the University of Connecticut School of Nursing.
Her mother is a Peace Corps volunteer in West Africa.
Her father was a State Department officer in the Middle East and North Africa.


Correction
A chart in the Arts and Leisure section on May 26 with an article about the film "Hudson Hawk" misstated the production cost of "Who Framed Roger Rabbit." According to Amblin Entertainment and Touchstone Pictures, the film's producers, it was about $50 million.


A Hindu Nationalist Stirs and Scares
They gathered beneath the monsoon-soaked coconut palms, thousands and thousands of people at each stop, some barefoot, many of them poor, listening intently to the words of the man from New Delhi far to the north.
"Victory to Mother India!" he said in a hoarse voice, and at each stop the crowd responded with a great cheer.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Announced they will move their spring training facility to Homestead, Fla. in 1993.
National League
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Signed Dominic DeSantis, Craig Holman and Glenn Nevill, pitchers; Phil Geisler and Craig Billeci, first basemen; Bruce Smolen, infielder, and Carlton Hardy, third baseman.
Football National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed K.D.
Dunn, tight end.
Acquired Roy Green, wide receiver, from the Phoenix Cardinals for an undisclosed draft choice.
World League of American Football
BARCELONA DRAGONS -- Signed Mark Murphy, defensive end.


Social Events
Monte Carlo and Rio June 10 -- Vacations in Monte Carlo and Rio de Janeiro are among the offerings at an auction from 6 to 10 P.M. at the Tower Suite, the top floor of the Time-Life Building, 1271 Avenue of the Americas, at 50th Street .
Proceeds will benefit the Coalition for the Homeless and Community Access, which provides services and housing for mentally ill homeless people.
There will be music, a buffet and cocktails.
Tickets $125; (212) 420-1594.
A New Theater in Harlem


Julia H. Gillespie Is Wed in Capital
Julia Howard Gillespie and William Barlow Sanders 3d were married yesterday in Washington.
Abbot Aiden Shea, a Benedictine monk, performed the ceremony in Notre Dame Chapel at Trinity College.
The bride is a daughter of Mrs.
Julian E. Gillespie Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Mr.
Gillespie.
The bridegroom is the son of Mrs.
William B. Sanders Jr. of Alexandria, Va., and the late Mr.
Sanders.


Jackson's Tactic Hardly Classy
To the Sports Editor:
Perhaps churlishness is contagious.
How else to explain Ira Berkow's recent tirade against Chuck Daly and the Pistons?
If Phil Jackson had not whined to league officials about Detroit's dirty play before the series, the Pistons would have felt far less animosity toward the Bulls after the sweep.
Jackson's tactic was hardly classy.
And why should Michael Jordan get any accolades from the Pistons when he badmouthed them in the press as unworthy champions?


Sports People: TENNIS; Suit Upsets Navratilova
A former companion has sued MARTINA NAVRATILOVA, contending that the tennis star owes her as much as $10 million under a "nonmarital cohabitation agreement" the two concluded in 1986 after moving into a house together in 1984.
The suit, filed by JUDY NELSON in Texas state court in Fort Worth last week, says that under the agreement Nelson is due half the assets the two acquired during their years together. (AP)


Miss Harper Wed To R. M. Moeser
Victoria Harper, the daughter of Valerie Harper of New York, and Richard Mestres Moeser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles R. Moeser of Cincinnati, were married yesterday at Emmanuel Episcopal Church in Manchester, Mass.
The Rev.
George Hunter performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Moeser, 24 years old, is a graduate of Wesleyan University.
Her late father, Marion Clay Harper Jr., founded and headed the Interpublic Group of Companies in New York, the holding company for several advertising agencies including McCann-Erickson Worldwide.


The World; NATO's Difficult Career Change
FOR the NATO foreign ministers gathered in Denmark last week, it was the to-be-or-not-to-be question: Who needs NATO any more, now that the Soviet Union is no longer a threat?
The same question was at the center of discussion at NATO gatherings in 1989 and 1990, but then it seemed more theoretical than real.
Not this time around.
The Soviets have agreed to be out of Germany by the end of 1994.
The 500,000-man Warsaw Pact army under Soviet control no longer exists and several of the pact's former members, such as Hungary, have actually inquired about joining NATO.
The Soviet Union itself is struggling to keep from disintegrating.
Alliances are defined much more by their enemies than their architects, and NATO's enemies just aren't what they used to be.


Public &amp; Private; Instant Replay, Confettied
One of the weirdest technological wonders of our modern age, along with the fact that you can now bake a potato in the time it takes to blow your nose, is the strange case of the video camera.
We have a generation of children who think life works like this: You do things, and then as soon as you are finished doing them, you watch yourself doing them on television.
The result is that reality sometimes seems even more synthetic than it is.
This is the image that comes to me when I consider the Persian Gulf war parade to be held tomorrow in lower Manhattan.
The parade will be an instant replay of many of the elements that made the conflict in the gulf so popular in some quarters, and so troubling in others:


Corrections
Because of a production error, part of a letter to the editor on page 12 of the Travel section today is omitted from some copies.
The letter, about the Henry Francis du Pont mansion at Winterthur in Delaware, will be reprinted next Sunday.


Out (Mostly) And About
Neither thunderstorms nor cool temperatures kept partygoers from last week's outdoor festivities.
On Monday, guests at the American Chefs' Tribute to James Beard tasted the specialties of 24 celebrated chefs at Rockefeller Plaza.
The evening raised money for Citymeals-on-Wheels, an agency that delivers food to homebound elderly New Yorkers.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 9, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
2
3
SECRETS OF THE MORNING, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.95.) A young music student is haunted by the ghosts of her lovers, present and past.
3
2
ONCE A PRINCESS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.95.) A woman in Mississippi is visited by the European prince to whom she was affianced.
4
6
MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.99.) A woman journalist's coming of age.
5
34
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
6
13
RED DRAGON, by Thomas Harris. (Dell, $5.95.) An F.B.I. agent hunts a serial killer.
7
3
"G" IS FOR GUMSHOE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.95.) On her 33d birthday, the private eye Kinsey Millhone finds herself on a hit list.
8
6
FAMILY PICTURES, by Sue Miller. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.95.) The good and bad times of a large Chicago clan during the past 40 years.
9
7
AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick Dunne. (Bantam, $5.99.) Manners, morals and murder in Los Angeles's high society.
10 *
1
IMPULSE, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) The search of a vengeful woman to find her father, who wronged her mother, brings her romantic adventures.
11
7
THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Doomsday brings horrors to America.
12
1
THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $5.99.) Murder and chicanery amid the mansions of California's Orange County.
13
5
THE CAT WHO LIVED HIGH, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.50.) A reporter and his two cats probe a mysterious death.
14
1
GET SHORTY, by Elmore Leonard. (Dell, $5.99.) A crook goes to Hollywood, where he finds his life is the stuff of which motion pictures are made.
15 *
2
HAMMERHEADS, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.95.) The Coast Guard versus the drug cartel.
16 *
10
SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins. (Bantam, $5.95.) The horror and humor of the upcoming apocalypse, played out in a restaurant.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
81
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
3
12
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
4
396
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
5
7
MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff describes the craft of the game.
6
36
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
7 *
2
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
8 *
43
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) The Arab-Israeli conflict as observed by a New York Times correspondent over the past decade.
9
122
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions in treating serious illness.
10 *
35
A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME, by Stephen W. Hawking. (Bantam, $9.95.) A scientist reviews efforts to create a unified theory of the universe.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
12
THE REVENGE OF THE BABY-SAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
45
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
28
ALL I NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED FROM MY CAT, by Suzy Becker. (Workman, $5.95.) Precepts of a wise cat, in words and pictures.
4 *
25
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
5
3
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Linda Fielder Is Wed
Linda Ellen Fielder, a student at Columbia University Teachers College, and Douglas William Preiser, a vice president and research analyst at Kidder Peabody &amp; Company in New York, were married yesterday at the Old Stone Presbyterian Church in Cleveland.
The Rev.
Kenneth Jones officiated.
Mrs.
Preiser, 29 years old, has an M.B.A. from Duke University; her husband, also 29, has an M.B.A. from the University of Rochester.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William L. Fielder of North Olmstead, Ohio.
Mr.
Preiser is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Preiser of Schenectady, N.Y.


Noriega Trial Delayed Again; New Starting Date Is Sept. 3
At the defense's request, a Federal district judge today once again postponed the drug-trafficking trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.
The new date set by the judge, William M. Hoeveler, is Sept. 3.
That is 18 months beyond the trial date that was set at General Noriega's arraignment on Jan. 4, 1990, soon after he surrendered to American forces that had invaded Panama.


Currency; Dollar Still Gains On Mark, Franc
The dollar rose sharply on Friday, bringing it to a new level in its four-month rally, in which it has risen 22 percent against the mark.
The dollar passed 140 yen and 1.77 marks, key levels in its march back from post-World War II lows against the mark and levels not far above the record low against the yen.
The stimulus on Friday was the surprising employment report.
Rather than showing a decline in nonfarm payroll jobs -- which had been the consensus expectation -- the Labor Department said nonfarm jobs increased by 59,000.
This means the recession may be ending and there is little chance the Fed will lower interest rates further.
The Japanese are also less likely to lower their interest rates.


Family Matters


Andrea Terzi Is Married
Andrea D. Terzi and David M. Baum, associates at Goldman Sachs in New York, were married last evening at Heinz Hall for the Performing Arts in Pittsburgh by Rabbi David C. Levy.
Mrs.
Baum, 29 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and has an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Terzi of Pittsburgh.
Her husband, 26, graduated from Indiana University.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric Baum of Walnut Creek, Calif.


Linda Joan Lowry Is Wed
Linda Joan Lowry, a legal secretary at Paul Weiss Rifkind Wharton &amp; Garrison, and Michael Mackin Gordon, a partner in the law firm of Cadwalader Wickersham &amp; Taft, both in New York, were married last evening by Rabbi Charles J. Davidson aboard the commercial yacht Empress of New York on a cruise off Manhattan.
Mrs.
Gordon, a New York University graduate, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Lowry of Brooklyn.
Mr.
Gordon graduated from Vassar College and received his law degree from Columbia University.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence H. Gordon of Newton, Mass.


Biking Abroad
To the Editor: Two words of advice to Josh Gonze and others thinking of bicycling abroad (Q &amp; A, April 21): insure and go!
My husband and I have flown to Europe twice with our bicycles.
In 1986 we flew Trans World Airlines to Ireland (T.W.A. provided free bike boxes).
After going through customs in St.
Louis, my bike was lost on the way to Denver.
Within three months we had a check for $500, the limit on foreign baggage claims.
When we flew to the Netherlands in July 1989, and the limit on foreign baggage claims had been increased to $640, we purchased additional insurance from T.W.A. at a cost of $1 per $100 of coverage.
My husband's bike was ruined on the way over, but we rented a bike and continued on our way.
After returning home and trying for more than five months to get reimbursement, I found that our local district attorney's office would pursue the matter for us.
Finally, on April 26, 1991, we received payment.


A Glimpse at Punishments Past
The discovery of jail records dating back more than a century is giving historians a rare glimpse at what was once considered a crime in Massachusetts.
Among the crimes and punishments recorded were a 30-day jail term for a man who allowed "swine to forage in one of Springfield's main streets" and a three-month sentence imposed on a 10-year-old boy for "being a stubborn child."


State Union Plans a Strike Over Florio's Demands
New Jersey's largest public employee union began laying plans this weekend for a possible strike over the state's demands that the union give up $370 million in wages and benefits or face layoffs of some 10,000 workers.
"We're planning details of how to do the strike if they keep insisting on this," said Vincent Trivelli, an official with the Communications Workers of America, which represents 38,000 state employees and is the largest of eight unions that broke off talks with the administration on Wednesday.
"Do we want to strike? No," Mr.
Trivelli said.
"But we are contacting our members and setting up the technical work for a strike."


Buick Hunts The Future In Its Past
I HAD one of my nicer letters recently from a 10-year-old named Michael C. Koch, who described himself as "Your favorite reader."
"I love cars just as you," Michael said.
He wrote in pencil and he said kind things.
But what he really wanted to know, he added, was how to learn about automobiles and how I learned about them myself.


MS. PLAYBOY
ON THE UNDULATING APPROACHES TO Hugh M. Hefner's Los Angeles mansion, squirrel monkeys, peacocks, flamingos and an occasional jogging Playmate parade.
A paved driveway loops up past a grotto filled with Japanese koi fish and ends at the portals of the mock-Tudor retreat of Playboy's reclusive 65-year-old founder.
Thirty-eight years after he started Playboy and two years after he married a Playmate less than half his age, Hefner still lives his fantasies.
It was to this unusual corporate outpost that Arthur Kretchmer, Playboy's editorial director, and Barry Golson, then its executive editor, came in August 1989 with a proposal for a new magazine called Men's Life.
Enthusiastically backed by Hefner's 38-year-old daughter, Christie, it was designed to revamp the other-era image of Playboy by offering a magazine for men who had, well, outgrown the centerfold.


Scholarship Under Fire
To the Editor:
Francis V. O'Connor protests that the awarding of the 1990 Pulitzer Prize for biography to our book "Jackson Pollock: An American Saga" "cheapened" the prize, that the award was made in "an intellectual vacuum"  [ "An Undeserved Pulitzer for a Pop Biography?" May 12 ] .
But nowhere in his lengthy diatribe does he account for the fact that our book was also one of five finalists for the 1990 National Book Award.
Are we to believe that the eminent scholars who served on the Pulitzer Prize committee, including David Herbert Donald,
and
those on the National Book Award committee, including Ronald Steele, all simultaneously took leave of their senses?


A Glimpse 'Up the River' in Ossining
AN inmate at the Sing Sing Correctional Facility put some finishing touches on a replica of the famous Sing Sing electric chair.
"The whole jail knows I built it," said Clarence McCants Jr., a 38-year-old prisoner serving 20 years to life for second-degree murder.
"They thought I was crazy, but I explained to them it was for a museum.
"Cuomo isn't going to be Governor for long. When the next guy comes in, they're going to bring the death penalty right back. I built the chair so people will know how cruel the electric chair is."


A Summer Program For the Above-Average
I read with interest your article concerning summer camp programs for children with interests that go beyond recreation  [ "Camps Without Boats or Balls or Bats," May 26 ] .
Although the article stated that this was a selected list, I would like to call your attention to our program, which has served such youngsters in the Westchester area for the past 30 years.
As its name implies, the Westchester Arts and Science Program offers a most unusual day-camp program.
It is for children between ages 8 and 12, who are screened for intelligence, achievement and interests and whose school records and teachers are consulted.
About 100 children from all parts of Westchester are selected to attend the five-day, six-week program, which this season runs from June 27 through Aug. 8.
Transportation is included, but lunch is not.
A beverage at lunch, plus a snack, are provided, however.
The fee is $900.
Some scholarships are available.


Campus Life: SUNY, Stony Brook; Professors Make A Computer Unit Controlled by Eye
A new and inexpensive technology for computers that would use eye movements to execute commands is being developed by two professors at the State University of New York at Stony Brook.
Though still in development, the technology, which would eliminate the need for a keyboard or a control pad known as a mouse, could enable people in wheelchairs to maneuver their wheelchairs with their eyes.
Enabling users to blink or stare at segments of a computer screen to execute commands, the eye-tracking technology also could be applied to robots, vehicle navigation, computer graphics and video and arcade machines.


Style Makers; Lesage, Embroiderers
What sometimes makes French couture haute is the extraordinary embroideries of Lesage, a Paris company that the fashion cognoscenti considers the premier embroiderers.
Since 1858, the company has made cages of mother-of-pearl, flowers woven of straw and blouses of ruched silk ribbons.
Through June 12, 48 examples of Lesage embroideries are on exhibit at Hermes Boutique at 11 East 57th Street in Manhattan.
From 1898, there is a skirt designed by Worth for Empress Eugenie, that was embroidered with beaded leaves, antique lace and rococo ribbons.


Political Talk
'Betsy Must Go'
Politics makes strange bedfellows, the saying goes, but it can also make strange enemies.
Take the union protest last Thursday directed at the city's Parks Commissioner Betsy Gotbaum -- it was led by District Council 37 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, the union that was headed for 22 years by Commissioner Gotbaum's husband, Victor.


2 Brothers Charged In Killing of Trooper
Two brothers have been charged in the killing of a state trooper last week, and one of them confessed to the crime and said his older brother was the triggerman, according to an arrest affidavit.
Duane Johnson, 18 years old, of Griswold, was quoted in the affidavit released on Friday as saying his brother, Terry, 22, of Mansfield, decided to shoot Trooper Russell Bagshaw after the trooper surprised the brothers as they were burglarizing a Windham gun store on Wednesday.


Travel Advisory; Madeira Hotel Marks 100th
Reid's Hotel, on the Portuguese Island of Madeira, where Winston Churchill painted and George Bernard Shaw learned to dance, celebrates its 100th birthday this year with the old-world style that has drawn Europe's elite since the turn of the century.
Perched on a rocky cliff facing the Atlantic, the stately hotel is set on 10 acres of tropical gardens.
To mark the anniversary, its management has hung original Picasso prints, polished the crystal chandeliers and redone the grand dining room in pink and blue marble.
Two balls are planned: one on July 28 with fireworks and a samba band and a second party the night before the Nov. 1 anniversary.
Reid's is also holding weekly (usually on Tuesday) black-tie dinners where guests can dance on the terrace overlooking Funchal harbor.
For guests not paying full board, a seven-course dinner costs about $53 a person.


Style Makers; David R. Smith, Handbag Designer
David R. Smith is a handbag designer whose creations have been capturing the spotlight in recent weeks at the runway shows of the fall collections of half a dozen top designers.
Last September, the 46-year-old designer said, he resigned a position at Jacomo, where he created ornate beaded evening bags "for ballrooms," to design daytime handbags "for board rooms" under his own label.


Alfred Hassler, Lifelong Pacifist And Environmentalist, Dies at 81
Alfred Hassler, a lifelong pacifist and leader of the Fellowship of Reconciliation and a pioneer in the environmental movement, died on Wednesday at the Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.
He was 81 years old and lived in Monroe, N.Y.
He died of cancer after a long illness, said Richard Deats, director of interfaith activities at the Fellowship of Reconciliation in Nyack, N.Y.


The Joy of Flies
This is an elegant, enthralling book of pictures by Peter Gathercole of trout, tackle and fishermen.
A compelling sequence of underwater photographs of trout rising to the fly graces the introductions to several chapters of THE CLASSIC GUIDE TO FLY-FISHING FOR TROUT: The Fly-Fisher's Book of Quarry, Tackle and Techniques (Random House, $35) and every one of the first 241 pages has the kind of illustration that ought to make non-anglers envy what they are missing.
That is fortunate, because Charles Jardine's prose seems unlikely to hook the beginner whom the book is cast toward.
"To catch a trout on an artificial fly is arguably the highest form of fishing" splats on the page like a cast sloppy enough to spook a very dumb trout.
The book seems to be organized as a primer, with diagrams showing how to cast, several pages showing current rods and reels, knot-tying diagrams and a full 78 pages of plates of fly patterns, followed by precise instructions as to what materials to use to tie each of them.
But in fact the teaching chapters are too short for beginners, too simple for experienced anglers and a little too British for either.
But the pictures!
Along with the fish themselves, there are anglers on English chalk streams, steelhead rivers of the American West, fishermen playing trout, fishermen releasing trout.
Rich illustrations define the various kinds of trout and quasi trout (chars, especially) anglers seek, and the methods they use.
When asked for an introduction to the feeling and meaning of fly fishing, I always recommend Norman Maclean's "A River Runs Through It." But for a sense of what it looks like, this volume would make a handsome companion.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
"Baby Bells": Vote on passage of a bill that would allow the seven regional Bell companies to manufacture equipment.
Approved 71 to 24, June 5.
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
N
Lieberman (D)
N
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
N
Lautenberg (D)
N
New York
D'Amato (R)
Y
Moynihan (D)
N
House
1.
Civil Rights: Vote to approve a civil rights substitute bill that did not include the compromises contained in the Democratic leadership's proposal.
Rejected 277 to 152, June 4.
2.
Civil Rights: Vote to approve a civil rights bill supported by the Bush Administration.
Rejected 266 to 162, June 4.
3.
Civil Rights: Vote on passage of a Democratic-backed civil rights bill intended to make it easier for victims of job discrimination to sue and collect damages.
Approved 273 to 158, June 5.
4.
Space Station: Vote on an amendment to a 1992 fiscal year spending bill for the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Department of Housing and Urban Affairs and a variety of independent agencies including NASA.
The amendment provided $1.9 billion for the space station by holding NASA funding to 1991 levels.
Approved 240 to 173, June 6.
1
2
3
4
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Y
N
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D)
Y
N
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D)
Y
N
Y
N
4. Shays (R)
N
N
Y
N
5. Franks (R)
N
Y
N
Y
6. Johnson (R)
N
Y
N
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Y
N
Y
Y
2. Hughes (D)
N
N
Y
N
3. Pallone (D)
Y
N
Y
Y
4. Smith (R)
N
Y
N
Y
5. Roukema (R)
N
Y
N
N
6. Dwyer (D)
Y
N
Y
N
7. Rinaldo (R)
N
N
Y
Y
8. Roe (D)
Y
N
Y
Y
9. Torricelli (D)
Y
N
Y
Y
10. Payne (D)
Y
N
Y
N
11. Gallo (R)
N
Y
N
A
12. Zimmer (R)
N
Y
Y
N
13. Saxton (R)
N
Y
N
Y
14. Guarini (D)
N
N
Y
N
New York
1. Hochbr'knr(D)
N
N
Y
Y
2. Downey (D)
N
N
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D)
Y
N
Y
A
4. Lent (R)
N
Y
N
Y
5. McGrath (R)
N
Y
N
Y
6. Flake (D)
Y
N
Y
N
7. Ackerman (D)
Y
N
Y
A
8. Scheuer (D)
Y
N
Y
N
9. Manton (D)
Y
N
Y
N
10. Schumer (D)
N
N
Y
N
11. Towns (D)
Y
N
Y
N
12. Owens (D)
Y
N
Y
N
13. Solarz (D)
N
N
Y
N
14. Molinari (R)
N
Y
N
N
15. Green (R)
Y
N
Y
N
16. Rangel (D)
Y
N
Y
N
17. Weiss (D)
Y
N
Y
N
18. Serrano (D)
Y
N
Y
N
19. Engel (D)
N
N
Y
N
20. Lowey (D)
Y
N
Y
N
21. Fish (R)
N
N
Y
N
22. Gilman (R)
N
N
Y
N
23. McNulty (D)
N
N
Y
N
24. Solomon (R)
N
Y
N
A
25. Boehlert (R)
N
N
Y
Y
26. Martin (R)
N
Y
N
A
27. Walsh (R)
N
N
Y
Y
28. McHugh (D)
Y
N
Y
N
29. Horton (R)
N
N
Y
Y
30. Slaughter (D)
Y
N
Y
A
31. Paxon (R)
N
Y
N
N
32. LaFalce (D)
N
N
Y
N
33. Nowak (D)
Y
N
Y
N
34. Houghton (R)
N
N
Y
Y
KEY Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Baseball; L.S.U. Takes College Title
Louisiana State scored a 6-3 victory over Wichita State today to capture the College World Series championship game as Chad Ogea allowed four hits in seven-plus innings and Armando Rios hit a two-run homer.
The fourth-seeded Tigers (55-18), who hit .348 in their first three victories in the tournament, set one Series record and tied another in their four-game sweep to the title in their first championship appearance.


Fashion; In The Pink
Once dismissed as sappy and romantic, pink is now challenging black as the most appropriate color for summer evenings.
Designers are using pink, in shades ranging from pale ca mellia to deep flamingo, for satin trench coats and full-skirted evening dresses reminiscent of the 50's.


Managing; More Care for the Corporate Kids
When business keeps Hewitt Associates consultants away from home overnight, the firm recommends -- and pays for -- someone to stay with their children.
"That way, we help them deal with guilt and finances," said David J. Wille, director of human resources for the Lincolnshire, Ill.-based firm.
From January through April, Plante &amp; Moran, a Southfield, Mich.,-based accounting firm, uses a conference room for day care on First of two articles on day care.


Homeless Man Killed In Subway at Times Sq.
A homeless man was stabbed to death with an ice pick on a Times Square subway platform yesterday afternoon, only moments after he had been panhandling on a train, the police said.
The attack took place about 4:45 on a busy Saturday afternoon as dozens of people crowded onto a platform, waiting for the southbound No. 1 train at 42d Street and Seventh Avenue.
A homeless man who appeared to be about 45 years old had just left the train when he became embroiled in an argument with a man between 25 and 30 years old, said Albert W. O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.


Sports of The Times; Dreams and Tragedy Of the Bulls' Rookie
YES, Scott Williams says now, he's glad that he didn't give up basketball when he heard the news, and that he stuck it out.
"I found that I was comfortable on the basketball court, it made me feel better about myself," he said, "and it helped me handle the problems."
Now Williams, the rookie, is in the National Basketball Association playoff finals.
It is, he said, what you dream about, except for a detail or so, when it's three seconds! two seconds! one second! left in front of the hoop in your driveway.
"The Lakers trail by one," he said at breakfast yesterday in front of a bowl of Cream of Wheat, and giving his best imitation of a frenzied play-by-play announcer, "Williams with the ball at the top of the key. He dribbles right, he pulls up for the shot -- off the glass and it's good! Lakers win! Lakers win!"


Sad Children Left Behind Wait For a Fresh Air Family to Call
Eight-year-old Marcos Reyes chased his first frog last summer.
He swam in his first river.
He did both in the brief two weeks he left Brooklyn behind to stay with a family on the South Shore of Long Island who volunteered to give a child from a poor city neighborhood a free vacation.
"I climbed a little tree in the backyard," he said.
"I swam in a pool. I went to a museum and saw a dinosaur who had sharp teeth and red eyes and brown skin."


CHRIS WHITTLE'S CAPTIVE AUDIENCE
For the 30 years that I have been teaching high-school English, I have had to listen to friends describe my students as a captive audience ("What Is Chris Whittle Teaching Our Children?" by N. R. Kleinfield, May 19).
I suppose there is some truth in this, but the irony is that by teaching a love of good books, an appreciation of correct writing and a respect for their own abilities I have tried to liberate my students, to make them independent.
Now Chris Whittle has discovered "my" captive audience.
His goal, however, is not to liberate, but to enslave them to the tyranny of a commercial society -- to make them good consumers.
CLAYTON CURTISS
Orange, Conn.


Not Every Circus Needs 3 Rings
LIKE a giant cornucopia of exploding color and never-ending thrills, the entrance to the only ring in the Big Apple Circus tent spills out a succession of horses, clowns, jugglers, balancing acts, aerialists, elephants, apples, oranges and giant-size boxes.
And that's only part of the show.


Postings: St. Peter's Center Expands; New Pavilion for Women and Children
St.
Peter's Medical Center in New Brunswick, N.J., believes it delivers more babies a year than any other hospital in the state, and still the newborn numbers keep rising: 5,900 last year, to an expected 6,100 by 1994.
So it is not surprising that the center, which is sponsored by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Metuchen, is embarking on an expansion.
Ground will be broken next month for a $27 million Pavilion for Women and Children.
It will be the hospital's focus for childbirth, prenatal care, pediatric nursing and outpatient care.
The center will consist of a five-story triangular project of 75,000 square feet and an adjoining one-story, 11,000-square-foot center for cancer radiation treatment.


Traffic Alert
Puerto Rican Day Parade: Fifth Avenue will be closed today from 44th to 86th Street from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Welcome Back to Brooklyn Fair: Eastern Parkway will be closed today between Washington and Flatbush Avenues from noon to 5 P.M.
Operation Welcome Home: The ticker-tape parade is expected to create gridlock conditions in Manhattan tomorrow.


Acclaim, All In Due Time
To the Editor:
James R. Oestreich, in his article about Zubin Mehta  [ "For Mehta, the Final Melody Is Bittersweet," May 26 ] , quotes Joseph H. Kluger, the executive director of the Philadelphia Orchestra, as follows:


Ms. Somary, Research Aide, Is Wed To Patrick Joseph Romano, Musician
Karen Anne Somary, a mental-health research assistant, and Patrick Joseph Romano, a musician, both in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Jean Baptiste Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan.
The Rev.
John Kamas officiated.
Mrs.
Romano, 23 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Virgina and works for the State Psychiatric Institute at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Johannes Somary of Riverdale, the Bronx.


Noriega Lawyer Aided a U.S. Inquiry on Judges
Federal prosecutors today disclosed a longtime bribery investigation of state judges in South Florida and said a former top lawyer for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega had worked undercover for the Government during the inquiry.
The prosecutors said that as part of the investigation Federal and state law-enforcement agents had posed as criminal defendants and that payoffs had been made to get their bail lowered, have evidence suppressed and gain confidential information.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 9
Neither Ted WIlliams nor Joe DiMaggio played today. Both teams had the day off.


Betsy Crane Marries William Mushkin
Elizabeth Loring Crane, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin F. Crane of Brooklyn and Cold Spring, N.Y., was married yesterday in Cold Spring to William Masu Mushkin, a son of Irwin Mushkin of Shawnee Mission, Kan., and Enid Polovick of San Diego.
Rabbi Joseph H. Gelberman and the Rev.
Francis Geer, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Crane, 28 years old, is known as Betsy; she is keeping her name.
She graduated from Bowdoin College and is studying law at the University of Colorado.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.


A Sharp Eye for Capturing Peak Moments in Dance
MANY who never saw Martha Graham dance can nonetheless picture her in motion.
The chiaroscuro of her expressive face, the rhythmic swirl and flow of her costumes, the taut symbolism of her gestures are familiar to millions, thanks largely to the widely exhibited and published photographs of Barbara Morgan.
Some of the most famous Graham images -- which capture peak moments in such dances as "Letter to the World," "Lamentation" and "Primitive Mysteries" -- were photographed here, in the hilltop home where Mrs.
Morgan has lived and worked since 1941.
Miss Graham's death in April at the age of 96 -- as well as last Monday's tribute to her at the City Center in Manhattan -- have focused new attention on the photographer, who at age 90 lives a quiet life amid cats and grandchildren.


Miss Rodriguez to Wed in September
September wedding plans for Maria Teresa Rodriguez and Gary Edward Lawrence, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn E. Lawrence of Hickory, N.C., have been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Fernando O. Rodriguez of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Miss Rodriguez, 25 years old, graduated from Amherst College and received a law degree from Columbia University last month.
Her father is a pediatrician in Corona, Queens.
Her mother, Belkis Rodriguez, is a microbiologist for Mount Sinai Hospital Services at City Hospital Center at Elmhurst, in Queens.


Fred H. Fuller, Inventor, 64
Fred H. Fuller, developer of a voice analyzer that was used as a lie detector and for personality assessment, died on May 30 at his home in Wood-Ridge, N.J.
He was 64 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


The Nation; When the Subject Is Civil Rights, There Are Two George Bushes
George Bush, the man whose Presidential campaign benefited from the now notorious Willie Horton commercials, also has the distinction of having appointed the first black Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen.
Colin Powell.
He will be remembered as a President who vetoed a civil rights bill in 1990 and, if he carries through with his threat, again in 1991, while making a point of donating half the proceeds from his autobiography, "Looking Forward," to the United Negro College Fund.
Images of Mr.
Bush's relations with blacks collide at odd angles, revealing no coherent pattern other than contradiction.
It is a Janus-like approach that allows his enemies or supporters to choose the lens through which they view him -- as an enlightened healer or a cynical opportunist.
And combined with his flip-flops on issues like abortion, "voodoo economics" and "no new taxes," his approach to race raises a broader question: Is there no coherent pattern, or no coherent value system?


Ideas &amp; Trends; For Consumers, Bank Reform Offers Not So Much as a Toaster
DRIVEN by the fear that lightning could strike twice, the Bush Administration is pressing for deregulation that could change the nature of the banking system and, it maintains, eliminate the chance of another financial cave-in and a multibillion-dollar taxpayer bailout.
The measure's name even has a somewhat comforting ring: the Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act.
But consumer advocates say the legislation, which has the support of Democrats and Republicans alike, is anything but their choice.


Foreign Affairs; Peace Morsels
Along the paths of the labyrinth into which Arabs and Israelis have led the Bush Administration, some tantalizing morsels have been dropped by the weakest of all the potential negotiating parties.
These morsels represent great risk for those who deposited them and perhaps genuine promise for Mideast peace talks, should the U.S. find a way to jump start the process.
The morsels could help explain the real thinking behind Prime Minister Shamir's recent secret letter to President Bush in which he effectively rejected a U.S.-proposed peace conference.
They also could shed light on recent meetings between Syrian and P.L.O. leaders, blood rivals who have preferred killing each other to conversing and who now may be combining talents to kill prospects for negotiations.


The Nation; Despite All His Efforts, Nixon Is Still Wrapped In the Tapes of Watergate
ROUGHLY 64 million Americans nearly a quarter of the population -- have been born since Richard Nixon resigned on Aug. 9, 1974.
To them, the historical figure whose Presidency fell on the sword of Watergate is as ancient as the Beatles.
Their flickering image is drawn largely from Mr.
Nixon's meticulously prepped role as eminence grise -- in Beijing with Deng Xiaoping, in Moscow with Mikhail Gorbachev, in bookstores with weighty tomes on global politics or personal struggles.
But like ordinary men, Mr.
Nixon cannot entirely escape his past.
The latest glimpse was the release last week of some 60 hours of conversations between the President and his advisers, transcribed from secret tape recordings made in the Oval Office and other White House locations in the early 1970's.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Business World/Magazine Part 2  Book Review/Section 7 The summer issue, including a list of 200 books for vacation reading.


Ming Hui Chen Has a Wedding
Dr.
Ming Hui Chen, a senior resident in internal medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, was married yesterday at Riverside Church in New York to Dr.
Christopher Walsh, a Howard Hughes fellow in genetics and neurology at Harvard University.
The Rev.
Eugene E. Laubach performed the Methodist ceremony.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is 30 years old.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Yung Chang Chen of New York.
The bridegroom, 33, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Walsh of Cranford, N.J.


Summer a Good Time To Repair a Window
TROUBLESOME windows are best repaired in the summer, when they can be opened or removed without discomfort.
For drafty double-hung wood windows that stick or need new sash cords, a quick easy repair for both problems is to install replacement window channels.
The simplest and probably most-common replacement channels are Window Fixers, made by the Quaker City Manufacturing Company, 701 Chester Pike, Sharon Hill, Pa., 19079.
They consist of shallow metal troughs that fit vertically on each side of the window frame, creating smooth, close-fitting channels in which the sashes can slide.


Sending the Very Best, For No Particular Reason
You're getting a card  and it's not even your birthday,  That's because you don't have  to be special to me --  I love you ALL the time!
TWO years ago, Hallmark Cards Inc., the country's largest producer of greeting cards, introduced a new line of cards for children, ages 7 to 14, who were facing the everyday trials of growing up.


The Royal Retreat at Potsdam
FREDERICK II, King of Prussia, has long been famous as one of history's great generals: he attacked ruthlessly, conquered repeatedly and raised his country to the rank of a great power.
That, as it turned out, was a dubious achievement, and one that the rest of the world has had good reason to regret; but one aspect of his activity, at least, deserves nothing but praise: the complex of palaces at Potsdam.
With the reunification of Germany, that splendid ensemble of buildings is again easily accessible: even in heavy traffic, it is just a 45-minute drive from central Berlin.
The park, at first, was just a vast piece of land purchased by Frederick's father, Friedrich Wilhelm I, as a hunting preserve next to the small garrison town where he had installed his Guard of Giants; then, in 1740, Frederick succeeded to the throne, and development began.
First came a vast French-style garden, a few traces of which remain; then the King built a pavilion, Sans Souci (French for "carefree"), where he could enjoy the privacy he craved.
Eventually, he added other buildings, including an art gallery open to the public, a variety of small and charming structures in the park and finally a vast and splendid palace, the Neue Palais.


Headliners; The Fissioning of the Nuclear Family
IT was the kind of demographic news calculated to bring joy to the makers of single-portion soups and the managers of singles bars.
More Americans are home alone.
More than one in every nine adults over age 18 lived alone in 1990, a total that exceeds 27 million people.
That news, coming from an annual survey by the Census Bureau, was one more indicator of the atomization of the American household.
Like a cubist painting of a human figure, households have been continually rearranged over the last 30 years by personal preferences and economic imperatives.


Jean McAndrews Plans Wedding
James J. McAndrews of Madison, Conn., has announced the engagement of his daughter Jean Curran McAndrews to William Rust Koehler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Koehler of Cleveland.
Miss McAndrews also is the daughter of the late Anne M. McAndrews.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss McAndrews, 26 years old, is the director of Grassroots Tennis in New Haven.
The nonprofit program, operated in conjunction with the Volvo International tennis tournament, attempts to bring the sport to urban youth throughout Connecticut.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was the New England account executive in New York for Hanes, the hosiery manufacturer.


Susan Strawbridge Wed to Todd Paige
Susan Sayres Strawbridge, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter S. Strawbridge of Newtown Square, Pa., was married in Squirrel Island, Me., yesterday to Todd Durgin Paige, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kent Larrimore Paige of Duxbury, Mass.
The Rev.
Timothy Pickering performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Squirrel Island Chapel.
Mrs.
Paige, 24 years old, graduated from Lake Forest College and is a social worker for Catholic Charities in Chicago.
Her father is the president of Strawbridge &amp; Clothier, the Philadelphia department store.


Postings: In New Headquarters; Carpenters, Firefighters Seek Tenants
Two of New York City's larger labor unions, representing carpenters and firefighters, have invested in new headquarters.
In the process, each has become a landlord seeking commercial tenants in the city's weak real estate market.
The firefighters union, formally the Uniformed Firefighters Association, said it paid $3.8 million to buy its new headquarters at 204 East 23d Street, just east of Third Avenue, from the New York City District Council of Carpenters.
When minor renovation work is completed on the interior in early July, officials of the firefighters union said they would move their staff of 30 into the top two and a half floors of the five-story, 25,000-square-foot building.
Already, they said, the lower floors of the building have been put on the market for commercial tenants, but no leases have been signed.
The union is leaving offices it had rented at 225 Broadway, across from City Hall.


Making a Difference; Battling Textile Imports and Industry Frictions
For Donald R. Hughes, the vice chairman of Burlington Industries, 1991 has offered little to cheer about.
As chairman of the Fiber, Fabric and Apparel Coalition for Trade, he led the industry's opposition to a free-trade agreement with Mexico and to a new round of multilateral trade liberalization, which is likely to result in larger quotas for textile imports.


Ms. Iselin Weds Kenneth Pearce
Josephine Lea Iselin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Jay Iselin of New York, was married yesterday at the Iselin family farm in Ghent, N.Y., to Kenneth Andrew Pearce, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Pearce of Lecanto, Fla.
The Rev.
Stephen S. Garmey, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is 29 years old and is an architectural lighting design consultant in San Francisco.
A graduate of Harvard University, she will begin her studies for a master's degree in fine arts at San Francisco State University in the fall.
Her father is the president of the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art and was the president of WNET-Channel 13 in New York.
Her mother, Josephine L. Iselin, is a partner in the New York law firm of Lankenau &amp; Bickford.
The bride is a descendant of John Jay, the first Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court.


On the Street; Call It Hair, More or Less
Exotic hair styles are nothing new to Greenwich Village and SoHo.
This summer, a style has emerged that suggests the medieval bowl cut crossbred with Victorian Gothic braids.
Top finials and flying buttresses of long hair sprout from a basic crew cut.
All the variations of the Gothic look are worn most often with black clothing.
The head is shaved on the back and sides to above the ears, where long hair flows into a variety of shapes, including one that looks like a mushroom and another that makes it seem that the wearer has received an electric shock.
Others have trimmed their hair into bonnet-like crew cuts, as at the lower right, with a frame of long hair around the face.
And one young woman carried her pet white rat on her shoulder.


Violence Imperils Democracy, Indian Leader Says
As Indians prepared to resume voting this Wednesday in a national election interrupted by the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, the nation's President warned political parties tonight that violence and intimidation at the polls were threatening the democratic system that has sustained India since independence in 1947.
"A country ceases to be a democracy where the will of the people is not reflected in the elections and where the sacred right to vote is deprived either by a dictator or by musclemen employed by inscrupulous politicians," the President, Ramaswami Venkataraman, said.


Landlords Owe County For Homeless Deposits
I read, with interest, your article "Progress in Moving Homeless From Motels"  [ May 26 ] .
Although your reporter may be correct in stating that progress has been made, the Department of Social Services still is not very efficient in dealing with homelessness.
The county is presently owed more than $5 million (the figure was obtained from the Department of Social Services) from welfare landlords who received security deposits from the county.
When a homeless family moves into a permanent apartment the county picks up the security deposit.


Dance in Review
Janis Brenner and Dancers  Danspace at St. Mark's Church
Janis Brenner came to notice as a member of the Murray Louis Dance Company, in which she performed from 1977 to 1984 and in which her darting witty style stood out in relief.


Puerto Rican Day Festivities in Manhattan


Jack Resnick, 83; He Helped Shape New York Skyline
Jack Resnick, a real-estate investor and developer who helped reshape New York City's skyline by putting up dozens of towering apartment and office buildings, died on Saturday in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
He was 83 years old and for the last several years had lived in a building named in his honor at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale.
In 1928, Mr.
Resnick opened a real-estate business in the Bronx with one employee, a secretary who was paid $8 a week.
With an aggressive flair for buying, renovating and selling office buildings, he built Jack Resnick &amp; Sons Inc. into one of the city's premiere real-estate businesses.
Along the way, he became one of Manhattan's most active apartment builders.


A Contemptuous Gun Bill
Last year, New Jersey's Legislature passed a tough, sensible law barring civilian ownership of military assault weapons.
But this year, just as the ban took effect, the gun lobby pushed through a new bill that would severely weaken it.
Gov.
Jim Florio could protect the old law, and public safety, with a swift veto.
Assault weapons, designed for war, have no legitimate civilian use.
They are favored weapons of drug gangsters.
Capable of spraying bullets indiscriminately, they are blamed for the recent surge in "stray bullet" shootings.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly RESUMED 45TH SESSION -- 10:30 A.M.
Economic and Social Council GOVERNING COUNCIL -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
BUDGETARY AND FINANCE COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Two New Kingmakers Are Emerging in India
With the Nehru family out of the running and a new age of politics about to begin in India, two popular leaders in important states are emerging as kingmakers.
Sharad Pawar, the Congress Party Chief Minister of India's richest industrial state, Maharashtra, and Jyoti Basu, the Communist Chief Minister of West Bengal, already qualify as leaders who may fill the power vacuum created by the assassination last month of Rajiv Gandhi, the former Prime Minister whose family had long controlled the Congress Party.


Review/Opera; A Woman's Spiritual Journey In 'Atlas'
"Mystical Minimalism" might best describe the aura of the lower Manhattan artistic community of the last quarter-century.
No one has better epitomized, in so many different arts, that elemental yearning for the beyond than Meredith Monk.
Ms.
Monk has at long last expanded her idiom to create an opera, "Atlas." It was first seen in Houston in February and is now appearing for a lamentably brief four-night run at the Annenberg Center here, courtesy of the American Music Theater Festival.
At this point, Minimalism is so reviled by its enemies that even its practitioners shy away from the term.
Ms.
Monk apparently resists calling "Atlas" Minimalist, and one can see her point: More than three hours long, with a cast of 18 and a chamber orchestra of 11, telling an epic tale of a woman's world travels and spiritual quest and using a musical idiom of greater complexity than any Ms.
Monk has yet employed, this work is hardly Minimalist in the narrow, reductive sense.


Pavarotti in Park Series
Luciano Pavarotti is to star in a free all-Verdi concert at 8:30 P.M. tomorrow to celebrate the 25th anniversary of Metropolitan Opera performances in the parks.
James Levine will conduct the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra and Chorus in the concert on the Great Lawn in Central Park, midpark at 81st Street.
Mozart's "Don Giovanni" and Verdi's "Ballo in Maschera" are the two operas to be performed in this year's free parks series, which begins Wednesday and runs to June 29.
Performances begin at 8 P.M.


Howard Hobson; Basketball Pioneer And Coach Was 87
Howard (Hobby) Hobson, who coached the University of Oregon basketball team to the first National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball championship in 1939 and was a member of the National Basketball Hall of Fame, died today.
He was 87 years old.
Mr. Hobson's son, David, said his father had died of congestive heart failure.


2 Teen-Agers Killed in Crash
Two teen-agers were killed and another was critically injured today when the car they were driving in collided with another vehicle, the state police said.
Shane Eurto, 16, of Lebanon, was driving with five passengers eastbound on Norwich Avenue when the car traveled into the westbound lane and collided head on with the other vehicle.
Mr.
Eurto and two passengers, Sarah Raymond, 15, of Versailles, and Kelly Corcoran, 13, of Colchester, were taken by helicopter to St.
Francis Hospital in Hartford.
Miss Raymond and Mr.
Eurto were pronounced dead on arrival and Miss Corcoran was being treated for extensive internal injuries, officials said.


Right to Sue Over Loss of Adult Offspring Is Upheld
In a decision that sets Vermont apart from most states, the Vermont Supreme Court has ruled that parents may seek to recover damages for the loss of companionship of an adult child.
Although most states allow parents to collect companionship damages only when a child is under 18, the court held Friday that "the loss of the comfort and companionship of an adult child is a real, direct and personal loss that can be measured in pecuniary terms."


CHRONICLE
TONY RANDALL has signed MARTIN SHEEN as the lead in the first production of the National Actors Theater, Mr.
Randall's new theater company.
Mr.
Sheen will play John Proctor, the hero of "The Crucible," ARTHUR MILLER'S ever-relevant play about persecution.
Mr.
Miller is "thrilled" with the choice, Mr.
Randall said.
Mr.
Randall has already raised $3 million for his first season, to begin in November at the Belasco Theater on Broadway.
"Classical theater with great actors, for the people," he described it, "with a $30 top. The idea is to bring young people into the theater. The second balcony will be for students, maybe $5 seats."


Some Disappointment at Trammell Crow
Several large pension funds that invested about $200 million in Trammell Crow Equity Partners anticipating annual returns of 15 percent to 20 percent will be told today why the returns will be closer to 5 percent, several investors and a Trammell Crow executive say.
Trammell Crow Equity Partners was organized in late 1987 by the Trammell Crow Company of Dallas, the nation's largest real estate developer.
In the last year and a half, the Trammell Crow Company has been buffeted by huge losses on its development projects and the collapse of real estate values across the country.


Cutting Health Care Paperwork Will Cut Costs; A Greedy Coalition
To the Editor:
"The Wrong Medicine" (editorial, May 26) had the right title: the basic trouble with the United States health care system is that good money is being paid out for bad medicine.
More than half the money spent on the treatment of cancer, acquired immune deficiency syndrome and other chronic diseases merely prolongs the agony.
Even official medical statistics show these very costly treatments rarely do any lasting good and often have grim side effects.


Courier More Than Power Player
James Spencer Courier, a terrier of a tennis player who counts himself among Dade City, Fla.'s top three exports, along with orange juice and country music, established his credentials on a global scale this stormy afternoon when he turned Andre Agassi aside, 3-6, 6-4, 2-6, 6-1, 6-4, in the final of the French Open.
It was the first trip to a Grand Slam final for Courier, who has a 4-0 finals record in his career.
Jubilant after a victory that improved his ranking to No. 4 in the world and earned him $451,660, Courier, the former Little Leaguer who likens his tennis stratagems to those of a pitcher, ripped his clay-stained white baseball cap from his head and threw it into the stands.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 10


Release for a Lawyer Who Wouldn't Testify
A judge has ordered the release of a lawyer who has been in jail since December for refusing to testify about a client who the authorities say jumped bail.
The lawyer, Linda Backiel, will leave the Bucks County Prison on Monday after serving six months for contempt of court under a ruling issued Friday by Judge Charles R. Weiner of Federal District Court.


Carnegie Hall Tribute to Cole Porter


Reaching for the Sky


U.S. Gap In World Investing
Foreign investment in the United States exceeds American investment overseas by much more than most economists had previously believed, according to two new measurements released today by the Commerce Department.
The department's previous calculations of the nation's net investment position, which showed an even greater United States deficit than the new measures, had been widely discounted by many economists as outdated and badly understating the value of American investments overseas and of the Federal Government's holdings in gold.


Marc Fink Weds Ms. Kirschstein
Laura Beth Kirschstein and Marc David Fink, assistant district attorneys in Manhattan, were married yesterday at Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Allen Block officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David B. Kirschstein of Chappaqua, N.Y.
She graduated from Bucknell University and received a law degree from Temple University.
She is keeping her name.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Kirschstein, Ottinger, Israel &amp; Schiffmiller.
The bridegroom, 29, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Fink of Brooklyn.
He graduated from the State University of New York at Albany and received a law degree from Syracuse University.
He is on the staff of the special narcotics courts program in New York.
His mother is the director of public relations at Kingsborough Community College of the City University in Brooklyn.
His father is a partner in the New York law firm of Bower &amp; Gardner and a former Speaker of the New York State Assembly.


Essay; 76 Trombones
Listen up, you quagmirers who opposed the Persian Gulf war, and now deride the costly parades in Washington and New York as a macho-militaristic "wargasm";
Pay attention, Democrats who followed Sam Nunn and Disjointed Chiefs of Staff over the cliff to silly-sanctionland, and now fret about political manipulators turning a national victory into a political winner;


Andrew Cooper Wed To Sharon Anne Loeb
Sharon Anne Loeb, a daughter of Frances R. Loeb of Flushing, Queens, and the late Henry S. Loeb, was married in New York yesterday to Andrew Cooper, the son of Sarah L. Cooper of Baltimore and the late Benjamin B. Cooper.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue Synagogue.
Mrs.
Cooper, 36 years old, is the personnel director of the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society in New York.
She is a Cornell University graduate.
The bridegroom, 43, is an executive vice president at the Burson-Marstellar public relations company in New York.
A graduate of Grinnell College, he received a master's degree in communications from Syracuse University.


An Actress Drawn to Characters on the Verge
The first thing you notice about Lena Olin, the Swedish actress who is in New York these days for three performances of Strindberg's classic play "Miss Julie," is her handshake, firm, warm, veritably muscular.
Then there is the steady gaze, the quiet intensity of her eyes.
You think of some of the characters Ms.
Olin has played in the movies, characters who seemed to exist on several emotional levels at the same time, figures just a bit on the edge of madness.
Ms.
Olin is not on the edge of madness herself.
She seems self-possessed, polite, reflective, just a bit on the shy side, certainly perfectly sane.
But as she sits on a patterned couch, wearing an embroidered sweater and long cotton skirt, her suede cowboy boots tucked under her, she acknowledges that there might be some connection between Lena Olin the person and the women of fragile yet violent nature played by Lena Olin, the Swedish actress.


Bells Are Ringing
To the Editor:
Your May 15 Op-Ed letter on the Pontesbury bells was presented so as to suggest that change ringing was another quaint, unexportable, uniquely English custom.
You should know there is a North American Guild of Change Ringers, with some 200 active members who practice their craft in 28 towers across North America.
New York does not have a working tower for change ringing (the Trinity Church bells were hung to do this, but they have long been inoperative), so the nearest is 60 miles away at Brewster, N.Y.
New York can look forward, however, to having the largest ringing tower in North America when the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine is completed.
Perhaps then the art of change ringing will not seem so quaint or exotic.
MARVIN CARLSON Brooklyn, May 23, 1991


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet
New York State Theater
There are times one wonders, watching a familiar and much-loved ballet, whether that particular performance, if seen first, would have made the dance seem as special.
The austere splendor of George Balanchine's signature "Apollo" and its Stravinsky score came through when the New York City Ballet presented it on Tuesday night, but only fitfully.


Crack Dealer Posing as Family Man. What Is the Message?
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to "Crack Dealer Feeds a Family and Habits of Fewer Addicts" (front page, May 16).
I am black and incarcerated in a Pennsylvania prison.
I am a recovering drug addict from the streets of Queens in New York City.


British Try a Catalyst For Arts Innovation
A foundation to foster artistic innovation has been established in Britain with a $1.87 million private bequest.
The new Arts Foundation will try to generate $34 million in private patronage over the next three years and will act as an agent to encourage "the experimental and the innovative," said Lord Palumbo, a property developer and trustee of the foundation.
"Without the experimental, it is impossible to expand the boundaries of art, and art stagnates. The equivalent in industry is research and development." Private support will give experimental artists "the right to fail," he said.


CHRONICLE
The author, professor, journalist, television producer and businessman FURIO COLOMBO added yet another facet to his career as the new Sanpaolo Professor of International Journalism at Columbia University's Graduate School of Journalism.
Professor Colombo, chairman of Fiat U.S.A., is a columnist for La Stampa, a Turin newspaper; editor of Nuovi Argomenti, the Italian literary magazine he founded with Alberto Moravia, who died last year; the author of 21 books on news organizations, culture and political affairs, and chairman of Gruppo Fabbri, a major Italian publishing company.
He will begin teaching a course in comparative journalism next spring.
The chair was established last week with a grant from the Sanpaolo Foundation, the philanthropic entity of a Turin-based bank.
In a tangle of academic crossover, the new chair fits into the Italian Academy for Advanced Studies in America, created at Columbia last month through a $17.5 million endowment from the Italian Government.
The grant goes to the academy for use in the journalism school.


Andrade Pulls Off Another Surprise
Young Billy Andrade, calmly riding the momentum of his first victory on the PGA Tour, outplayed a couple of revered names and a host of veterans to win his second tournament in a row today, the Buick Classic.
Tied for the lead with Hale Irwin and Nolan Henke after nine holes today, with Seve Ballesteros only a stroke behind, Andrade was the only one of the leaders who managed to play the Westchester Country Club's back nine under par to earn a two-shot victory over Brad Bryant.


As Candidates Wait to Run, Cash Waits to Follow
No prospective Presidential candidate has yet come calling on E. William Crotty, a leading Democratic fund-raiser, and that says a lot about the changed role of money as the 1992 Presidential campaign draws near.
By this time four years ago, five Presidential contenders had made separate visits to Mr.
Crotty's home in Daytona Beach, Fla., soliciting his help.


A Tourist and a Dispatcher Are Killed by Stray Gunfire
A woman from London who was visiting New York and a car dispatcher from Brooklyn were struck by stray gunfire in separate shootings Saturday night.
They died hours apart in the same hospital.
The London woman, Yvonne Williams, a 30-year-old mother of five, was walking about 10:45 P.M. in the vicinity of 101st Street and Northern Boulevard in Corona, Queens, on her way to visit friends when she was hit in the lower back by a bullet fired by someone in a street dispute, the police said.


Sutcliffe Put on D.L.
Rick Sutcliffe, the 1984 Cy Young Award winner and 1989 runner-up, was placed on the 15-day disabled list today by the Chicago Cubs.
The move made room on the roster for left-hander Danny Jackson.


Mary Knowles and Stephen Feldberg, TV Producers, Are Wed in New York
Mary Stoddard Knowles, the daughter of Katherine Seward of Bethesda, Md., and the late Edward W. Knowles of Arlington, Va., was married yesterday to Stephen Alan Feldberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Feldberg of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi David Posner officiated at Bridgewaters at the South Street Seaport.
The bride, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a television producer at WNET-Channel 13 in New York for the program "Thirteen Live." She is a summa cum laude graduate of Tufts University and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father was a senior official of the Central Intelligence Agency in Langley, Va.
Her mother is a teacher at the Viers Mill Elementary School in Bethesda.
The bridegroom, 35, is a producer at CBS News for "CBS This Morning." A summa cum laude graduate of Tufts and a member of Phi Beta Kappa, he received a master's degree in journalism from the University of Missouri.
His mother, Mildred Feldberg, is a food-marketing consultant in Great Neck.
His father is a vice president at CPC International, a food producer and distributor in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.


Dreams Fade in the Wine Country
During the wine boom of the 1970's, doctors, lawyers and others with money to invest started wineries.
Many were seeking a gracious way of life, with their names on their own wine labels and enough profits to pay for new French oak barrels.
Now, rising costs, lower consumption and increased regulation and taxation are weighing them down.
Many want to sell, and some already have.
Peter Haywood was a successful 37-year-old building contractor who tired of battling planning commissions.
In 1974, he planted a vineyard so he could work outdoors.
Six years later, after selling grapes and making wine at home, he built the Haywood Winery in Sonoma County.
It soon earned a good reputation, particularly for its zinfandel.
But as a business, it languished.


Union Pacific Gas Deal
Union Pacific Fuels Inc., a unit of the Union Pacific Corporation, said Friday that it had made final a 15-year fuel-supply contract with the Los Angeles Water and Power Department.
The contract allows the city agency to buy up to 50 million cubic feet of gas a day to be transported from southwestern Wyoming to Southern California through the Kern River Gas Transmission Company's pipeline system.
The pipeline system is to be in service by February.
Almost all of the Los Angeles agency's gas consumption is for generating electricity.
It serves about 1.4 million electric customers.


Divac Learns the Language
WITH eyes that appear as innocent as a doe's, and a beard as black and bushy as a buccaneer's, and standing 7 feet 1 inch and weighing about 250 pounds, Vlade Divac is a presence, as well as the center for the Los Angeles Lakers.
He is also, as his teammate Magic Johnson says, "a joy." Though sometimes you wouldn't know that Johnson feels quite that warmly toward him.
Divac, at 23 years old, is in his second year with the Lakers, and in only his second year in this country, having lived all the rest of his days in his native Yugoslavia, where he had also played professionally for five seasons.
And if you get close to the court, you may hear Johnson teaching Divac some English, as well as the verbal and physical language of basketball, shouting at him to move here, and go there, or slide down, or post up, or concentrate, or, darnit, quit throwing kisses to the fans after scoring a basket or giving a high-five to the thespian Jack Nicholson sitting at courtside.


Man and Pregnant Girl Are Killed in Police Chase
Police officers shooting at a stolen van with seven youths inside killed two of them -- including a pregnant teen-ager -- and wounded four during a high-speed chase through Newark and Hillside, N.J., early yesterday.
After the crash the police said they found a silver-plated pistol that they believed to be a starter's gun in the van.
The police declined to say whether any shots were fired from the van.


Bulls Smash Lakers, 97-82, to Take 3-1 Lead in Series
After smothering the Los Angeles Lakers with their defense tonight, the Chicago Bulls are one victory away from a championship.
Chicago dominated and demoralized the Lakers, cruising to a 97-82 victory in Game 4 of the National Basketball Association championship series at the Forum.
The Bulls lead the four-of-seven-game series, 3-1, and can win their first N.B.A. title with a victory in Game 5 here Wednesday night.


Corrections
A listing headed "This Week in Westchester" in the Westchester Weekly yesterday misstated the day of a musical tribute to Cole Porter, and an article about the event misstated the time.
The concert, by the New Orchestra of Westchester, is being given tonight at 8:30 in Theater A of the Performing Arts Center at the State University at Purchase.


Episcopal-Catholic Feud in Newark: Round 2
A highly unusual feud between the Episcopal and Roman Catholic prelates of Newark has heated up again, with the Episcopal Bishop, the Rev.
John S. Spong, calling the Catholic position against the use of artificial birth control "an act of immorality."
"It's not surprising, considering the source," countered Archbishop Theodore E. McCarrick, the head of the Catholic Archdiocese of Newark.
Then he added, "I just hope this doesn't mean his book isn't selling well."


High Hopes At Microsoft For Product
More than 60 million computers now use the DOS software developed by the Microsoft Corporation, and when the nation's largest software company introduces a new version on Tuesday, it expects many customers to welcome the chance to improve their computing.
DOS is an operating system -- the software that controls the basic operations of a personal computer and allows it to work with other software that perform specific functions, known as applications software.


2 Lawyers, Susan M. Jaffe And Joshua Sarner, Marry
Susan Michele Jaffe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira Jaffe of the Bronx, was married yesterday in Mamaroneck, N.Y., to Joshua Sarner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Sarner of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Peter Weintraub performed the ceremony at the Orienta Beach and Yacht Club.
The bride, 28 years old, is an associate with the Philadelphia law firm of Sarner &amp; Associates.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a partner in the accounting firm of Kurcias, Jaffe &amp; Kurcias in Great Neck, L.I.
The bridegroom, 29, graduated from the University of North Carolina and received a law degree from Penn.
He is an associate in the Philadelphia law firm of Duane, Morris &amp; Hecksher.
His father is the founder of Sarner and Associates.


Elizabeth Chequer Weds R. C. Hendee
Elizabeth Guthrie Chequer, a daughter of Mrs.
Herbert F. Schwartz of Greenwich, Conn., and John H. Chequer of Lake Pleasant, N.Y., was married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Riverside, Conn., to Richardson Colt Hendee, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Hendee Jr. of Hartland, Wis.
The Rev.
Philip E. Perkins performed the ceremony.
The bride, 27 years old, is an associate at Corporate Art Directions, a consulting concern in New York.
She is a graduate of the Marlborough School and New York University.
Her father is a building contractor.
Her stepfather is a partner in the New York law firm of Fish &amp; Neave.
Her mother, known professionally as Nan Budde Chequer, is an associate in the law firm of Tyler Cooper &amp; Alcorn in Stamford, Conn.
The bridegroom, 40, is a marketing consultant in Greenwich.
He graduated from the University Lake School and from Boston University, where he also received an M.B.A. degree.
His first marriage ended in divorce.
His father recently retired as the chairman and chief executive of the Firstar Corporation, a bank holding company in Milwaukee.


Linz Is Back, Older and Wider
PHIL LINZ, who played infield and harmonica for the Yankees of the 1960's, is back playing baseball.
The 52-year-old Linz is the second baseman for the Stamford Athletics in the Connecticut Senior Men's Baseball League (age 30 and older).


Athletes as Celluloid Heroes
PETE ROSE as TY COBB?
Not bad casting -- especially compared with Hollywood's bizarre casting record. (See: ANTHONY PERKINS, who was more convincing as a knife-wielding maniac in "Psycho" than a bat-wielding JIMMY PIERSALL in "Fear Strikes Out.") With Charlie Hustle having signed on to play the Georgia Peach in a made-for-TV movie, it might be instructive to see how athletes have been represented in films.


Federal Judges to Seek $11 Million for Protection
The nation's Federal judges plan to ask Congress for more than $11 million for home security systems, cellular telephones and remote car starters.
The judges also plan to seek an exemption from local gun laws so they can carry firearms.
Judge Stanley Sporkin of Federal District Court for the District of Columbia said the request was prompted by the killing of Judge Robert S. Vance of the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit.
Judge Vance was killed by a bomb mailed to his home outside Birmingham, Ala., in December 1989.
"That was our Pearl Harbor," said Judge Sporkin, a member of the judges' security committee.
"Are we going to have to lose another guy or two before somebody does something?"


Dr. Alpert Weds Michael Kaufman
Dr.
Barbara Alpert, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Alpert of Lewiston, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael Stephen Kaufman, the son of Mrs.
Frederick Kaufman of Pittsburgh and the late Dr.
Kaufman.
Rabbi Robert Fine performed the ceremony at the Sleepy Hollow Country Club in Scarborough, N.Y.
The bride, 35 years old, is an assistant professor of medicine at the Westchester County Medical Center-New York Medical College in Valhalla.
A cum laude graduate of Harvard University, she received an M.D. degree and a doctorate in immunology from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is keeping her name.
Her father, who is an environmental consultant, retired as the vice president of environmental affairs at the Occidental Chemical Corporation in Grand Island, N.Y.
The bridegroom, 37, is a managing director of Kluge &amp; Company in New York, the acquisition and strategic planning group for the Metromedia Company in East Rutherford, N.J.
He graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where he also received a law degree cum laude.
His father was the University Professor of Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh.


Goodyear Bets on an Outsider
On this, his second full day as chairman and chief executive of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, Stanley C. Gault had already called for a complete review of the company's costs, summoned senior executives for a battery of sunrise-to-sundown meetings and started looking at what pieces of the company might be sold.
Mr.
Gault, who reinvigorated Rubbermaid Inc. as its chairman in the 1980's, was off to a running start in the formidable challenge of resuscitating Goodyear, the world's second-largest tire maker.


Cutting Health Care Paperwork Will Cut Costs; No to Managed Care
To the Editor:
While you seem convinced that managed care would be the best solution to our health care costs in "The Right Medicine" (editorial, May 27), you do not articulate the problems with such a system.


New York Prepares Embrace for Troops
In Battery Park, where 24,000 troops who served in the Persian Gulf will gather to bask in their "Welcome Home" parade today, tourists and New Yorkers basked in a hot Sunday sun yesterday and took in the parade preparations -- yellow ribbons painted on the pavement and white portable toilets placed along the sidewalks.
Tourists talked of witnessing a piece of history.
New Yorkers spoke of what would be left once that shining moment had passed.
Two visitors from Britain sat on a park bench in the shadow of the United States Bankruptcy Court Building in lower Manhattan and marveled at the kind of uninhibited self-celebration that, in their view, happens only in America.
"We don't do things like this in England," said Susan Yates, who lives near Manchester and is an employee of the British post office, the Royal Mail.
In her crisp Bermuda shorts and crisp English accent, she added: "Unfortunately, they don't have parades. They welcome back soldiers very subtly."


U.S. IS CONCERNED
Western diplomats and experts are concerned by indications that China is seeking to increase its share of the world market for missiles.
The Chinese military, the experts say, may begin shipments of two new kinds of missiles to Syria and Pakistan, and perhaps to other countries as well.
The new missiles, which are said to be more accurate than the Soviet-designed Scuds used by Iraq in the Persian Gulf war, are thought to be at the end of the development stage and could be deployed soon.


Susan Jacobson Is Married
Susan Ilene Jacobson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Simon Jacobson of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Dr.
Edward Dennis Fein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold Fein of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Jack Stern performed the ceremony.
The bride, 25 years old, graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is to join the accounting staff of Ernst &amp; Young in New York in July.
Dr.
Fein, 27, is a resident in internal medicine at the Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He graduated from Brandeis University and received an M.D. from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


U.S. Pilot Shot Down in Iraq Regrets Human Cost of War
Lieut.
Jeffrey N. Zaun, a Navy flier who was taken prisoner by Iraq and shown on television with his face battered in the early days of the Persian Gulf war, says he has second thoughts about war, a published report says.
"I don't ever want to kill anybody again," Lieutenant Zaun, 28 years old, is quoted as saying in an interview that was published Saturday in the Lahontan Valley News and Fallon Eagle Standard.
"This country didn't get to see the cost of the war. I did. People didn't see the Iraqi mothers get killed."


For Young Theatrical Experiment, Two Down and How Many to Go?
When "Our Country's Good" closed on Saturday night at the Nederlander Theater, a little more than a month after the play about 18th-century Australian convicts opened, it marked the second flop in two tries for the Broadway Alliance, the plan set up last year to encourage the production of more serious plays and the growth of new audiences by reducing both costs and ticket prices.
And while many theater people say it is much too soon to pass final judgment on the alliance, most of them add that changes must be made to improve its chances of success.


U.S. Evacuates Philippine Base as Volcano Erupts
The United States military authorities ordered the evacuation of thousands of Americans from Clark Air Base today after a nearby volcano, dormant for centuries, spewed rocks and hot ash down its slopes.
There were no reports of injuries at the base, one of the United States' oldest and largest overseas military installations, from the eruption of Mount Pinatubo, about 10 miles to the west.


Boris Kroll, 77, Owner Of a Fabrics Company
Boris Kroll, a fabric designer who was the longtime president of Boris Kroll Fabrics in Paterson, N.J., died on Friday night at his home in East Hampton, L.I.
He was 77 years old and also had a house in Tucson, Ariz.
His daughter said he died of cancer of the kidneys and colon.


Agencies in California Are Going After Vons
Southern California advertising agencies are preparing to pursue the $20 million account of Vons, the Los Angeles area's largest supermarket chain.
Vons decided last week to dismiss J. Walter Thompson's Los Angeles office.
The account was the biggest at that office, which has been buffeted in the last year by account losses and resignations; billings have fallen to about $40 million from about $200 million.


Breland's Motto: 2 Fists, 2 Titles
Mark Breland is on the comeback trail and he's not looking for just one title.
He wants to capture the junior-middleweight boxing championship and then step up and win the middleweight crown.
First things first, though: Henry Anaya of Albuquerque, N.M.


The Long Wait Is Finally Over As Hershiser Gets First Victory
Orel Hershiser, taking a huge stride in his comeback, pitched and batted the Los Angeles Dodgers to a 6-3 victory over the Chicago Cubs today.
Hershiser (1-1) allowed two runs, six hits, walked one and struck out six in seven innings for his 100th career victory.
Jay Howell got the last three outs.


INSIDE
Dormant F.D.A.
Proposals The Food and Drug Administration is about to begin a sweeping review of hundreds of safety measures it has proposed in the last 30 years but never acted on.
Page A15.


A Warhol Protege Alters The Tastes of Connoisseur
When Hearst Magazines dismissed Thomas Hoving as editor in chief of Connoisseur and replaced him with Gael Love, the message was as clear as a piece of Baccarat crystal: pomp was out and pop was in at the 90-year-old magazine.
Since the departure of Mr.
Hoving, the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, in January, the magazine has changed noticeably.


People
*
Kenneth E. Caffrey, executive vice president and worldwide media director of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, New York, will resign, effective July 15.
"I just feel I did everything I could do here and want a new challenge," said Mr.
Caffrey, who is 52 years old and has worked at O.&amp;M. for 28 years. *
Norman Cooper, president and chief operating officer of Kallir, Philips, Ross, New York, has been named to the additional post of chief executive.
He succeeds John Kallir, who continues as chairman.


The Dancer and the Vagrant: Two Lives, One Death
Her life was almost a rewrite of "42d Street," the musical about the determined young dancer from small-town Pennsylvania who got one of those lucky breaks and was soon high-kicking her way across the big-city stage.
Her offstage life seemed to follow the same kind of only-in-New-York script: she fought off a mugger in 1987, and that only made her love the city more.
The man who was arraigned yesterday for her murder was an enigma to the few people who knew him.
An ex-convict, he spent hours singing blues melodies on the front stoop of his city-owned apartment building.
He told the neighbors he was a writer whose books had never quite caught on.
Evicted for not paying the rent, he began wandering the West Side, apparently homeless, scrounging street-corner garbage cans and looking ever more bedraggled.


Alex Witchel, Times Theater Writer, Is Married to Frank H. Rich Jr., Critic
Alexandra Rachelle Witchel, a reporter in the cultural news department of The New York Times, and Frank Hart Rich Jr., the chief drama critic of The Times, were married yesterday in New York.
Rabbi Murray Grauer performed the ceremony at the restaurant Alison on Dominick Street.
The bride, 33 years old and known as Alex, graduated magna cum laude from Wheaton College and has a master's degree in theater administration from the Yale University School of Drama.
She writes the "On Stage, and Off" column for The Times.


World Economies


New York's Police Chief Offers Advice to Pretoria
The South African police, who are confronting their own transition as the country abandons apartheid, have received some blunt advice from New York City's top policeman.
"An American lesson for policing post-apartheid South Africa might be: 'Get on with it,' " said Commissioner Lee P. Brown.
"Don't waste the next century attempting to devise ways to frustrate the aspirations of a subjugated people."


Quotation of the Day
"She's a fighter. She didn't let people get away with things. She would not let people take advantage of her." -- Christopher Welsh, husband of Alexis Welsh, who was stabbed to death on West 69th Street Saturday morning.  [ B9:3. ]


Bridge
The sixth Epson worldwide bridge contest was played around the world Friday night in nearly 100 countries.
World results are not available, but the North American scores are known.
The winners, with a score of 75.4 percent, were John Gilliatt and Kay Harrison of Penticton, British Columbia, who sat North-South.
The best East-West score was 73.5 percent by Warren Kornfeld of Jericho, L.I., and Paul Markarian of Deer Park, L.I., playing at the New 110 Club in Farmingdale, L.I.
They earned a big score by accurate bidding on the diagramed deal.


After 3-Decade War in Ethiopia, Eritrean Finds Victory Is Somber
At the end of one of modern Africa's longest and deadliest wars, Isaias Afwerki today returned home to this rocky, sandy outpost near the Red Sea, the victorious leader of Eritrea, a province that has fought for independence for 30 years.
But the Eritrean rebel chief's homecoming, in a khaki Land Cruiser driven through a bush border post in the Sudan, was not the jubilant affair that could have been expected after the long struggle ending last month in the ouster of the Government of President Mengistu Haile Mariam.


Although Disabled He's Not Unable
The car he was riding in crashed, and DENNIS OEHLER lost his right leg below the knee.
He had been scheduled to sign a pro soccer contract.
Instead, three weeks later, at the urging of a friend, he attended the Victory Games for disabled athletes, "and seeing them got my life together again."


Evan J. Cohen Is Wed To Tammy Anne Weiss
Tammy Anne Weiss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Weiss of West Hartford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Evan Jay Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen C. Cohen of Massapequa, L.I.
Rabbi Haskel Lindenthal performed the ceremony at Beth El Temple.
The bride, 26 years old, is a systems analyst at Bantam Doubleday Dell in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her mother, Edythe Weiss, is a financial planner for the Aetna Life Insurance Company in Hartford.
Her father is a hydrologist with the United States Geological Survey in Hartford.
The bridegroom, 27, is an associate at the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.
He graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree there.
His mother, Diane Cohen, who is retired, was an executive secretary at the General Electric Company in New York.
His father is a professor of textile science at the Fashion Institute of Technology.


In Bridgeport, Higher Property Taxes Just Add Injury to Accumulated Insult
Insult is not hard to come by here.
Suburbanites boast that they never visit Bridgeport, the state's largest city and the banking and legal center of Fairfield County.
A county atlas shows Stamford, not Bridgeport, on its cover.
Amid Fairfield's sometimes stunning affluence, the city's flagship hotel advertises rooms for $49.
Pawnshops seem as common as convenience stores.
The University of Bridgeport, a private institution, has half as many students as 10 years ago.
Citytrust Bancorp, a major bank, has a negative net worth.
When the city's high schools were admitted -- on a trial basis -- into the Fairfield County Interscholastic Athletic Conference this spring, the decision carried the weight of history, as though Bridgeport itself had been admitted into the county.  'A Leper Colony'
The feeling of accumulated insult has much to do with Bridgeport becoming the first city in the nation to enter bankruptcy court.
The alternative was a big property-tax increase, on top of what was already the state's highest local tax rate, only to balance a budget that would leave streets dirty, parks unmowed, beaches without lifeguards, libraries and centers for the elderly closed.


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices dropped this morning as fading hopes for a near-term cut in interest rates, aggravated by the softness of the yen and the bond market, reduced confidence.
At midday, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks was off 363.05 points, or 1.45 percent, to 24,672.06.
A million shares were traded.
The index gained 50.99 points on Friday.


CHRONICLE
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN married the singer PATTI SCIALFA in a ceremony at their home over the weekend, the rocker's spokeswoman, Marilyn Laverty, told the Associated Press yesterday.
The couple wed with family and friends on hand, she said.
No other details of the wedding were released.
The couple have a son, EVAN JAMES, who will be a year old on July 25.
Mr.
Springsteen, 41, was previously married to the actress JULIANNE PHILLIPS .
They were divorced in 1989 after almost four years of marriage.
Miss Scialfa, 37, was a singer in Mr. Springsteen's E Street Band.


Pipeline Washed Out by Rain Spills Crude Into Texas River
An oil pipeline under the Brazos River, apparently washed out by rain, spilled about 84,000 gallons of crude into the river on Friday, the authorities said.
The cleanup of the spill, near Knox City, about 150 miles northwest of Fort Worth, could take weeks, officials said.


CHRONICLE
Another writer, DAVID WAGONER, who lists novelist and magician among his occupations, won the Ruth Lilly Poetry Prize on Friday in Chicago.
At $25,000, it is the largest poetry award in America.
It was established in 1986 by RUTH LILLY, a philanthropist and a niece of Eli Lilly, the pharmaceuticals millionaire.
In another of his occupations, Professor Wagoner, who turned 65 on Wednesday, teaches English at the University of Washington in Seattle.
He has written 10 novels and 14 collections of poetry; the most recent is "Through the Forest" (Atlantic Monthly Press; 1987).


Yugoslav Cooperation Must Be Recognized
To the Editor:
Recent news coverage of Yugoslavia tries to frame the Yugoslav crisis as a conflict between Croats and Serbs, ignoring that all the republics except Serbia and Montenegro (which are ruled by ultranationalistic, pan-Serbian Communists) stand together with Croatia in calling for a looser confederation of sovereign states.


Review/Theater; Recluse and Salesman: A Parable on Loneliness
Elaine May is one of the most original and unpredictable of writers and directors and she is to be welcomed back to the New York theater after a long absence even though the result, "Mr. Gogol and Mr. Preen," is a disappointment.
In her new play, which opened last night at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater in Lincoln Center, there are glimmers of her special talent, but not enough to justify the fuzziness of the effort.
The subject is friendship and its opposite, loneliness, as represented by two New Yorkers of decidedly different background and temperament.
Mr.
Gogol (Mike Nussbaum), an intellectual European refugee of no apparent profession, is living reclusively in a derelict New York apartment.
He is surrounded by books, dirty dishes and other detritus of a household that exists without the benefit of housekeeping.
Through his spectacularly cluttered set design, John Lee Beatty makes his own commentary about a city dweller's ability to exist in chaos.
Amusing sight gags subsequently derive from the set.


Clara Hemphill Weds Robert Snyder
Clara Jacobs Hemphill, a daughter of Margaret Allison Hemphill of Hampton, Conn., and the late George Hemphill, was married yesterday to Robert William Snyder, the son of Mildred Snyder of Dumont, N.J., and the late Max Snyder.
Wendell Davis, a justice of the peace in Hampton, led the ceremony at the Conservatory Garden in Central Park.
Rabbi Margaret Moers Wenig signed the marriage license.
The bride, 37 years old, is a reporter for New York Newsday.
She is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Chicago and was an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation fellow in economics journalism at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University.
Her father was an English professor at the University of Connecticut at Storrs.
Her mother is a city planner for the Windham Regional Planning Agency in Willimantic, Conn.
The bridegroom, 36, a writer and historian, is the author of "The Voice of the City: Vaudeville and Popular Culture in New York," published in 1989 by the Oxford University Press.
A graduate of Rutgers University, he received a Ph.D. in American history from New York University and was a fellow at the Gannett Foundation Media Center at Columbia University.
His mother, who is retired, was a secretary.
His father was a mechanic at the Mosler Safe Company in Irvington, N.J.


Descent of a People From Spiritual to Worldly
The Pursuit of Happiness By Anne Roiphe 473 pages. Summit Books. $22.95.
Anne Roiphe's richly absorbing new novel, "The Pursuit of Happiness," begins with a genealogy of the Gruenbaum family, with Moses (1852-1899) and Naomi (1853-1929) up above; Tova (b. 1966), Yehuda (b. 1965) and Namah (b. 1972) down below, and three generations between.


Cutting Health Care Paperwork Will Cut Costs; Canada Goes South
To the Editor:
Before the United States rushes headlong into the Canadian system of health care, you should make a study of the increasing number of Canadians who go to the United States, mostly to hospitals not far from the border (such as the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York, a number of hospitals in Boston), when they want proper hospital care and can afford to go south.
I think the findings would be illuminating.
JAMES NAIMAN, M.D.
Montreal, May 26, 1991


Rising Newcomers Taking Their Marks Hot on the Heels of the Stars
At one end of the entry list are the seasoned stars, athletes like Carl Lewis, Jackie Joyner-Kersee and Greg Foster, whose Olympic gold medals, world records or world championships attest to their talent, fortitude and longevity.
Nearly a dozen of those planning to compete in the national track and field championships, starting Wednesday on Randalls Island, own medals from the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics.


Kenya Frees Ex-Minister
The Government today announced the release of Kenneth Matiba, a former Cabinet minister whose arrest last year in a crackdown on democracy advocates drew criticism from the United States and human rights groups.
The release of Mr.
Matiba came more than two weeks after he suffered a stroke.
He was jailed without charges on July 4 along with Charles Rubia, another former Cabinet minister, and Raila Odinga, the eldest son of Kenya's first Vice President, Oginga Odinga.


Helen Obermayer, Sales Director, Weds
Helen Obermayer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman J. Obermayer of Arlington, Va., was married in Cambridge, Mass., yesterday to Eric Lee Myers, the son of Dixie Myers of Omaha and Dr.
Donald Myers of Virginia Beach, Va.
Rabbi Lazlow Berkowits performed the ceremony at the Royal Sonesta Hotel.
The bride, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the director of sales for The Boston Parents Paper, a monthly publication for new parents in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University.
Her father is a professor of journalism at the University of Maryland and was the editor and publisher of The Northern Virginia Sun in Arlington.
The bridegroom, 30, is a graduate student at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University.
He is a magna cum laude graduate of Creighton University.
His first marriage ended in divorce.
His father is the dean of the school of education at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Va.


Claudio Arrau, Pianist, Is Dead at 88
Claudio Arrau, one of the great pianists of the 20th century, died yesterday in Murzzuschlag, Austria.
He was 88 years old and lived in Munich.
Friede F. Rothe, Mr.
Arrau's personal representative, said the Chilean-born pianist died after after emergency surgery to correct an intestinal blockage on Saturday.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on May 24 referred incorrectly to the Home Insurance Company.
It was acquired in February by Home Holdings Inc. from the Ambase Corporation; it is no longer affiliated with Ambase.


Maxwell Fights Murdoch On a New Front: Coupons
WHILE The Daily News battles for survival on many fronts, the fight over coupons for such things as a 75-cent discount on a Jell-O cheesecake has become a major engagement that the New York paper has been losing.
The coupon fight is another front in the war between Robert Maxwell, the British publisher who owns The Daily News, and Rupert Murdoch.
The two have competing newspapers in London, and Mr.
Maxwell has started a new horse-racing paper, The Racing Times, to compete with The Daily Racing Form, which was until recently controlled by Mr.
Murdoch.
Mr.
Murdoch's News Corporation also owns Quad Marketing Inc. and Product Movers Inc., two of the three companies that produce the coupon booklets in many Sunday newspapers.
Coupons are an important source of revenue for papers and attract readers.
But all three coupon companies stopped placing coupons in The Daily News when its Sunday circulation fell sharply from 1.1 million in the five-month strike that ended in March, when Mr.
Maxwell bought the paper.
The Daily News immediately started trying to woo advertisers back by guaranteeing that its audited Sunday circulation would average at least a million for the six months ending in September.
A News spokesman said the paper was "on target," but declined to give numbers.
Thus far, however, none of the coupon booklets have returned to The Daily News, although they do appear Newsday and The New York Times.
Les Goodstein, vice president of advertising at The News, said the non-Murdoch coupon company, Valassis Inserts Inc., would begin placing its coupons in The News by mid-July.
David A. Brandon, president of Valas sis, said a deal with The News was close, but not yet complete.
Should Valassis coupons return toThe Daily News, the other two coupon companies may be under greater pressure from package-goods companies to go back as well.
But Ken Bortner, president of Mr.
Murdoch's News America Publishing, said its coupon booklets would not return to The News unless the rates came down drastically.
"If our coupons are to be used to build circulation, we should have an incentive to go back," he said.
"If we just help Mr. Maxwell and not Mr. Murdoch, what's the point?"
At The Daily News, there is suspicion that the absence of the coupon books is not based on economics.
"Murdoch just does not want to do business with Maxwell; that's the end of the story," said a News executive who spoke on condition of anonymity.
But Mr.
Goodstein said he remained "confident that at some point we'll get the business back."
And Mr.
Bortner said, "Given the right structure and right terms, something could be worked out." Editorial Feud Continues
For 15 years, readers of the editorial pages in Shreveport, La., have been able to choose between the conservative voice of The Times of Shreveport and the outspoken liberalism of The Shreveport Journal.
The Journal ceased publication in April, but its prickly editorial page has survived and appears Monday through Friday side-by-side with The Times's editorial page.
On Saturday, The Times's op-ed page separates the feuding views, and Sunday belongs to The Times exclusively because The Journal did not publish on Sunday.
"As far as I know, this is unique," said Charles T. Beaird, the 68-year-old Shreveport native who has the right to express his liberal views in The Times until 2000.
Starting in 1953, The Times, owned by the Gannett Company, and The Journal were published in a joint operating arrangement in which they merged production, business and delivery operations and split the profits.
The Journal, the afternoon paper, lost money, so the much-larger Times said the arrangement would not be renewed when it expired in 1994.
But The Journal owned the rights to the paper's press, a complication.
The compromise was to close The Shreveport Journal but continue the editorial page.
And Mr.
Beaird's family will also receive The Journal's roughly 20 percent share of The Times's profits until 1994.
Latest Bout for Trump
When it comes to negative press coverage, Donald J. Trump usually attacks.
So the New York developer recently declared war on a Wall Street Journal reporter.
Norman Pearlstine, the executive editor, acknowledges that his reporter might have used better judgment -- and has second thoughts about a time when he accepted Mr.
Trump's expensive hospitality.
But he expressed full confidence in Neil Barsky, who has been covering Mr.
Trump for The Wall Street Journal since 1989, and said Mr.
Barsky would continue on the Trump beat and would not be reprimanded.
On May 31, The Journal published an article by Mr.
Barsky that said Mr.
Trump's finances were was so strained that the developer might have to borrow money from his father.
Mr.
Trump denounced the article as untrue and charged that Mr.
Barsky had asked for free tickets to the Holyfield-Foreman fight, staged by Mr.
Trump in Atlantic City on April 19.
Mr.
Pearlstine said Mr.
Trump told him that Mr.
Barsky had been given three $1,000 tickets and then asked for two more tickets and a hotel suite, which were refused.
Mr.
Trump charged that Mr.
Barsky was retaliating with his article.
Mr.
Pearlstine said what happened was quite different.
He said a Trump official offered a ticket to Mr.
Barsky.
The Journal's policy generally prohibits accepting gifts.
Mr.
Barsky asked Fred R. Bleakley, the news editor, whether he should accept.
Mr.
Barsky wanted to go to the fight to gain access to top Trump executives.
Mr.
Bleakley did not express strong opposition, which he now regards as his mistake.
Mr.
Barsky accepted the ticket, was invited to take two and agreed, so his brother could go.
He paid $100 for a third ticket for his father, but when he went to pick up the two free tickets, he was offered a third $1,000 ticket for his father.
He accepted.
But The Journal says there were no requests for two additional tickets or a free hotel suite.
Mr.
Barsky said he probably should have refused the tickets.
"I made a mistake, and it's a beaut," he said.
And Mr.
Pearlstine said, "The fact that Donald chose to call and complain a month after the event rather than at the time suggests that he was seeking favorable coverage and is upset he didn't get it."
Mr.
Pearlstine said he might have erred when he accepted Mr.
Trump's invitation in 1988 to a helicopter ride to Atlantic City and free tickets for the Tyson-Holmes fight.
He said he reasoned that the trip would enable him to meet valuable news sources.
"If he offered the tickets today, I would not accept them," he said.
Mr.
Trump said he was "strongly considering major legal action" against The Journal and Mr.
Barsky.
But Mr.
Pearlstine was skeptical that such a suit would ever be filed.
He said The Journal had sent $3,000 to Mr.
Trump for the tickets.


British Official Starts Beirut Hostage Mission
A senior British Government official arrived here today in a fresh effort to win the release of Western hostages believed held by Shiite Muslim fundamentalists aligned with Iran.
Douglas Hogg, a minister in the Foreign Office, said he would be ready to meet anyone able to help free the hostages.
Among the leaders Mr.
Hogg is to see is Sheik Mohammed Hussein Fadlallah, spiritual mentor of the pro-Teheran Party of God.
Sheik Fadlallah, a prominent Shiite Muslim scholar, says he has no organizational link with the Party of God, which in turn insists it is not involved in hostage taking.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on May 31 about a new supercomputer from the Intel Corporation misidentified the computer's location.
It is on the California Institute of Technology campus in Pasadena, not at the Caltech Jet Propulsion Laboratory nearby.
J.P.L. is a member of the consortium managing the computer.


Outweek, in a Shake-up, Ousts Its Editor
Outweek, the New York-based gay and lesbian magazine that has been trying to attract mainstream advertisers, dismissed its editor in chief last week after he refused to submit his resignation.
Steven Polakoff, the publisher, said the magazine needed to become more engaging than it had been under Gabriel Rotello, the editor and a founder of the two-year-old weekly.
"The reader doesn't always want to be lectured and bored," he said.


P.&amp; G. Shifts Executives
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the giant consumer products concern, said that it would announce high-level management changes today.
Under a realignment of the company's United States operations, B. Jurgen Hintz has resigned as executive vice president for paper, food and beverage products, the company said, and has also resigned his board seat.
Mr.
Hintz, who is 49 years old, will continue to serve with the company for a short period on special assignment to Edwin L. Artz, the chairman and chief executive.


French Open Winner


2,000 at St. John's Mark the Gulf War
The generals who spearheaded the victory in the Persian Gulf war spoke of remembrance and resolve at a dramatic memorial service yesterday in the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Civilians and soldiers alike gathered beneath the soaring arches of the mammoth Gothic cathedral to hear solemn readings and the piercing, funereal tones of taps echo through the sanctuary.


Ms. Holskin Wed To Michael Stern
Patti Holskin, a daughter of Ruth Holskin of Baldwin, L.I., and Ira Holskin of Bethlehem, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael R. Stern, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence P. Stern of New Haven.
Rabbi Mark L. Winer officiated at the Stonehenge Inn in Ridgefield, Conn.
The bride, 30 years old, is a public-relations manager at the Heublein wine and brandy company in Farmington, Conn.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, owned Weathervane Outerwear, a clothing manufacturer in New York.
The bridegroom, 31, is a lawyer at the Connecticut Fund for the Environment, a nonprofit group in Hartford.
He graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Boston University.
His father is the senior vice president and chief financial officer of Takihyo Inc., the parent corporation for the Anne Klein fashion companies and a partner in the Donna Karan Companies.
His mother, Betsy C. Stern, is a clinical social worker at the Jewish Board of Children and Family Services in New York.


Cheltenham Journal; In a Slice of Old England, a Black Tory Candidate
Nearly every weekend since February, John Taylor has been traveling from his home in London to this fashionable town on the edge of the Cotswolds, where he walks the flowered squares and narrow avenues to shake the hands of voters.
Mr.
Taylor is the Conservative candidate for Parliament, running for a seat the party has controlled since 1950.
He is also a black man campaigning in a district in which there are almost no blacks, on behalf of a party that can claim few black members.


Andrea Nicoletti Weds
Andrea Mary Nicoletti and Christophe Jerome Brun, vice presidents at the Bankers Trust Company in New York, were married yesterday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Theologian in Tenafly, N.J.
The Very Rev.
Ernest Blougouras performed the Greek Orthodox ceremony.
The bride, 32 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard J. Nicoletti of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
The bridegroom, 39, is the son of Claude G. Brun of Paris and Armand Brun of New York.
Mrs.
Brun graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in international affairs from George Washington University.
The bridegroom, 39, graduated from Fordham University.
His first marriage ended in divorce.


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL United States Basketball League LONG ISLAND SURF -- Placed Rich Henry, guard, on the taxi squad.
Added Arnold Bernard, guard, to the active roster.
FOOTBALL National Football League CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed K.D.
Dunn, tight end.
Acquired Roy Green, wide receiver, from the Phoenix Cardinals for an undisclosed draft choice.
World League of American Football BARCELONA DRAGONS -- Signed Mark Murphy, defensive end.


Public Toilets for OTB
To the Editor:
Public toilets for New York City are in the news again (news article, May 21).
Public restrooms should also be mandated for quasi-public installations.
The most obvious such facility is the Offtrack Betting parlors around the city.
Each of these storefront points of assembly should be required to install and maintain adequate toilet facilities for the large number of people who frequent them and for other passers-by.
This could be done with a minimum of public expense and a maximum of public benefit.
LAWRENCE KURTZBERG New York, May 28, 1991


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater
Metropolitan Opera House
The performance of "Giselle" by American Ballet Theater on Saturday afternoon was a splendid example of company teamwork.
Everyone involved seemed to be united in a sincere effort to achieve dramatic effects.
Amanda McKerrow was once again a vulnerable Giselle, and previously unreviewed dancers gave fine accounts of other major roles.


The Spectacle's the Thing As Monarchs Capture Title
Amid much fanfare, the London Monarchs won the first World League of American Football championship today at Wembley Stadium, defeating the Barcelona Dragons, 21-0.
"This is tremendous," said Monarchs quarterback Stan Gelbaugh.
"I'll never forget this."


Heroics Again as Yankees' Future Overpowers Yankees' Past
There is something very special going on with the Yankees these days.
Come-from-behind victories, dramatic homers and an abundance of confidence have replaced the daily despair and numbing experience of constant losing.
The feeling might not last for the rest of the season or even the rest of the month, but the ride has been joyous.
It probably felt as refreshing as being in a convertible with the top down yesterday when Pat Kelly belted a two-run homer off Goose Gossage in the eighth inning to give New York a 6-4 victory over Texas at Yankee Stadium.


Review/Television; Could There Be Nuclear War?
The only laugh in "Losing Control?," tonight's all-out alert on the risk of blundering into nuclear war, comes at the very end, when the narrator, Bill Kurtis, says earnestly, "Our purpose here is not to advocate any definitive answer." It's like having a car salesman tell you after an hour of browbeating that all he wants is for you to make up your own mind.
The documentary, at 9 on Channel 13, centers on what it calls "a plausible scenario" of the United States and the Soviet Union caught in a nuclear exchange through some muddy set of calculations and miscalculations.
Simulated scenes of television news reports of the crisis, which begins with a war between Syria and Israel, are interspersed with comments by real former officials, think tankists and others; most caution that the ever-increasing complexity of modern weapons combined with never-diminishing human fallibility makes nuclear war only too likely.


The March Of Images
Today, as our troops march down city streets, deluged by confetti, applause and speeches in a welcome home that veterans of the Vietnam War never had, we might also begin to feel a little sorry for them.
They are heroes who fought admirably, we are told, but we were allowed to witness little of their bravery.
Government policies intended to keep the public committed to the war effort made the whole campaign largely an abstraction.


Meadow Star's Victory Margin? Just Say Nose
In the race that Leroy Jolley called "the Mother of all Gooses," his champion filly Meadow Star withstood a final furious challenge from the glamorous new star Lite Light and won the Mother Goose Stakes yesterday by the dramatically slender margin of her nose.
It was a sensational duel through the homestretch between the two prima donnas of the filly class of 3-year-olds, and they fought it so tightly that it took the placing judges six minutes to report who had won the photo finish.


Bonnie Rosenblatt Marries
Bonnie Lynn Rosenblatt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Rosenblatt of Brooklyn, was married in Howard Beach, Queens, yesterday to Dr.
Gary Warren Freeberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Freeberg of Melville, L.I.
Rabbi Rafael Saffra performed the ceremony at the Rockwood Park Jewish Center.
The bride, 29 years old, is an associate in the New York law firm of Rudes, Lax, Berkowitz &amp; Mittman.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Albany and received a law degree from the University of Bridgeport.
Dr.
Freeberg, 31, is a fellow in pulmonary medicine at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
He graduated from the University of Rochester and received his M.D. from the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn.
His first marriage ended in divorce.


Homeownership At Record Level For New Yorkers
While New York City is still primarily a tenant's town, the surge of co-op conversions and housing construction in the 1980's brought the level of homeownership above 25 percent for the first time, according to figures in the 1990 census.
It is a truism of American life that people who own their homes think and act differently from renters, and a variety of political leaders and others expect the increase -- from 23.4 percent of households in 1980 to 28.4 percent in 1990 -- to be reflected in areas from career mobility to political affiliation.


Report Critical of Drop in Savings
Criticizing the United States in particular, the coordinating bank for the world's central banks said today that long-term economic growth in the industrial world was slipping because of a sharp drop in savings as well as a decline in public investment by many governments.
In a report issued today, the Bank for International Settlements said the drop in savings -- which provides the money for investment for future growth -- could also hurt Eastern Europe and the third world because they need to attract investment money to spur their economies.


Deborah Gunset, Lawyer, Marries
Deborah Ann Gunset, a daughter of Gertrude Gunset of Larchmont, N.Y., and James T. Gunset of Delhi, N.Y., was married in Larchmont yesterday to Charles Beard Anderson, the son of Mary B. Anderson of Tenafly, N.J., and the late John W. Anderson.
Msgr.
Joseph Boyd performed the ceremony at the Church of SS.
John and Paul.
Mrs.
Anderson, 39 years old, is an associate in the New York law firm of Tanner Propp Fersko &amp; Sterner.
She graduated from Fordham University and received a law degree from Fordham and a master's in German literature from Columbia University.
Her father is a security consultant in Delhi for Ames Department Stores.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the English department at Dominican Academy in New York.
Mr.
Anderson, 43, is a maritime lawyer and a partner in the New York law firm of Haight, Gardner, Poor &amp; Havens.
He graduated cum laude from Columbia, from which he also received a law degree.
He also has a master's degree in German literature from Princeton University.
His father was the master of the liner United States from 1952 to 1964.


Back to the Beach: In Philadelphia?
None of those beach movies with ANNETTE FUNICELLO ever were set in Philadelphia, where the submarines are sandwiches.
But next Thursday 10 truckloads of sand will be delivered to Delaware and Frankford, on Pier 42 North, where a beach is being constructed.


Birdie Putts Carry Geddes To a One-Stroke Victory
Jane Geddes survived a double bogey with six holes left and made remarkable saves on two other holes later to capture the Atlantic City Classic today at the Greate Bay Country Club.
Geddes shot a two-under-par 69 for a total of five-under 208, a shot better than Amy Alcott, who started the day with a two-shot lead and was the favorite of the galleries.
A victory for Alcott would have been her 30th and would have automatically put her in the Ladies Professional Golf Association Hall of Fame.


Cuomo Veto Is a Gamble
By threatening to veto virtually all the spending lawmakers added to the state budget, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has made a risky declaration of war against the New York State Legislature.
Mr.
Cuomo says he is planning to veto the Legislature's spending because it has thrown the state's $51.9 billion budget out of balance.
Yet he seems to be looking to do more than simply restore balance.
He is seeking to reopen the very same budget negotiations he distanced himself from almost a month ago -- only now, having denounced the Legislature as irresponsible, he seems even less likely to win its cooperation than he was before.


10001-9998 Journal; Postal Scanners Can Parry Commas' Blows, After All
In the eighth century an English monk named Alcuin, backed by an edict from Charlemagne, established the laws of grammar for scribes across the Holy Roman Empire.
"Let them distinguish the proper sense by colons and commas," he wrote, "and let them see the points each one in its due place, and let not him who reads the words to them either read falsely or pause suddenly."
Alcuin's laws survived for 12 centuries, but this year they were superseded by an edict from the United States Postal Service.
The new instructions to the public appear on books of stamps currently on sale across the country: "Help speed mail delivery. Please use all capital letters with no punctuation in addresses."


Angola's New War; As Battle Lines Form for Elections, Ruling Party Secures Grip on Power
It will long be debated who won and who lost Angola's 16-year civil war, but most diplomats and political experts here believe that as the nation prepares to hold its first free elections, the leftist Government has an edge in the coming campaign.
The peace accord signed in Lisbon on May 31, culminating a year of talks involving Washington and Moscow as well as the warring factions, provides for elections in the second half of 1992.
But the pact gives the Luanda Government sweeping powers in the interim, at least for the moment, say analysts examining the document's fine print.


F.D.A. to Review Regulation Backlog
With the goal of restoring credibility after a decade of budget cuts and deregulation, the Food and Drug Administration is about to begin a sweeping review of hundreds of food and drug safety measures it has proposed in the last 30 years but never acted on.
The review is the second phrase of efforts by the F.D.A.'s new Commissioner, Dr.
David Kessler, to rebuild the agency.
The first phase, which began several months ago, was increased enforcement actions against food and drug manufacturers.
The idea, Dr.
Kessler said in interviews over the weekend, is to first get rid of misleading labels and then to give manufacturers guidance on what the labels should say and how to keep their products safe.


Departing Health Chief Cites Maze of Problems
Calling New York City a patient "in poor condition," Health Commissioner Woodrow A. Myers Jr. said his successor would inherit an agency plagued with problems that have undermined efficiency, recruitment and health initiatives.
In an interview on Friday as he prepared to leave his city post for a job in the private sector, he said the Health Department's work during his tenure was hampered by antiquated technology, vacancies in his management staff and a lack of resources.
The city, mired in drugs, AIDS and exploding rates of measles, tuberculosis and congenital syphilis, he said, cannot tolerate the magnitude of budget cuts proposed for the agency for the next fiscal year.


All-Terrain Vehicles Recalled
The American Honda Motor Company has announced a recall of 730 of its 1991 four-wheel-drive all-terrain vehicles because their brakes could fail.
The front brake hose of the TRX300FW model may contact the edge of the front fender, a result that could damage the hose, the company said Saturday.
The model has independent front brakes and rear brakes, and the latter would function if the front brakes failed, said a company spokesman, Kurt Antonius.


Man Is Arrested In Slayings of 2 At U. of Florida
A man who cleaned carpets in student apartments has confessed to strangling two young women last week in a case that stunned this university city, the authorities said today.
The man told investigators he had become enraged after one of the victims sprayed him with Chemical Mace, apparently from a canister she was given after the killings of five students here last August.


Treasury Is Selling Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings for this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.57 percent and the six-month bill was bid at 5.74 percent.


Abroad at Home; 'The Color of His Skin'
White Americans are impatient with the idea of special concern for the problems of blacks.
So the polls tell us, and so the political climate indicates.
The raw racial prejudice that once disfigured this country has been overcome, we are told.
Blacks do not need extra help, and anyway providing it causes resentment.
It is time they made it on their own.


Courier Beats Wind, Rain And Agassi
Whipped by the wind, the rain and, on a more personal note, whipped by underdog Jim Courier in the first five-set French Open men's final since another dark horse, Michael Chang, eliminated Stefan Edberg in 1989, Andre Agassi trudged away from his third Grand Slam finale in a familiar mood: despair.
Today's final, an all-American affair featuring two halfway hostile contemporaries, was sandwiched between showers that splattered Roland Garros Stadium this afternoon.
And for the bulk of five ungainly sets, forecasting an imminent champion was as impossible as deciphering the weather.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:  &lt;biBangor Hydro-Electric Co., 800,000 common shares.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.  &lt;biChambers Development Co., global offering of 4.6 million common shares, 3.1 million in the U.S.
Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Circon Corp., 1 million common shares.
Lehman Brothers.  &lt;biComerica Inc., 2.4 million common shares.
First Boston.  &lt;biDeVry International, 3.6 million common shares.
Salomon Brothers Inc.  &lt;biEcogen Inc., 3.2 million common shares.
Dillon, Read &amp; Co.  &lt;biGenelabs Technologies Inc., 3 million shares.
Allen &amp; Co.  &lt;biGenesis Health Ventures Inc., 3.3 million common shares.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.  &lt;biGlycomed Inc., 2.3 million common shares.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist.  &lt;biHorizon Healthcare Corp., 3.54 million common shares.
Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.  &lt;biLoral Corp., 4 million common shares.
Lehman Brothers.  &lt;biMulti-Local Media Information Group Inc., global offering of 6.3 million common shares, 5.04 million in the U.S.
First Boston.
New Plan Realty Trust, 3 million shares of beneficial interest.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  &lt;biPS Group Inc., 1.5 million common shares.
Salomon Brothers Inc.  &lt;biPulse Engineering Inc., 2.55 million common shares.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.  &lt;biQual-Med Inc., 4.3 million common shares.
Salomon Brothers Inc.  &lt;biQuarterdeck Office Systems, 3.4 million common shares.
Montgomery Securities.  &lt;biRamsay-HMO Inc., 2.25 million common shares.
Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.  &lt;biReader's Digest Association Inc., global offering of 15 million common shares, 12.5 million in U.S.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.  &lt;biRoberts Pharmaceutical Corp., 2 million common shares.
Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.  &lt;biServ-Tech Inc., 1.35 million common shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Societe Nationale Elf Aquitaine, 7.6 million American depository shares, 6.4 million shares in the U.S. representing 3.2 million ordinary shares.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.  &lt;biValue City Department Stores Inc., 3.75 million common shares.
Salomon Brothers Inc.  &lt;biVanguard Cellular Systems Inc., global 3.5 million common shares, 2.8 million in U.S.
Lehman Brothers.  &lt;biVarco International Inc., global offering of 6.5 million common shares, 5.2 million in U.S.
Lehman Brothers.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch


Rethink the Recycling Retreat
To close $30 million of a $3.5 billion budget deficit forecast for fiscal 1992, Mayor Dinkins would suspend New York's recycling program.
But to abandon recycling, however briefly, is to threaten the city's long-term capacity to handle waste.
Recycling is no panacea.
Under the most favorable circumstances, no more than half the waste could be re-used by the best foreseeable technology.
New York's fledgling recycling program now removes only 1,200 of the 17,000 tons of trash handled every day by the Sanitation Department.
Private carters haul away an additional 10,000 tons.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None Tuesday Merchandise Trade...1st.
Qtr.
Wednesday Housing Completions April Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims Producer Price Index...May Retail Sales...May Friday Inventories...April Consumer Prices...May Industrial Production...May Capacity Utilization...May


Corrections
An article in Weekend on Friday about art from the Burton G. and Emily Hall Tremaine collection, to be auctioned by Christie's in November, misstated the sales total from a 1988 sale of part of the collection there.
It was $29 million, no $60 million.


Barnes Foundation to Permit Color Reproductions of Its Art
The extraordinary art collection of the Barnes Foundation in Merion, Pa., largely unknown to the general public, will soon be published for the first time in full color.
Alfred A. Knopf has surprised the art world by signing a contract for several books on the collection, which has long been prohibited from color reproduction.
All the major art-book houses in the country have sought to publish a book on the Barnes collection.
"It's an exceptional prize, and we are proud that we have been selected," said Alberto Vitale, chief executive of Random House Inc., Knopf's parent company.
"We are honored to be informing the world about one of the great wonders that has been hidden for a long time."


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet
New York State Theater
Hisses and boos vied with bravos as "Watermill," Jerome Robbins's 1972 presumed meditation on life for the New York City Ballet was performed on Saturday night with Bart Cook making his debut in the central role.


Gooden and Figures Don't Add Up
The words, heretical for some, long overdue for others, were spoken by Frank Cashen early on an overcast Florida morning in February.
Fighting for higher ground amid the flood of emotions concerning negotiations on a contract extension for Dwight Gooden, the Mets' general manager had conceded the 26-year-old right-hander's unique magnetism, his almost inestimable contributions to the fortunes of the franchise, his breathtaking career record.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge receipt of or return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Long Islander Wins  Jim Albus, a club pro from Long Island, shot a closing-round 70 for a nine-under total of 279 yesterday in Dearborn, Mich., to win the Senior Players Championship by three strokes over Dave Hill, Charles Coody and Bob Charles.
Albus is a pro at the Piping Rock Country Club at Locust Valley, L.I. (AP) CYCLING Zanoli Is a Winner


Cutting Health Care Paperwork Will Cut Costs
To the Editor:
"The Wrong Medicine" and "The Right Medicine" (editorials, May 26 and 27) are based on wrong assumptions and mistaken prescriptions.
You believe a major villain in driving costs up is that individuals are unrestrained in their purchase of medical care because they do not pay for it.


A Gulf Veteran Docks for New York's Celebration Today


Canada Doesn't Stint on Meat Inspection
To the Editor:
I am surprised you chose to highlight a tendentious and inaccurate article on Canadian meat entering the United States ("Poisoned Meat From Canada," Op-Ed, May 31).
What are the facts?


Dearth in the Afternoon: Mets Get 3 Hits, No Runs
Bud Harrelson thought the pitch that ended the game was a change-up.
Howard Johnson, who swung at it and missed, swore it was a slider.
Another player turned from a television replay and pronounced it a split-finger fastball.
That was how good Pete Harnisch was today.
The Mets couldn't figure him out even after the game was over.


Eve Berenblum, Manager, Weds
Eve Nanette Berenblum, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Berenblum of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Brett Goldberg.
He is the son of Dr.
Marshall Goldberg of Philadelphia and the late Isa Ritz, and the stepson of Charles Ritz of Cambridge, Mass.
Rabbi Joshua Hammerman officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, is the manager of the women's fragrances department at Saks Fifth Avenue in New York.
She is a graduate of Amherst College.
Her father is a partner in Heidrick &amp; Struggles, management consultants in Greenwich.
Her mother, Susan Berenblum, is a broker at Prudential Connecticut Realty in Greenwich.
The bridegroom, 31, heads Isratrade, a New York company that imports skin- care products from Israel.
He is a graduate of Yale University.
His stepfather, who is retired, owned the Light 'N' Lovely Fitness Center in Wellesley, Mass.


Sports of The Times; The Fillies Upstage Celebrity Owners
IN racing, the celebrities are still four-legged.
The owners may make the front page for trying to save an airline or they may hit the top of the charts with a rap record.
But when the gates open, the horses are the stars, and fragile ones at that.
For nearly two glorious minutes yesterday, Carl Icahn and M. C. Hammer were merely two wealthy men who had made a modest little wager of $35,000 and then watched their fillies run.


Flooding Turns Farmland Into Pools of Trouble
In his 58 years of farming here, Henry Delger has never seen so much storm water covering the fields and drenching the spirits and hopes of so many of his neighbors.
With a sad, slow shake of his head, he said the heavy rains that have hit the Midwest in recent weeks had made "grown men cry."
"I can believe it," Mr.
Delger's friend, Robert Robb, said as the two men sat and talked the other day at a grain elevator in this farm town of 3,000 in north-central Iowa.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9
China is expanding its arms sales of missiles and other heavy weapons around the world, experts say, possibly putting it on a collision course with a Western consensus aimed at slowing the arms race.
Page A1


Arms Talks: A Warm-Up
Although the Soviet and American Foreign Ministers have been meeting almost weekly to try to tie up long-delayed arms control agreements, the real focus of relations between Moscow and Washington has radically shifted to economics and the question of how the West can help transform Soviet society.
Don't be fooled by the recent attention that Washington and Moscow have been paying to arms control, both Soviet and American officials say.
They are the wave of the past.
The reason for the recent burst of arms control activity is that the Soviets are eager to get the conventional and nuclear agreements out of the way -- because Washington has made this a condition for a summit meeting that would focus primarily on economic help -- and Washington is eager to exploit Moscow's vulnerability.


Corrections
A diagram on Thursday about a new treatment for racing heartbeats mislabeled the small chamber that lies atop the left ventricle, the heart's main pumping chamber.
The small chamber is the left atrium; the aorta is the body's main artery, which receives blood from the left ventricle.


A Publicity Stunt Man Leaps to 'Power P.R.'
Hacks and flacks milled about Maguire's Cafe in Manhattan last week, trading tales about Dan Klores, the New York public relations industry's premier stunt man.
One television correspondent recalled Lassie's attendance at the opening of the Dog Hall of Fame, which Mr.
Klores invnted for the Animal Medical Center in New York.
And a newspaper reporter noted that Jack Benny's daughter came to the inauguration of the Radio Hall of Fame, devised by Mr.
Klores for the Emerson Radio Corporation.
When someone suggested that Halls of Fame were his favorite fallbacks, Mr.
Klores agreed: "I love 'em."


Alisa Miri Kwitney, Writer, Is Married
Alisa Miri Kwitney, the daughter of Ziva Kwitney of New York and Robert Sheckley of Portland, Ore., was married last evening to Mark Stapylton-Smith, a son of Mrs.
Thomas Bradbury of Dallington, East Sussex, England, and Stewart Stapylton-Smith of Ticehurst, East Sussex.
Rabbi Ellen Lippmann performed the ceremony on the yacht Mariner III in New York Harbor.
The bride, 26 years old, is a writer and an assistant editor at DC Comics in New York.
She is keeping her name.
She graduated from Wesleyan University, where she won the Paul Horgan Prize for short fiction, and received a master's degree in fiction writing from Columbia University.
Her father is a science-fiction writer.
Her mother is a writer and a psychotherapist in New York.
The bridegroom, 33, is a marketing consultant in New York.
He graduated from the University of Leicester in England.
His father is a retired farmer.
His stepfather, a retired rear admiral in the British Navy, is the personnel director of the Davy Corporation, a consulting engineering company in London.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Thursday misstated the location of the National Starch and Chemical Company.
It is Bridgewater, N.J.


Metro Matters; Tick, Tick, Tick: Cuomo Can Afford To Wait on 1992
If "they also serve who only stand and wait" becomes the axiom of the 1992 Presidential campaign, no Democrat can stand to wait longer than Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
Mr.
Cuomo says he has no plans to run, no plans to make plans and no plans not to make plans.
But the thirst for leadership in the Democratic Party and the vacuum that it is in the nature of political reporters to abhor even more than politicians (witness an earlier New York Governor's rush to fill the vacuum created by Hoover) prompt many to continue to discount Mr.
Cuomo's repeated, if marginally less unequivocal, disavowals of candidacy.


Police Officer in S.I. Arrested In Menacing of Three Women
A New York City police officer assigned to the Staten Island Ferry Terminal was arrested last night and charged with taking women into the terminal on three occasions and demanding money from them in exchange for their release, the police said.
The officer, identified as Darrel E. Smith, was charged with grand larceny, unlawful imprisonment, sexual abuse, official misconduct, attempted kidnapping and menacing.


Jockey's Faceless Approach To a Times Square Teaser
A BILLBOARD in Times Square is attracting attention for its premise that while it is not unusual to see someone in Times Square who has lost her head, it is unusual to see someone who has lost her face.
The advertisement, produced by Van Wagner Communications Inc., is for the Jockey for Her line of women's underwear marketed by Jockey International Inc.
Under a headline, "So comfortable! Jockey for Her," is an illustration of a reclining woman, her face not yet filled in.


Dr. Beth R. Schwartz Is Wed in Baltimore
Dr.
Beth Robin Schwartz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar Schwartz of Jamaica, Queens, was married yesterday in Baltimore to Harry Belt Turner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles T. Turner of Baltimore.
Rabbi David Holtz performed the ceremony at the Harbor Court Hotel.
The bride, 34 years old, is a staff pathologist at the Greater Baltimore Medical Center.
A magna cum laude graduate of Princeton University and a member of Phi Beta Kappa, she received an M.D. from Harvard University.
The bridegroom, 39, is a senior associate in the Baltimore law firm of Adelberg, Rudow, Dorf, Hendler &amp; Sameth.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from the University of Maryland.
His first marriage ended in divorce.


Dividend Meetings


Debt Accord By Child World
Child World Inc., the troubled toy retailer, said it had reached an agreement with its creditors to restructure its debt.
Under the terms of the restructuring, approved by Child World's major trade creditors and announced on Friday, the company would remain public.
And the CNC Holding Corporation would dispose of its 82 percent interest in the retailing chain.


Bucharest Bowl? Not Quite Yet
Romania had its first taste of American football today, complete with rock music and majorettes.


Review/Music; Evoking Images of Bars in Asian Ports
John Zorn, the most manically creative of the 1980's decade of downtown Manhattan musical improvisers, makes a kind of world art-rock using a rethought model from jazz.
Instead of scores, he relies on sets of rules, within which his musicians, most from vanguard rock, play off against one another's energy and skills.
The rules are clever and most of the musicians first rate, starting (when he participates) with Mr.
Zorn himself.
But there is more to his music than that.
He's an excellent organizer and self-promoter, and he's got a fertile, hiply au courant imagination.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
CPC International Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J., is offering $250 million in liquid-yield option notes, due in 2006, at a price of 411.99 for every $1,000 of bonds through Merrill Lynch.
The notes are zero-coupon and pay no interest but if held to maturity yield 6 percent.
They are also convertible into 4.112 common shares of CPC.
The issue is rated A-3 by Moody's Investors Service and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Co., New York, has filed with the S.E.C. to extend a shelf registration for subordinated debt to cover offering an additional $400 million in securities, for a total of $600 million.


Out of Bounds at Justice
When Dick Thornburgh became Attorney General three years ago, he brought a fresh wind to sweep away the fetid partisan atmosphere of Edwin Meese's tenure.
Mr.
Thornburgh gave promise, as a former Governor, prosecutor and Assistant Attorney General, of knowing the difference between
politics
and
partisanship
at Justice.
As Mr.
Thornburgh now demonstrates even in his coy manner of departure, he has failed that promise.
The least he could do, having declared himself a Republican candidate for the Senate, is to stop hiding behind transparent technicalities and, honorably, resign.


On Day After, Colts Rest, Trainers Plot
On the day after Hansel won the Belmont Stakes by the length of his head, Frank Brothers headed home to Chicago with his $1 million Triple Crown bonus and said he would withdraw his star colt from the racing wars for a while and then decide on the best route to the ultimate prize, the Breeders' Cup championships.
On the day after Strike the Gold lost the Belmont by the length of Hansel's head, Nick Zito said he would regroup his colt, probably run him in the Haskell Invitational at Monmouth Park on July 27 and then head for Saratoga and the $1 million Travers Stakes on Aug. 17.


Pessimism on Long-Term Rates
At just under 8.50 percent, long-term interest rates are at their highest levels since mid-January.
But credit market analysts say that over the next few months conditions in the bond market will probably get worse before they get better.
There are any number of reasons to be pessimistic.
Many big investors, convinced that the recession will never end, still hold large positions, and sales of vast amounts of new long-term Treasury securities are just weeks away.


Albania Gives Up the Ghost
Turning Karl Marx's confident boast in the Communist Manifesto on its head, Europeans are now rousting the specter of Communism from its remaining haunts.
Albania, long home to the hardest of the hard-line Marxist-Leninist regimes, is a Communist state no more.
The end came with such stunning swiftness that it overran the results of Albania's recent democratic elections.
Only this March, the Communists won a two-thirds majority in the first multi-party elections since the 1920's.
Last week the Communist Government yielded power to a caretaker coalition.
Rapidly rising democratic demands had made even reform Communist rule untenable.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Apple executives will visit I.B.M. today to discuss technology links, industry executives say.
One proposal is for I.B.M. to license from Apple, and perhaps to help develop, software for a new line of Apple computers to succeed the Macintosh.
Another possibility is that Apple will seek to use an I.B.M. microprocessor.  [ Page A1. ]
Microsoft plans to introduce an improved version of its most popular software -- the DOS operating system.
Some industry analysts say the company could profit enormously because tens of millions of personal computers already use older versions of DOS.
The new system is also aimed at more powerful computers.  [ D1. ]


Elizabeth Dole Stresses Beliefs at Dartmouth
Elizabeth Dole, president of the American Red Cross and former Labor Secretary, addressed the 1,385 graduates of Dartmouth College yesterday at the 221st commencement ceremony held on the campus in Hanover, N.H.
Speaking to an audience of over 10,000 students, parents and faculty members on the Baker Library lawn, Mrs.
Dole said: "A university is a paradoxical place, where ancient tradition thrives alongside the most revolutionary hypothesis. And if any single strand unites the diverse tapestry of Dartmouth, it is New England's unyielding faith in the individual and his obligation to improve the world into which he is deposited by fate. What you believe matters less than your capacity for belief -- and your willingness to translate belief into constructive action."


From the Smugglers' Coves of Hong Kong, Bourgeois Booty Sails for China
Until recently Tap Mun was simply a shabby fishing village, with fewer than 100 residents and more than 100,000 television sets.
On a breezy green island where cows graze near a temple dedicated to a sea goddess, some huts were so crammed with television sets that entire families had to eat and sleep outside.


Battle for Control Of Banyan Trust


King Hussein Signs Charter Reviving Jordan Democracy
King Hussein and Jordanian politicians signed a document today to revive multi-party democracy 34 years after political parties were banned.
The 40-page National Charter culminates nine months of heated discussions by 60 Jordanians appointed by the King to draft the charter.


College President Quits Over Use of Escorts
The president of the University of Central Florida has resigned, following a newspaper report that he called on escort services in at least five cities while on university business.
The president, Steve Altman, told the chancellor of the Florida university system in a telephone call on Saturday that he was resigning.
"He said it was in the best interest of the University of Central Florida and the state university system," said the chancellor, Charles Reed.
"I accepted it."


Corrections
A background article on Tuesday about the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty misidentified a Latin American agreement to curb the spread of nuclear arms.
It is the Treaty of Tlatelolco.


Deadline for Gillett Holdings
Gillett Holdings Inc. is expected to seek an extension in a court hearing today in Denver in order to prevent its being forced into bankruptcy.
The holding company owns television stations, two meatpacking concerns and two ski properties, Vail and Beaver Creek in Colorado.
It also owns SCI Television of Denver.


Carrie Rickey, Film Critic, Wed in Philadelphia
Carrie Rickey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Rickey of Marina Del Rey, Calif., was married yesterday in Philadelphia to Paul Robert Levy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Levy of Mountainside, N.J.
Rabbi Sanford Hahn performed the ceremony at the Germantown Jewish Center.
The bride is a film critic for The Philadelphia Inquirer.
She is 38 years old and is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of California at San Diego, from which she also received a master's degree in fine arts.
The bridegroom, 44, is the executive director of the Center City District, a civic improvement organization in Philadelphia supported by local business.
He graduated from Lafayette College and received a doctorate in history from Columbia University.
His two previous marriages ended in divorce


The Last Dinosaur
Many American cities, swimming upstream against the rough currents of economic recession and the loss of Federal aid, have adopted innovative ways of delivering services based on competition and consumer choice.
But in New York City, it is business as usual.
Phoenix uses competitive bidding for some sanitation services and for street repairs and custodian services. (The city's public agencies are allowed to bid for the right to deliver the service.)


A Costly 'I Do' For Giants Rookie
Another example of how football is more important than love or marriage:
If KIERNAN CLAIRgets married on time, the Giants will fine him $1,500 a day for missing training camp.


TECHNOLOGY LINKS WILL BE DISCUSSED BY APPLE AND I.B.M.
Top executives of Apple Computer Inc. will be visiting the headquarters of the International Business Machines Corporation in Armonk, N.Y., on Monday to discuss a far-ranging technology alliance that could have a major impact on the computer industry, industry executives say.
One part of the talks, according to these executives, is a proposal for I.B.M. to license from Apple, and perhaps even to help develop, basic software for a new line of Apple computers that will be a successor to its Macintosh family.


Sue Ellen Lane Weds in Capital
Sue Ellen Lane, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce S. Lane of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday in Washington to Steven Silber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Silber of New Hempstead, N.Y.
Rabbi Dennis Ross performed the ceremony at the ANA Westin Hotel.
The bride, 31 years old, is the event marketing manager for the New York Road Runners Club in Manhattan.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in arts administration from New York University.
Her father is a partner in the Washington office of the New York law firm of Kelley Drye &amp; Warren.
Her mother, Ann E. Lane, is a principal in the Chevy Chase interior design firm of Schorr-Lane Interiors.
The bridegroom, 36, is a senior associate in the Burson-Marsteller public-relations company in New York.
His mother, Frances Silber, teaches English at Ramapo (N.Y.) Senior High School.
His father retired as a manager at the Paul Stuart clothing store in New York.


Bane of the International Game: No Goals
Nothing-nothing.
There were those two awful words again, the bane of international soccer, paying a hyphenated, 90-minute call today at the Yale Bowl on the United States national team and Juventus of Italy.


How West Side Murder Suspect Went Free in 1990 Case
Law-enforcement officials said yesterday that the man charged with fatally stabbing a woman on the Upper West Side early Saturday spent only 30 days in jail for stabbing another woman a year ago because they thought they lacked sufficient evidence against him.
The handling of that case has led some New Yorkers to question whether the death of the second woman, who was walking her dogs in the early morning near Central Park, might have been prevented.


Court Lets LTV Pay Pension Fund
The LTV Corporation said a Federal Bankruptcy Court in New York had allowed it to contribute $27 million to a pension fund for 41,000 former employees.
Without the infusion, the J &amp; L Hourly Fund was expected to run out of money this summer.
At a hearing yesterday, LTV had sought to pay $40 million into the fund.
The $27 million should last through August, the steelmaker said, and the company expects to return to court to seek approval for additional payments.
The fund is LTV's largest, with an unfinanced liability of $1.4 billion.
The Dallas-based LTV filed for creditor protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code in 1986.
The company's shares fell 12.5 cents yesterday, to $1, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Mass Graves in Kuwait
On the southern outskirts of Kuwait City, al-Riqqa cemetery guards the dark underside of Kuwait's liberation.
In a corner is a section marked "collective graves." Here lie many victims of Kuwait's ordeal -- not only those felled by Iraq's secret police but also those who have died at Kuwaiti hands since liberation.
Twenty-four of the graves appear to date from the Iraqi occupation, judging from the height of the weeds and the dates posted on several makeshift markers.
The remaining 20 mass graves, their earth freshly turned, appear to have been dug more recently.
Terrified grave diggers whispered to me that many of the bodies showed signs of unspeakable torture.


Presbyterians Reject Report on Sex
The governing body of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) today overwhelmingly rejected a report urging the church to relax its traditional strictures against sexual relations among homosexuals and unmarried heterosexuals.
By a vote of 534 to 31 at their meeting here, the elected delegates of the church's annual General Assembly accepted the recommendation of a 67-member committee to set aside the report, which had provoked fierce opposition among church members.


Still Wallowing With Richard Nixon
To appreciate the latest 28 hours of tape recordings to emerge from the Richard Nixon archives, it is necessary to remember what they are not.
They're not the "smoking gun" evidence that forced him to resign while he was being impeached in 1974.
And they're not the conversations that made this President a criminal conspirator, though not an indicted one, and sent his Attorney General and top White House aides to prison.
No, we've heard those old tapes or read their transcripts.
These are the third and fourth sub-criminal layers of Watergate mire.
Mainly they exhibit not criminality itself but attitudes, ways of thinking.
Yet they do help to explain some of those high crimes and misdemeanors.


Student Recalls Sexual Episode In Queens Case
A St.
John's University student testified yesterday that he saw a fellow student prop a seemingly helpless woman into a sitting position and that another student then unzipped his pants and obtained oral sex from her at a house near the school's campus in Queens.
At a trial stemming from accusations of a sexual assault at the house last year, the witness, Thomas Dean, a 22-year-old senior, did not say what caused the the woman, whom he described as sitting on a couch with her eyes closed, to appear helpless.
Prosecutors have said that the woman, who was 21 at the time of the March episode, was incapacitated by liquor she had been verbally pressured to drink.


NEARLY $1 BILLION VETOED BY CUOMO IN ALBANY BUDGET
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo vetoed nearly $1 billion in spending today from the budget passed last week by the Legislature, opening a new round in the state budget battle that has already dragged on 71 days into the new fiscal year.
The State Comptroller, Edward V Regan, announced soon after the Governor's vetoes that the budget, minus the $937 million Mr.
Cuomo excised by veto, was now in balance.


Looking Up While Down on Yanks' Farm
Players mingled in the outfield as if they were members of the same team.
Which they are, in a sense.
Wade Taylor leaned against a fence and talked with Rick Down, the Columbus manager.
Bernie Williams conversed casually with Roberto Kelly and Hensley Meulens.
Pat Kelly was home again.


Baseball Ready to Add Miami and Denver Teams
Miami and Denver have won the National League expansion race.
A league committee recommended the two cities over the weekend, and as soon as they are approved by major league baseball's team owners, as expected, the cities will begin to prepare for their 1993 debuts.
"I support the recommendations," Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent said by telephone yesterday from a hotel in Santa Monica, Calif., where the owners will be conducting their quarterly meeting tomorrow and Thursday.
"I don't think they'll have any problem. I think they will go through."
The two new franchises, which will pay $95 million apiece to join the major leagues, must be approved by three-fourths of the 12 National League owners and a majority of the 14 American League owners.


Camera Back in U.S. Court
All seemed routine yesterday in Judge William C. Conner's beige-and-white courtroom in the United States Court House in lower Manhattan.
The judge was in place and so were the lawyers.
A witness took the stand, describing the copyright procedures that his company follows.
But actually, the scene was historic.
A television camera perched in the jury box, and a monitor, with a producer sitting beside it, was in another corner.
For the first time since the Lindbergh kidnapping trial more than 40 years ago, a camera recorded the goings-on in a Federal courtroom.


Dollar in a Broad Retreat, But Gains Against the Yen
The dollar slipped against major foreign currencies yesterday but rose against the Japanese yen as traders expressed uncertainty over the future of Japan's economy.
At least 10 European central banks and the Bank of Japan sold dollars in European trading in an attempt to control the dollar's rise, traders said.


Connecticut Considers 3 Sites For Nuclear Waste Dumping
An agency set up by the state named three possible sites yesterday for a 160-acre burial ground for low-level radioactive waste generated in Connecticut.
Two are in Ellington and the third is along the East Windsor-South Windsor border.
The board, the Connecticut Hazardous Waste Management Service, expects to make a final decision on a site a year from now, after more studies are conducted.
The final site will hold a variety of waste from industry and hospitals, with the vast majority coming from Northeast Utilities' four nuclear power plants.
The waste includes radioactive machinery, parts, equipment, clothing and tools.


Art-Sale Guidelines Introduced in Albany
Calling certain art-market practices "inappropriate, unnecessary and in many ways unethical," a New York State Assemblyman who has investigated the field for nearly two years yesterday announced the introduction of several Assembly bills to reform and strengthen that market.
At a news conference in Manhattan, Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, Democrat of Westchester, distributed copies of the bills, which he introduced in Albany on Friday.
They would regulate the use by auction houses of "sham" bidding up to the minimum price acceptable to the consignor when there are no real takers; do away with loans to buyers by dealers and auction houses; establish guidelines for museums' sales of artworks, and extend to the entire state New York City regulations regarding disclosure of minimum, or reserve, prices and guarantees at auctions.


Lakers Left Wondering as Bulls Take Command
As they arrived for practice this morning, the Los Angeles Lakers were still trying to explain how they were being dismantled so easily.
Not only have the Chicago Bulls taken a three-games-to-one lead in the National Basketball Association championship series but they have blatantly exposed the Lakers' weaknesses, frustrating a team that came into the series with more playoff experience.


Barmag Stake Sale
Akzo N.V., the Dutch chemical maker, said it would sell its remaining 15 percent of Barmag A.G., the German machinery manufacturer, to Agiv A.G., a German industrial holding company.
Two years ago, Akzo sold 85 percent of Barmag to Agiv.
Akzo will make a profit of "tens of millions" of dollars by selling the remaining stake, Dutch news reports said.
Akzo declined to release the terms of the sale.


Unisys in $207 Million Deal To Sell Timeplex Subsidiary
The Unisys Corporation said today that it would sell Timeplex Inc., a computer networking subsidiary, for $207 million to a joint venture led by Ascom Holding A.G., a Swiss telecommunications and automation concern.
Unisys, a military contractor and the nation's third-largest computer maker, said the sale, which should close before September, would help trim its debt, which stood at $3.43 billion at the end of March.
Unisys lost $551 million last year on revenues of $10.1 billion, largely because of big interest payments.


Review/Dance; In Masks, Telling Tales From Seoul
A multitude of masks were on view in Pongsan Masked Dance-Drama of Korea, the program offered Sunday night at the Asia Society as part of the New York International Festival of the Arts.
White blank-faced masks with tiny eyes stared impassively.
There were also goggle-eyed red masks.
And it was easy to tell that one character was a foolish idle nobleman because of his mask's silly crooked grin.
Everyone onstage might well have been an animated doll.
But if these dancers from Seoul, South Korea, were doll-like, their offerings were not childlike.
The performance was devoted to a style of Korean masked dance that began to appear in the 18th century and which radically changed in tone over the years.
The masked presentations were originally religious in nature, and this one, under the artistic direction of Kim Ki Soo, began and ended with sacred ceremonies.


World Records Lag as Drug Tests Gain
It took the biggest scandal in Olympic history to force track and field authorities around the world to engage a serious campaign against athletes' use of performance-enhancing drugs.
Once Ben Johnson of Canada failed his drug test at the 1988 Games in Seoul, South Korea, many countries, including the United States, expanded their testing programs, and most evidence suggests the efforts have helped diminish the problem.
But the increased vigilance has brought about another phenomenon, certainly unintended but unfortunate, nonetheless -- the infrequency of a world record.
In the 38 individual events that will be contested in the Mobil national championships starting tomorrow on Randalls Island, just nine world records have been established since the Olympics -- five in 1989, two in 1990 and two so far this season.


La Quinta Accepts Slate of Nominees
La Quinta Motor Inns Inc. has agreed to nominate five directors proposed by dissident shareholders who include a group led by members of the Bass family of Fort Worth, the company said.
The nominees will be voted upon at a special stockholders meeting on July 12.
The Bass-led group, which owns nearly 15 percent of La Quinta's common stock, has criticized management's attempts to increase the company's value for shareholders.
Sam Barshop, La Quinta's chief executive, has agreed to vote his common shares in favor of the nominees.
He is the the company's largest investor, with 19 percent of the stock.
Six of La Quinta's 11 board members have agreed to resign before the special meeting.
Mr.
Barshop said a sixth nominee would be found in consultation with the dissident group.
La Quinta operates more than 200 motels in 29 states.
Its shares fell 12.5 cents today, to $13.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Israel Sets New Condition for Joining Peace Talks
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir has added a new and potentially difficult qualification to the list of conditions that the Israeli Government has attached to its participation in any American-sponsored regional peace conference.
By adding the new condition, the right to veto the names of any Palestinians who would attend the conference, Mr.
Shamir seems to be backtracking from an agreement he made with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d during Mr.
Baker's most recent visit to Jerusalem last month.


FEELING FIT, BUSH RESUMES JOGGING
President Bush used hand signals, pumping his arms and holding up two fingers, to tell reporters that he had resumed his normal two-mile jog this morning for the first time since his atrial fibrillation on May 4.
Signaling to reporters over the roar of the Marine One helicopter that brought the President and Mrs.
Bush back to the White House from an overnight trip to Camp David, Mr.
Bush seemed energetic and pleased that his full exercise schedule was back in place after weeks of curtailing it at doctors' orders.


Nevada Approves a New Flag
Nevada has a new flag, one designed to make the state's name easier to read.
Legislation calling for the design was signed into law on Saturday by Gov.
Bob Miller.
The new flag moves the golden letters that spell "Nevada" from their scrambled position around a five-pointed star into a more legible form.
"Nevada" will now appear below the silver star, which is in the blue flag's upper left corner.


Live Entertainment Seeks Merger With Carolco Pictures
Live Entertainment Inc., a home video distributor, said today that it wanted to negotiate a merger with Carolco Pictures Inc., which already owns 54 percent of the company.
Live Entertainment said it had formed a committee of outside directors not affiliated with Carolco to negotiate a transaction, but it did not propose a price or any other details.
Theodore B. Bean, Live's chief financial officer, said that one possibility would be for Carolco to buy out Live's shareholders or begin a stock merger in which shareholders of both companies would emerge with a stake.


Singer to Relocate And Offer Stock
The Singer Company, the 140-year-old sewing-machine concern that has changed hands several times in recent years, is planning a public offering worth $250 million to $300 million, company officials said.
Singer plans to offer 15.6 million shares at $16 to $19 apiece to shareholders in the United States and overseas.
The Singer Company has been based in Hong Kong since 1989, when a subsidiary of Toronto-based International Semi-Tech Microelectronics Inc. bought it.
Singer's headquarters will be moved from Hong Kong to the Netherlands Antilles.
Its name will be changed to the Singer Co.
N.V., and it will be listed on the New York Stock Exchange.


So You Want Data Quickly
SAY you need to know something about pets.
It might be for a school report, for a business proposal or just for fun.
Here is how I recently went about it.
I fired up my computer, inserted a compact disk exactly like the familiar audio disks into a special holder and put that into a new peripheral, a CD-ROM drive.
A few keystrokes later, the colorful title screen of The Software Toolworks Illustrated Encyclopedia appeared.


Careers; Managers Lack Fluency In Languages
FEW American managers can claim fluency in foreign languages, despite the growing emphasis on globalization, according to a survey made by Dunhill Personnel System Inc.
Dunhill found that most American managers were not "ready to compete globally," because they did not even feel that language skills were important and they lacked "sufficient cultural understanding." Although about 80 percent of the managers surveyed studied a foreign language, only 25 percent said they were fluent.


Indians Balance Changes and Tradition
When New York City's first Hindu temple opened in Flushing, Queens, 14 years ago, volunteer priests had to be culled from the handful of devotees who worshiped before silver-sheathed sculptures of ancient deities.
Now, seven full-time priests minister to a congregation of thousands of Indian immigrants.
On some feast days a line of barefoot worshipers snakes down the ornate temple's steps waiting to chant prayers and make offerings of fruits and flowers.


Music in Review
Mob of Angels
Washington Square Church
Layne Redmond, the leader of the Mob of Angels, is a superb percussionist.
On Friday evening, she drew an astonishing variety of well-focused sounds from a tambourine, two frame drums and an African finger piano.
Steve Gorn also performed exquisitely and evocatively on a bamboo flute.


Review/Music; An Updated Cole Porter, Through Loud Speakers
One couldn't help walking out of Carnegie Hall Sunday night wondering whether Cole Porter had been listening as much to us as we to him.
Important music has a way of doing this.
It tells audiences about a composer and his time but at the same time it holds a mirror up to what we have become.
On the face of it, the Cole Porter 100th Birthday Celebration was a generous affair -- 40-odd singers, musicians and presenters, an excellent orchestra conducted by Donald Pippin, and stage management that, excepting a few stumbles, flowed smoothly.
Given the sheer numbers and the size of the egos involved, this was a victory in itself.


Analyst Settles Trump Lawsuit
A securities analyst who lost his job after saying that Donald J. Trump's empire was built on shaky financial ground has settled a $2 million defamation suit filed against Mr.
Trump that accused the real estate developer of pushing for his dismissal.
Marvin B. Roffman, who was dismissed in March 1990 from Janney Montgomery Scott Inc., sued Mr.
Trump in the Federal District Court here after his dismissal.
Three months ago, a New York Stock Exchange arbitration panel ordered Janney to pay Mr.
Roffman $750,000 because of the dismissal.


Pope Sounds a Call to Reclaim Lands From Both Communism and the West
Pope John Paul II used his nine-day pilgrimage across his native Poland to articulate a dynamic, evangelical vision for the Roman Catholic Church in Europe's post-Communist era.
In personal, often emotional pleas, he sounded a call to arms for a new crusade to reclaim territory lost to the Communism of the Soviet Union and the secularism of Western Europe.


R. C. Van Dusen, 65; Was Housing Official
Richard C. Van Dusen, an Under Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in the Nixon Administration, died Saturday at the Harley Street Clinic in London.
He was 65 years old and lived in Bingham Farms, Mich.
Mr.
Van Dusen, who was vacationing in England, died while undergoing surgery for a heart transplant, said his daughter Amanda.


A Multitude of Masks With Movements From Korea


Cuomo's Budget Vetoes: Pique and Fiscal Concern
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's effort to undo the Legislature's budget is a response to a potent mixture of fiscal concerns, institutional interests and sheer personal pique.
This, to be sure, is not obvious from his words.
Today, in announcing that he was vetoing virtually all of the spending the Legislature had added to his budget proposal, Mr.
Cuomo spoke only of the need to restore balance to a budget he called woefully in the red.


Joseph Fitzgerald, 54, Bankers Trust Official
Joseph T. Fitzgerald, senior vice president and director of investment research for the Private Bank of Bankers Trust Company in Manhattan, died on Sunday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 54 years old and lived in Union, N.J.
He died of cancer, his wife, Judith, said.


Colorado Studies United Air Aid
The Colorado Attorney General is examining a $150 million incentive package the State Legislature is offering United Airlines to build a maintenance operation in Denver, Gov.
Roy Romer said.
The Governor said he might also ask the Colorado Supreme Court to examine the constitutionality of the package.
The state's borrowing costs would be lower if the bond market can be assured the incentive package can pass constitutional muster.
Part of the incentive plan calls for Colorado to float a bond issue to raise as much as $115 million to pay United for up to three years.
Another $33 million in state tax breaks is also available under the measure.
The Denver City Council is also pushing a plan to give the carrier, a unit of the UAL Corporation, $175 million in city tax breaks if it brings the operation here.
It is expected to create at least 6,500 jobs.


Sikh Bomb-Maker Sentenced
A Canadian judge sentenced a Sikh man to 10 years in jail today for helping to make the bomb that killed two Japanese baggage handlers in a Tokyo airport.
Last month the Sikh, Inderjit Singh Reyat, was found guilty of manslaughter and explosives counts in the June 1985 blast at Narita Airport.
British, Indian and Canadian authorities say the blast was part of a reprisal against the Indian Government for the 1984 killing of Sikh militants at the Golden Temple in Amritsar.
Mr.
Reyat, an electrician, was extradited from Britain in 1989.


Sports of The Times; A Club Pro Answers A Question
NO matter what the job, the question is always there.
If you're a lawyer, could you successfully argue a case in front of the United States Supreme Court?
If you're a doctor, could you diagnose a mysterious new disease?
If you're in sales, could you land the multimillion dollar order?
And if you're a golfer, could you beat the best in a big tournament with $150,000 to the winner?
"You always question that," Jim Albus was saying now.
"You always wonder if you can do what you have to do to win, if you can hang in there. Not just hitting the ball and putting, but hanging in there."


Arrow Electronics To Acquire Lex Units
Arrow Electronics Inc., a distributor of electronics parts and components, said yesterday that it would buy the North American electronics distribution businesses of Lex Service P.L.C. of Britain.
Arrow said the move would make it the world's largest electronics distributor, with projected annual sales of $1.68 billion.
Arrow, based in Melville, L.I., said it would pay about $160 million for the businesses -- $106 million in cash, and the rest in about 6.6 million shares of Arrow common stock.


First Metal Asteroid in Nearby Orbit
USING the giant radiotelescope at Arecibo in Puerto Rico, astronomers have discovered the first metal asteroid known to have an orbit near that of Earth.
The asteroid, named 1986 DA, was discovered in 1986, but only recently were scientists able to evaluate its composition from their analysis of reflected radar signals bounced from the object.


Quotation of the Day
"This was the mother of all parades." -- Mayor David N. Dinkins  [ B4:1. ]


Miami Still Has Heat and Rain, but Now It Has a Team
Spring trainees had barely left Florida last year when Miami was just about being counted out of the quest for a new major league baseball team.
Too much rain, the handicappers said.
Too much heat.
No real ball park.
Not enough real fans.
But a year and incalculable maneuvering later, Miami is one of the two cities that the National League has chosen for its new franchises.
And not that much has changed.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day yesterday about personnel changes at Procter &amp; Gamble rendered the names of three executives incorrectly.
Stephen P. Donovan will become group vice president for food and beverages, Alan G. Lafley will become vice president for laundry and cleaning products and Edwin L. Artzt remains chairman.
The article also misidentified the executive who will be Mr.
Lafley's immediate superior.
He is Durk I. Jager.


Thatcher Accused of Undermining Successor
Already flummoxed by rising unemployment rates and falling ratings in the public opinion polls, Prime Minister John Major and his advisers have found themselves grappling with another political problem that won't go away, and her name is Margaret Thatcher.
For several days, British Conservatives have been in turmoil over reports that Mrs.
Thatcher, the grand vizier of Britain's Conservative Party, has lost faith in Mr.
Major, the man she chose to succeed her last year when she was forced to resign as Prime Minister.
It began on June 2 with an article in The Sunday Telegraph, the newspaper most closely associated with Conservative thinking.
In it, Mrs.
Thatcher was quoted as having told friends that Mr.
Major "stands for nothing -- he is nothing."


Miscellany
*
For every home run hit on the Fourth of July by major and minor league baseball teams, the Coca-Cola Company says it will donate $5,000 to the "Star-Spangled Banner" monument, to open in Washington in 1993. *
Toni Maloney, a former vice president of corporate communications at the American Express Company, has opened the Maloney Group, New York, a marketing and public relations consulting firm. *
Tatham-Laird &amp; Kudner, Chicago, is being renamed Tatham/RSCG to reflect the agency's merger with RSCG, Paris, in 1988.


Civil Rights Bill Alters Fairness of '64 Law; Test Profits Blacks
To the Editor:
"Race-Norming: Necessary, for Now" (editorial, May 30) grossly misstates the facts concerning race-norming.
You say that "in many cases the General Aptitude Test Battery overpredicts for whites and underpredicts for minorities." Just the opposite is true.
The G.A.T.B. raw test scores are actually biased in favor of blacks, not against them.
As the National Research Council report to which you refer states: "A total-group equation is somewhat more likely to overpredict than to underpredict the performance of black applicants" (p. 188).
Race-norming benefits test takers whose scores already tend to overpredict their job performance.


Tokyo Stocks Edge Up
Japanese stock prices showed very small gains today as investors made a timid return to the market, feeling it had been oversold on Monday, brokers said.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks was up 64.21 points, or 0.26 percent, to 24,662.59.
The index lost 436.73 points on Monday.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Sunday about the Persian Gulf victory parade in Washington misstated the destination.
It was the Pentagon, not Arlington National Cemetery.


Judge Dismisses Libel Suit Against The Times
A state judge yesterday dismissed a libel complaint filed against The New York Times by Dr.
Elliot Gross, a former Chief Medical Examiner of New York City.
Dr.
Gross sued after a series of articles in 1985 accused him of ineptitude and misconduct and of issuing misleading and inaccurate autopsy reports in police investigations of possible homicides, some of them intentionally.
He contended that the articles were based on false information and that they defamed his character and reputation.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 11
Neither Ted Williams nor Joe DiMaggio played today.
The Red Sox game was postponed because of wet grounds, and the Yankees had no game scheduled.


Pennsylvania Parties' Hold On Senate Contest Is Upset
A Federal judge threw Pennsylvania's special election for the United States Senate into chaos today by ruling that the way candidates are picked for special elections is unconstitutional.
A state law had permitted elected representatives in political parties to nominate candidates for special elections rather than letting voters elect their nominees in primaries.


Pessimism Is Growing on Saving Pandas From Extinction
IN a quiet enclave in the heart of Sichuan Province, two giant pandas ambled playfully among the rocks and bamboo, oblivious to the growing fear that their species could become extinct within decades.
Millions of dollars have been spent to preserve panda habitats and save the animals from hunters who kill them for pelts.
But the efforts have been stymied by red tape and in-fighting among Government ministries.
The result is that the panda is losing its competition with humans.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Amoco Corp., Chicago, appointed Rady A. Johnson senior vice president of government relations and Terrance R. Weaver vice president of public and government affairs. *
Belmac Corp., Tampa, Fla., makers of pharmaceutical products, named Jean-Pierre Hermet vice president of marketing and general manager of a new subsidiary, Belmac Europe S.A.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Fresno, Calif., is offering $53 million in 4 3/4 percent tax- and revenue-anticipation notes due July 31, 1992, priced to yield 4.4 percent through Prudential Securities Inc.
The issue is rated MIG-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc.


Chief Adds Retail Job At Prudential Unit
Little more than a month after taking over as chief executive of Prudential Securities, Hardwick Simmons told employees yesterday that he was temporarily assuming the additional duties of head of the firm's large retail operations.
The announcement by Mr.
Simmons, the former head of the retail division at Shearson Lehman Brothers, came after he dismissed Richard Sichenzio, who had been president of retail for Prudential Securities since 1988.


Welcome to Twins' Streak: It's 9 Victories and Counting
Mike Pagliarulo sums up Minnesota's nine-game winning streak in one word: teamwork.
The Twins used Paul Abbott's first major league victory and a key hit by Pagliarulo to extend their streak with an 8-5 victory over the Cleveland Indians tonight.
The winning streak is Minnesota's longest since a 10-game string in 1985.
Minnesota has won 12 of its last 13 games and is 30-16 since starting the season 2-9.
The victory also completed a four-game sweep of the Indians, who have lost five in a row.


Pricing for Mellon
The First Boston Corporation led a group of underwriters yesterday that priced $100 million in subordinated notes of the Mellon Financial Services Corporation.
The notes, which are due in 2001, have a 9 3/4 percent coupon and are priced at 99.371 to yield 9.85 percent, or about 157 basis points more than a Treasury security with a similar maturity.
The notes, which are noncallable through maturity, are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BBB+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Goldie B. Kweller, 70; Headed Jewish Groups
Goldie Bober Kweller, the president of Mercaz, the Zionist organization of the Conservative movement, died on Sunday at her home in Kew Gardens Hills, Queens.
She was 70 years old.
She died of lung cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


British Envoy Warns Lebanon
A senior British diplomat, Douglas Hogg, warned Lebanon today that it had little hope of receiving Western aid as long as kidnappers in the country continued to hold Western hostages.
Mr.
Hogg spoke as another Western official, Bettino Craxi, the former Italian Prime Minister, met with Lebanese leaders on United Nations aid.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, yesterday priced a total of $1.15 billion in fixed-rate and short-term floating-rate notes.
Sallie Mae, which generally sells short-term floating-rate notes each month, priced a $650 million six-month issue at par through various securities dealers.


New York Salutes; American Flier Shot Down in Iraq Recounts Horrors After Capture
Lieut.
Jeffrey N. Zaun, a Navy flier who was coerced by Iraq into making an anti-war statement on television five months ago, spoke of the horror of war in a rare interview published over the weekend.
"I don't ever want to kill anybody again," Lieutenant Zaun was quoted as saying in an article published Saturday in the Lahontan Valley News and Fallon Eagle Standard in Fallon, Nev., 60 miles east of Reno.


Leyritz Hoping for Another Chance
He used to be brash and self-assured, but Jim Leyritz says he has changed. Honest.
He would rather sit quietly on the Yankee bench than spend the rest of the summer in the minors.
All he wants, he said today, is another opportunity.


Stadium and Home on List of 'Endangered' Places
Independence Hall is falling down, and so are Tiger Stadium in Detroit and Montpelier, the Virginia home of James Madison.
They are on the fourth annual list of "America's 11 most endangered historic places," to be published Tuesday by the National Trust for Historic Preservation, a Congressionally chartered nonprofit group dedicated to restoring America's crumbling monuments.


A Regulator of Calcium Is Discovered in Rats
SCIENTISTS studying laboratory rats have identified a hormone produced by the adrenal glands that plays a role in regulating calcium levels in the blood.
The hormone, corticosterone, appears to work in tandem with the hormone produced by the parathyroid gland, whose main job is to keep blood levels of calcium steady.
But the relationship is unclear.
Muscle and nerve function can be impaired if calcium levels are too low; levels that are too high can mineralize tissues, leading to problems such as kidney stones.


Doc's Fine, but Is There a Reliever in the House?
Dwight Gooden, who had done most of his suffering on the mound of late, tonight did it in the clubhouse.
The sounds of a teammate being taken apart and a game going to pieces with it were being manufactured at the other end of a long tunnel in the basement of the Astrodome.
Gooden, whose performance tonight represented a personal relief, if not a full recovery, from his recent pitching troubles, had barely exited before his efforts went up in the smoke coming off the bats of the Astros.


Baseball Title Goes to McClancy
Anthony Sylvester pitched Monsignor McClancy of Queens to its first city title with a 3-2 victory yesterday over Xaverian of Brooklyn in the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association championship game at Yankee Stadium.
The junior right-hander held the defending C.H.S.A.A. champions to two singles while striking out three and walking four.
Sylvester retired the last 11 batters and allowed no hits over the last four innings, finishing 9-1 for the season.
McClancy finished with a 22-8 record while Xaverian went 27-6.


Major Face-Lift Makes the Open a Major Free-for-All
The 91st United States Open, which will begin Thursday at the Hazeltine National Golf Club in Chaska, Minn., appears to be as wide open to possibility as any Open in memory.
Topographically, this is true because the championship is being held on a 29-year-old course that lacks the dense rows of tall trees that give the Open its characteristic enclosed effect at older inland courses.


Question in Hillside Chase: What Caused Police to Fire?
Both the Union County Prosecutor and relatives of two young people who were fatally shot said today that it was unclear why police officers began firing after surrounding a stolen van that had crashed into a police car in Hillside, N.J., early Sunday.
"I still don't understand why they would shoot them when they had already surrounded them," said Patricia Jones, the mother of Lamont Russell Jones, 20 years old, one of the victims.
"There was no reason to shoot those kids."


Our Towns
As everyone can imagine, even if their name isn't Verdi, Puccini or Metropolitan, getting a new opera on stage for a world premiere is a colossal undertaking.
There are always last-minute script-polishing, music adjustments, lighting changes, costume alterations, makeup difficulties.
There are also ticket problems.
Were enough made for the expected crush?
How to handle all the invited dignitaries?
Where, for instance, to seat the President and his wife.


France's Timely Turnaround on Arms
France used to assert its independence by refusing to join in cooperative arms control efforts, but no longer.
Now it is preparing to sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
And President Mitterrand has answered President Bush's quavering call for supplier states to curb Middle East arms sales with full-throated assent.
In fact, he has exceeded Mr.
Bush by calling for such curbs to extend worldwide.
France's new willingness to join in restraining the spread of arms is warmly welcome.
The Persian Gulf war may have demonstrated the competitive disadvantage of some French-made arms in Iraq's arsenal.
But it brought home the self-destructiveness of unregulated arms sales.


INSIDE
Justices to Rule On Hate-Crime Law
The Supreme Court accepted a case involving a cross burning in St.
Paul, setting the stage for a major ruling on the constitutionality of the hate-crime and hate-speech laws and codes that are the focus of attention in the states and on college campuses.
Page A20.
U.S.
Talks of Summit Delay


Right to Die Is Approved By Assembly In Trenton
Sixteen years after the case of a New Jersey woman, Karen Ann Quinlan, made the question of an individual's right to die a national issue, the New Jersey Legislature tonight passed legislation insuring that right.
Voting 65 to 7, the State Assembly moved New Jersey closer to becoming the 48th state to legalize living wills.


Members Seek to Depose President of New York School Board
Disenchanted with the leadership of the Board of Education, at least three, and perhaps four, of the Board's seven members are moving to depose Dr.
Gwendolyn C. Baker as president when a re-election vote comes up in three weeks.
The removal of Dr.
Baker would be a political embarrassment for Mayor David N. Dinkins, who appointed her, because it would indicate that he was not able to shape the board's choice.
In recent years, mayors, who appoint two of the seven members and can use their budgetary powers for leverage, have been able to make sure board presidents are at least obeisant, if not personal allies.
Boards have generally complied by trying to elect presidents with influence at City Hall.


Kuwait Accused of Illegal Expulsions
The Kuwaiti Government has begun expelling civilian prisoners to Iraq, and some of those deported apparently have been sent against their will.
Any such forcible expulsions would be a violation of an agreement signed by all parties at the end of the Persian Gulf war.
At least 600 prisoners, including many Iraqis, are being held in a jail opened about 10 days ago in the Shuwaik section of town, and of these about 30 prisoners were escorted across the border Sunday night.
More were seen arriving in the prison in shackles today.
Kuwaiti officials said the 30 prisoners were Iraqis.


Ted Afoul of Puritans
A Page One headline in Sunday's Boston Globe had Senator Kennedy saying his "lifestyle will change." This was depressing news.
The country is infested these days with a busybody Puritanism determined to inflict wholesome goodness on the entire population.
If it can force a "lifestyle" change on a spirit as cavalier as Senator Kennedy's, the future is bleak indeed.
Combing through the full page of type and pictures that accompanied The Globe's headline, I was relieved to find little evidence that the Senator had promised anything approaching a change of "lifestyle." About all he had told the Globe man was that he would "have to be a little more attentive to behavior."


New York Salutes; War Parade Left Its Marks On the Streets of Washington
Tanks and other heavy military equipment left inch-deep tread marks on main thoroughfares of the nation's capital during the military parade on Saturday, city officials said today.
Mayor Sharon Pratt Dixon said she hoped the Federal Government would help pay for repairs.
Engineers said before the parade that the streets could withstand the weight, but now officials are assessing "exactly how much damage has been caused," said Schanolia Barnes, a spokeswoman for the city's public works department.


Gillett Gets an Extension
A Federal bankruptcy judge today extended until June 25 the date that Gillett Holdings Inc. has to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization.
Three of the nation's largest financial companies are trying to force Gillett, the parent company of the Vail and Beaver Creek ski resorts, as well as SCI Television in Denver, into the reorganization.


BRIEFS
*
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., New York, said it had been selected by Ford Motor Co., Dearborn, Mich., to provide a telephone network to Ford's 5,500 dealerships nationwide.
No price was disclosed. *
Cargill Inc., Minneapolis, said it had acquired four flour mills from Pillsbury Co., Minneapolis, a unit of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., for $100 million.


Stimulating Billions
To the Editor:
"States and Cities With Deficit Woes May Slow Rebound" (front page, May 31) is so misleading as to be hysterical.
To say "the Federal Government is not stimulating the economy" is sheer nonsense.
The Federal deficit for this fiscal year will be about $300 billion; last year it was $220 billion.
That's $80 billion of stimulation!
Most "cuts" in state spending are not cuts, but rather "no increases," which is a totally different subject.
PIERRE A. RINFRET New York, May 31, 1991


Civil Rights Bill Alters Fairness of '64 Law; Jewish Support
To the Editor:
Your May 28 editorial describing in a gentlemanly fashion President Bush's position on the civil rights bill as a "canard" is to be commended.
Nevertheless, a "canard" is a lie, however politely your editorial writer wants to put it.
It is significant that 15 major American Jewish organizations, concerned as always about civil rights and equality in our society, unanimously support enactment of the bill, although those same organizations have traditionally opposed "quotas" because they can deny access and operate to limit opportunity.


Occidental to Sell Coal Stake in China
China has agreed to buy the Occidental Petroleum Corporation's 25 percent stake in the An Tai Bao coal mine and pay off the mine's large foreign debt, a person close to the deal said today.
The $750 million mine, the largest joint venture ever between China and a foreign company, was a pet project of Occidental's late chairman, Armand Hammer.
Since his death, the energy, chemicals and meatpacking concern has been getting out of many undertakings in which Mr.
Hammer had special interest.
Occidental stock rose $1.375 a share to close at $22.625 today on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company also announced it was beginning a major oil search in the Sahara Desert in Algeria.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


Corrections
A table in Business Day on Saturday with an article about Government data on employment misstated the military employment figures.
Military employment, which reflects domestic land-based forces, was 1,602,000 in February, 1,460,000 in March, 1,456,000 in April and 1,458,000 in May.
The figures shown were for civilian and military employment combined.


16 Die in a Violent Weekend
A 16-year-old girl, a guest at a birthday party and a man attending a baptism party were among 16 people killed over the weekend in Los Angeles County, the police said.
The 16-year-old girl was fatally shot by a Hawthorne gunman early Sunday as she sat in a car with three friends, said Sheriff's Deputy Hal Grant.
The victim's identity was not released.


New Campaigns
*
"What makes Benihana Benihana?" is the theme of a campaign for the restaurant chain by Romann &amp; Tannenholz Advertising, New York.
Television commercials feature happy folks dining. *
Young &amp; Rubicam, New York, has created a campaign for Citizen Watch Company of America promoting Citizen's sponsorship of the 1992 America's Cup.


With Elections Near in India, A Gandhi Urges Party Unity
In the shadow of the most violent election in India's history, the vote for a new Parliament moved to a close today as Sonia Gandhi, the widow of Rajiv Gandhi, urged the divided Congress Party to fulfill her husband's "dream of a strong united India."
Mrs.
Gandhi, who remains in seclusion after her husband's slaying more than two weeks ago, made her rare public comment, in the form of a letter to the party president, as the campaign ended this afternoon in 15 states, parts of states or territories with more than 105 million voters scheduled to go to the polls on Wednesday.


Shamans and Their Lore May Vanish With Forests
THE symptoms indicated tetanus: fever, stiffness and lockjaw so severe that the victim could barely drink through a straw.
His illness upset his entire village of 500 or so on the coast of an Indonesian island.
The distressed villagers called in a local shaman, or native healer, who had the man take a compound of pressed plants.
Within 24 hours the symptoms of tetanus had faded.


American Express Is Looking Around
The American Express Company said yesterday that its decision to seek ideas for its charge-card advertising from agencies other than Ogilvy &amp; Mather was not unusual.
Although O.&amp; M. is the agency of record on the account, the trade weekly Advertising Age, in its current issue, reports that American Express was soliciting suggestions from Wunderman Worldwide and Chiat/Day/Mojo, which handle other American Express accounts.


Unisys Case Settlement Seen as Near
The Unisys Corporation is close to a settlement calling for the company to admit its guilt on charges from a sweeping Federal investigation into bribery and fraud in Pentagon contracting, lawyers involved in the case said yesterday.
Peter Hynes, a Unisys spokesman, said the negotiations were proceeding, but he declined to comment on a report yesterday in The Wall Street Journal that the company had agreed to pay fines and penalties totaling about $190 million.


Frank Visceglia, Realty Developer And a Civic Leader, Is Dead at 49
Frank D. Visceglia, a commercial real-estate developer and an executive vice president of Federal Business Centers of Edison, N.J., died on Sunday at his home in Short Hills, N.J.
He was 49 years old.
He died of a heart attack, a family spokesman said.


A New Novel by Amy Tan, Who's Still Trying to Adapt to Success
Success, Amy Tan has learned, is never what you expect it to be.
"In some ways it's like being a kid in a candy store," the 39-year-old best-selling author says, pouring coffee in her suite at the Carlyle Hotel.
"But there's also the loss of privacy. I'll be getting up from a nap on an airplane, and someone will come over to me and say, 'You're Amy Tan.' And I'll realize that I look like everybody else does when they've just awakened on a plane, and I want to say, 'No, I'm not.' "
Three years ago, Ms.
Tan was a freelance technical writer living in San Francisco and working on her first novel.
That book turned out to be "The Joy Luck Club," a tale of Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers.
It jumped onto the best-seller lists in the spring of 1989, and a few weeks later its paperback rights were sold for $1.2 million.


F. Reed Dickerson; Professor, 81
F.
Reed Dickerson, a former law professor and Pentagon lawyer who helped codify United States military law in the 1950's, died Friday at Bloomington Hospital.
He was 81 years old.
Mr.
Dickerson was deputy assistant general counsel of the Defense Department from 1950 to 1958, when he joined the faculty at Indiana University Law School.
He retired in 1980.
He is survived by his wife, Jane; two daughters; a son, and two grandchildren.


Plumes from Deep Shape Earth and Climate
GEOPHYSICISTS are constructing a new and striking history of the earth's geological past, and in particular of the great engine that pushes apart the sea floor and reshuffles the continents.
The new picture has emerged from the study of "superplumes" of hot material widely believed to have risen 1,800 miles to the ocean floor from near the earth's molten core.
A research ship equipped to drill deep into the ocean floor has recently brought back new evidence of the work of one of these superplumes -- great aprons of lava that were spewed across the floor of the Pacific Ocean.


Support for President, Amid Some Questions
Despite the political unrest and refugee problems that have mired American soldiers in Iraq, public support remains high for President Bush and his actions in the Middle East, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
An overwhelming majority say they feel proud of the United States action, although a growing number question whether the war was worth its costs.
Article, page A16.


Steering the Federation Toward Activism
THE American Advertising Federation has promoted from within in naming its first new president in 23 years.
It has chosen an executive with extensive experience in governmental relations who seeks to steer the organization in a more activist direction.
Wallace S. Snyder, 48 years old, was elected president yesterday by the board at the organization's annual conference in Nashville.
Mr.
Snyder, who has been the executive vice president of government relations since last June, succeeds Howard H. Bell, who has served as president of the Washington-based trade association since 1968.


Rig Count Up in Week
The number of working oil and gas rigs in the nation jumped by 26 last week, but still trailed figures from last year, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
The oilfield tool maker said 850 rigs were operating nationally, 141 less than a year earlier.
The previous week's count was 824.
Of the rigs working, 344 were seeking gas, 463 oil and 43 others were listed as miscellaneous.
The count represents the number of rigs actively exploring for petroleum and natural gas, not those producing oil and gas.


3 Killed at Amusement Park
Two men were electrocuted in a pond and a woman fell to her death from a ride at an amusement park here on Sunday.
Three men suffered electrical shocks at Kings Island amusement park, about 20 miles northeast of Cincinnati, a spokeswoman said.
The two men who died apparently were trying to rescue another man in the pond about 9 P.M.
In a separate accident, a woman was killed in a fall from the Flight Commander ride shortly before 10 P.M.


As Fountain Gushes, So Do Its Critics
For more than 200 years, this city has hugged a hairpin turn of the Ohio River.
And although paddle wheelers don't churn the waters the way they once did, this former frontier town proudly remains a city of the river.
So it didn't surprise many folks around here when word surfaced some five years ago that Louisville was to get a new public symbol: a 400-foot-high geyser of river water spewing from the Ohio itself.
It would be the largest floating fountain in the world.
Better yet, it would create a spray in the shape of a giant fleur-de-lis, in homage to the city's namesake, Louis XVI of France.


Music in Review
Concordia
Alice Tully Hall
Marin Alsop is the music director of the Long Island Philharmonic and the Eugene (Ore.) Symphony.
But before she was appointed to those posts, she made her name in Manhattan with Concordia, the chamber orchestra she put together in 1984.


How CBS Pays the Price for a 'Maddening' Deal
You're a wealthy art collector and you want a Picasso so badly that you tell the seller, "I'll not only buy that abstract woman with the three eyes, but I'll take those Elvis velvets and display them proudly on my walls."
It is not too farfetched to compare such loopy logic to CBS's reasoning when it agreed to broadcast an assortment of moderate- to itsy-bitsy national college championships.


Civil Rights Bill Alters Fairness of '64 Law
To the Editor:
Your suggestion that President Bush's continued objections to the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1991 are motivated by "ugly political reasons" ("Quota? No, More Like a Canard," editorial, May 28), rather than a concern over fundamental fairness, obscures the fact that the bill continues the efforts of civil rights activists to rewrite the basic fairness of the equal and nonpreferential language in Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
You apparently accept the activists' vision that a world without discrimination would be one of proportionality of racial, ethnic and gender results.
Saying it isn't a quota bill won't make it so, and the House Democrats' last-minute "anti-quota" amendments won't alter the bill's provisions that make it extremely difficult for Title VII defendants to rebut unspecified, shotgun allegations of discrimination based solely on statistical disparities.
Rather than litigate and lose under a burden of proof that has been reversed and raised against the employer, many will protect themselves by using surreptitious quotas and other race-preferential techniques to hire by the numbers.


From Valentino, Three Decades Of Glamour
Valentino Clemente Ludovico Garavani hoped to celebrate his 30th anniversary as the head of his couture house earlier this year, but because of the Persian Gulf war it did not seem appropriate.
The festivities were rescheduled, taking the form of a giant homecoming, with lunches, dinners, two exhibitions and a ball this week.
In the end, there were two surprises: the parties, though lavish, were tasteful.
And the exhibitions, especially the one at the Accademia Valentino, a museum near the couture house, establish him as a major player in shaping fashion in the last half of the 20th century.
Show-Off Dresses
Valentino, known as a purveyor of luxury and a designer for film stars like Elizabeth Taylor and Gina Lollobrigida, has always had a rather frivolous reputation.
Sure, his tailored clothes are always superb.
But haven't his evening dresses been, well, on the show-off side?
Certainly, there are acres of ruffles, yards of king's ransom jewelry and fabrics of fathomless opulence.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about the sexual- assault trial of three St.
John's University students misstated the living arrangements of a witness.
The witness, Joseph Reilly, testified that he did not live in the defendants' house, where the assault occurred, but was visiting at the time.


In a Ticker-Tape Blizzard, New York Honors the Troops
Three months after the last angry rocket of the Persian Gulf war, New York City lionized the victorious troops yesterday with a magnificent blizzard of ticker tape, patriotism and affection in a homecoming parade up lower Broadway's Canyon of Heroes.
With painted yellow bows underfoot and a glimmer of blue between the skyscrapers overhead, brass bands exploded, flags and confetti whirled in the wind and what might have been another Monday in Manhattan's gray financial district suddenly boomed into a dazzling holiday of music, marching, balloons and deliriously roaring crowds.


Craning and Scrambling For a Glimpse of History
For some parade watchers yesterday, there was a lot of climbing.
They climbed on top of grimy, boxy street-corner newsstands, even though the police told them not to.
They climbed on top of soft-drink vendors' trucks, even though the vendors' bosses would have told them not to if the bosses had not climbed up there already.
And they clambered out on the rooftop promenade at the World Trade Center, even though it was a quarter of a mile high in the sky and they had to bring along binoculars or telescopes for a glimpse.


Reynolds Ban Lifted
The American Arbitration Association yesterday temporarily lifted a suspension against sprinter BUTCH REYNOLDS and declared him eligible for the Mobil national championships, which start tomorrow on Randalls Island.
Reynolds was suspended from all international track and field competititon for two years, dating from Aug. 12, 1990, by The Athletics Congress.
He had tested positive for steroids in an event in Monte Carlo, Monaco, on that date, the Congress said.
The decision applies only to the games in New York, and not to later events that Reynolds wants to enter, including the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, Spain. (AP)


Forte Unit Names Chief
Trusthouse Forte Food Services Inc., based in Trumbull, Conn., said yesterday that it was naming David Ford president and chief executive and changing its corporate name to Gardner Merchant Food Services Inc.
Trusthouse and Gardner are both parts of Trusthouse Forte, the big British hotel company, which has just changed its named to Forte P.L.C.
The change in the name of the food services operation was timed to coincide with the parent's name change, the company said, adding that the new name would be used to establish a single corporate identity in the United States.


Arena for Philadelphia
Mayor W. WILSON GOODE of Philadelphia said yesterday that a $100 million facility to be built near the Spectrum arena would insure keeping the Flyers hockey team and the 76ers basketball team in Philadelphia.
After the razing of the crumbling, 102,000-seat John F. Kennedy Stadium with $6.5 million of state funds, the new 21,000-seat arena, which is scheduled to open for the 1994-95 seasons, will be built on the site without any city financing.
Spectacor, the company that owns the Flyers and the Spectrum, will build the arena. (AP)


Space Errors Share Pattern: Skipped Tests
THE rules of spacecraft construction may not be etched in stone like the Ten Commandments, but the penalties for ignoring them are generally swifter and more violent.
The dictums are based on decades of experience and are widely disseminated.
They cover such things as how to establish clear lines of authority, how to turn blueprints into specifications for thousands of minuscule parts and how to test rigorously on the ground to uncover flaws and increase the odds of orbital success.
They go under the unassuming title system engineering.


Accounts
*
Daffy's, a clothing retailer in Secaucus, N.J., to Follis DeVito Verdi, New York, with billings of more than $1 million.
The account was previously at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York. *
Software Toolworks Inc., Novato, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, for its estimated $6.5 million account.


Patterns
About Those Ties
Ties used to say a lot about the man, but not in this era of wild ones.
Head-spinning colors, Pucci-fied patterns, giant paisleys and all manner of animals, fish, baseballs, surfers and casino prints now adorn the quasi-phallic accouterments that hang down the front of a man's shirt.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about gold mining in South Carolina misidentified the owner of the Kennecott Corporation, which operates the Kennecott Ridgeway mine.
Kennecott -- formerly owned by Standard Oil of Ohio, which is now part British Petroleum -- was sold in 1989 to the RTZ Corporation of London.


Lawyer Is Freed After Being Jailed Six Months for Refusing to Testify
A lawyer jailed for refusing to testify about a client who jumped bail was freed today after six months behind bars.
"It feels wonderful," the lawyer, Linda Backiel, said as she hugged her parents in the lobby of the Bucks County Prison, where she had been held since Dec. 10.


Astronauts Surprised By Reaction to Space
The astronauts doing research in the space shuttle Columbia's medical laboratory expressed surprise today at how their bodies were reacting after nearly a week of weightlessness.
"We're going to have a lot of fun the next few months and years putting together a very different picture of what happens when people go into space," one astronaut, Dr.
F.
Andrew Gaffney, said in a television interview.


Summit Talks Unlikely Until Late July
Because of difficulties in completing a nuclear arms reduction treaty, President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev are not likely to hold a summit meeting until sometime after the July 15-17 conference in London of leading industrial nations, the White House said today.
The announcement seemed, in part, a realistic assessment of how much time will be required to tie up the nuclear arms treaty, which the Bush Administration wants to have finished in time for the summit meeting.
But it also seemed a not-so-subtle attempt by the Bush Administration to squeeze the Soviets into quickly agreeing to new American proposals for overcoming the major obstacles to the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, known as Start, which would cut the superpowers' nuclear arsenals about 30 percent.


At Polaroid, More Than Snapshots
At the Polaroid Corporation these days, talking about old-fashioned "instant photography" is out.
The new chairman, I. MacAllister (Mac) Booth, talks instead of "rapid access, high-quality hard copy" -- terms more evocative of computer electronics than snapshots from family vacations.
Mr.
Booth would like doctors, researchers and business people wanting to take and transmit pictures to think first of Polaroid.
At the annual meeting last month, Polaroid executives displayed a spate of new products -- more, they say, than at any time in their history.
These include a computerized system for producing medical images in seconds without traditional film; a digital scanner to enter pictures into computers, and a printer that makes instant snapshots from a computer screen.


Chip Makers Talk in Europe
Thomson S.A., the state-owned French conglomerate, said today that it was talking with Europe's other leading computer microchip makers to pool their chip businesses.
But one, Philips N.V. of the Netherlands, said it was not interested.
Philips, Siemens A.G. of Germany and Thomson's SGS- Thomson Microelectronics B.V. unit had a combined 10.5 percent share of the world computer chip market in 1990.
Each, however, is widely perceived as too small to survive on its own.


Bank Sold By Mexico
The Mexican Government has sold 77.1 percent of Multibanco Mercantil de Mexico to Grupo Financiero Probursa for $202.7 million, the first bank to be sold under the Government's privatization policy.
The Finance and Public Credit Ministry said today that the bid by Probursa, a leading finance and investment house in Mexico, was the best of four received on Friday.


True or False: Michigan Gun Test Is Easy. A: True
It is every college student's dream, the answer to the prayers of anyone who has ever picked up a No. 2 lead pencil and stared at a test: 10 simple true-false questions with the answers on the back, to which the test-taker can refer at any time; the chance to take the test again, right then and there, if you fail, and, best of all, the comfort of knowing that the answer to each question is "true."
That is the test to be allowed to buy a handgun in Michigan.


Alfred E. Simon Memorial
A memorial service for Alfred E. Simon, a musical-theater historian and former director of light music for the radio station WQXR, is to be held at 5 P.M. today at the Players, 16 Gramercy Park South.
Mr.
Simon died of heart failure on May 28 at the age of 83.


AIR FORCE FINISHES CLARK EVACUATION
The United States Air Force completed its shutdown of most operations at Clark Air Base in the central Philippines today as thousands of American workers at the base fled from the threat of an erupting volcano.
The decision to evacuate Clark, one of the largest military installations outside the United States, was made after scientists warned that nearby Mount Pinatubo was on the verge of a potentially catastrophic eruption.
The 4,800-foot volcano is about 10 miles west of the base, 55 miles northwest of Manila.


CHRONICLE
Following MADONNA, LIZ, DOLLY and MIKHAIL GORBACHEV?
GEORGE BUSH, a possible cover of the month for Vanity Fair, was getting the treatment on Friday.
ANNIE LEIBOVITZ, the chronicler of pop and glitter stars, was photographing the preppy President during a Bush-family-at-home scene at the White House.


Brokers Strike in Italy
A strike by brokers halted trading today on the Italian stock markets.
The stoppage was in protest over a law to take effect next year that will end the state-certified brokers' monoply over equities transactions.
The law will create a new type of securities trading house, which the brokers contend is likely to be dominated by banks.
Protests by the brokers forced the closing of the Italian markets for several days last year.


Baxter Cancels Syria Plant Amid Arab Boycott Dispute
Baxter International Inc., a leading medical supply company, said yesterday that it had canceled plans to build a factory in Syria because of a "controversy" over its Middle Eastern business dealings.
The controversy developed after Baxter sold a factory in Israel in 1988.
Several Federal agencies have investigated accusations by Jewish groups that the sale was intended to get the company off an Arab blacklist of companies doing business with Israel, which would put it in violation of Federal anti-boycott laws.


Dow Off 1.34, to 2,975.40; Trading Is Light
Stock prices moved in a narrow range on light volume yesterday as many traders stayed on the sidelines amid deepening concerns over the recent surge in long-term interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average crept down by 1.34 points, to 2,975.40, while the Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 mostly blue-chip stocks slipped 0.86, to 378.57, and the New York Stock Exchange's composite index eased 0.45, to 207.74.


Justices to Decide if Hate-Crime Law Illegally Curbs Freedom of Expression
Accepting a case involving a cross burning in St.
Paul, the Supreme Court set the stage today for a major ruling on the constitutionality of the hate-crime and hate-speech laws and codes that are the focus of growing attention in state legislatures and on college campuses.
The Justices agreed to decide whether the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of expression was violated by a 1989 St.
Paul ordinance making it a crime to place on public or private property a burning cross, a swastika or any other symbol likely to arouse "anger, alarm, or resentment in others on the basis of race, color, creed, religion or gender." The case will be argued next fall after the Court begins its new term.


Balloonist Falls to Death
A man trying to tie down a hot-air balloon as it came down in a pasture was carried about 100 feet into the air and fell to his death on Saturday night, the police said.
The man, Michael McGrath, 39 years old, and another passenger in the gondola jumped out to tie down the craft but the balloon began to soar upward, said a spokesman for the Jackson County Sheriff's office.
Mr.
McGrath initially held onto the rope but lost his grip.


J. Raymond Jones, Harlem Kingmaker, Dies at 91
J.
Raymond Jones, the Harlem politician who helped arrange the appointments of state and Federal judges, borough presidents, a Cabinet member and Congressional representatives, died on Sunday in North General Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 91 years old.
Mr. Jones had been in the Greater Harlem Nursing Home since May 1990.


Market Place; Environmental Earnings Lag
ENVIRONMENTAL engineering appears to be a good business to be in.
Federal and state governments act as the chief marketing agencies for these companies, passing laws and regulations that dictate what can be discharged into the air, land and water and what must be done to clean up the messes of the past.
The only problem, analysts say, is that environmental consulting companies may be oriented more toward technology than toward business.
Last year Congress obliged with a new Clean Air Act, and this year it is working on new rules for disposing of solid waste as it considers rewriting the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
States, meanwhile, are pressing owners of underground storage tanks to check for leaks and to clean up any that have occurred and to restore industrial properties to a pristine condition when real estate changes hands.


Xoma Drug Called Closer to Approval
The Xoma Corporation, a biotechnology company based in Berkeley, Calif., said that an advisory panel of the Food and Drug Administration had recommended approval of the company's drug for treating a potentially fatal complication of bone-marrow transfers.
The drug, Orthozyme-CD5+, is the first of a type called immunoconjugates to be recommended for approval, Xoma said.
Such drugs use monoclonal antibodies, highly specific replicas of the immune system's main defense agents, as targeting agents for drugs that treat the disease.
While the bone-marrow complication affects only about 2,000 patients a year, approval of the drug opens the door to other immunoconjugates for more common diseases.
If Xoma wins F.D.A. approval, Ortho Biotech, a subsidiary of Johnson &amp; Johnson, would market the drug.


Court Backs Banks' Sales Of Insurance
A Federal court in Manhattan ruled yesterday that state-chartered banks could sell insurance if state law allowed it.
The ruling was a setback to efforts by the insurance industry to keep banks out of its business and by the Federal Reserve to strengthen its regulatory powers.
The decision by the three-member panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit was in response to a move by Citicorp to overturn a Fed ruling last year ordering the bank holding company to stop underwriting and selling insurance through the Family Guardian Life Insurance Company, a subsidiary of Citicorp's Citibank Delaware unit.
Powers Cited by Fed
The Fed, which regulates bank holding companies, asserted that it could order Citibank Delaware to stop the insurance activities because it had powers to regulate the non-banking activities of bank holding companies.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.61
5.71
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.60
5.57
7.73
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.78
5.74
7.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.16
8.15
8.49
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.47
8.47
8.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.54
9.52
9.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.27
7.26
7.51
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Police Badge and Vest Stop Slugs Fired at Two Officers
Two police officers were shot in the Bronx yesterday, apparently by a deranged man who had attacked another officer minutes earlier and stolen his gun, the police said.
Neither officer was seriously injured because their bulletproof vests stopped the slugs.
The gunman, identified as Everton Brown, 33 years old, of 125 Eastern Parkway in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, was arrested after he emptied the stolen .38-caliber service revolver at seven officers from the 44th Precinct who were chasing him up a staircase, the police said.


Bridge
The North American winners of the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest played on Friday were also the world winners, according to a report from the organizers in Paris.
John Gilliatt and Kay Harrison of Penticton, British Columbia, playing at the Penticton Bridge Club, scored 75.4 percent.
They were helped by the diagramed deal, on which they played three no-trump after West had opened with a weak two-bid in spades and North had overcalled in hearts.


Kemp Hopes for New Cabinet Post in 1992
Jack F. Kemp, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, said today that he would like a new Cabinet post after next year's Presidential election.
In an interview with The Associated Press, Mr.
Kemp went out of his way to say he planned to support a Bush ticket next year that includes Vice President Dan Quayle.


Of Two Quite Formidable Sisters
A Very Close Conspiracy Vanessa Bell and Virginia Woolf By Jane Dunn 338 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $29.95.
At this point, the reader might think, the subject of Bloomsbury must be pretty well exhausted.
Its famous members have generated a seemingly endless series of biographies and memoirs; their letters and diaries have been repeatedly scrutinized and compared.
Virginia Woolf, in particular, has spawned something of a cottage industry: her fiction is continually reissued in new editions, her journals and correspondence published in assorted versions.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Breland Wins by Decision Mark Breland, the former welterweight champion from Brooklyn, won a unanimous 10-round decision over middleweight Henry Anaya of Albuquerque, N.M., at the Meadowlands Convention Center in Secaucus, N.J., last night.
Breland, who weighed 157 pounds, shut out Anaya, winning by 100-90 on the scorecards of all three judges, Frank Brunette, John Riley and Vin Rainone.
Breland was the aggressor throughout the fight.
In the early rounds, Breland hit Anaya with jabs and uppercuts.
Occasionally, Anaya threw a wild right, but mostly he stood in front of Breland, absorbing punches.
By the fifth round, Anaya was able to narrow the distance to Breland.
At close range, he continued to take punches, but he also began landing hooks to Breland's body.
Breland's inability to damage Anaya brought boos from the crowd in the sixth round.
Over the final rounds, Breland methodically pummeled Anaya.
At one point in the eighth, Anaya threw Breland off him, bouncing him into the referee, Raphael Ramos.
Ramos warned Anaya for the tactic.
With the victory, Breland's record goes to 29-2-1 with 21 knockouts.
Anaya is 17-4 with 11 knockouts.
After the bout, Breland said he injured his left wrist in the second round.


Anson Burlingame, 83; Held Post at Columbia
Anson Burlingame, the director of Columbia University's Office of Projects and Grants from 1962 to 1973, died on Saturday at his home in New Canaan, Conn.
He was 83 years old.
He died of a heart ailment, his son, Edward, said.


New York Salutes; A Lot of Stuff, A Little of It Ticker Tape
In deference to tradition, yesterday's march up Broadway was officially a ticker-tape parade.
But most of the stuff that dusted the heads of the marchers was plain old confetti.
But there was also, despite the computerization of Wall Street, some genuine ticker tape provided by the TransLux Corporation of Norwalk, Conn.
Matthew Brandt, a vice president of the company, said it is "one of the last manufacturers and vendors of tickers and ticker tape left in the free world."


Heidi Bruehl, 49, Dies; An Actress and Singer
Heidi Bruehl, an actress and singer, died on Saturday in a hospital at this resort near Munich.
She was 49 years old.
The cause of death was not immediately known, said her agent, Carla Rehm.
Miss Bruehl complained of severe stomach pains on Thursday and had emergency surgery but never regained consciousness, her agent said.


The End. Mets Can Finally Return Home
Newspapers and towels were stuffed into Frank Viola's uniform, filling it out slightly better than the left-hander's limbs tend to.
Sneakers were attached to the pants.
A cap was taped to the top of a fake head.
And at last, the dummy, with the real Frank Viola back in New York, was taken out and placed upright on the dugout bench for tonight's game against the Astros.
The clubhouse enterprise was entirely appropriate.
The Mets, who left on this 13-game trip at the conclusion of a bad joke of a weekend at Shea Stadium, were ending it with a prank.
In between, there'd been some scenes of high comedy and more than the usual dose of dark humor.


Poll Finds Strong War Support, but Some Erosion
Despite the political unrest and lingering refugee problems that have mired American soldiers in Iraq, public support remains high for President Bush personally and for his actions in the Middle East, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
But behind the patriotism and pride of the parades through New York and Washington lies a growing concern among some Americans.
They say the Persian Gulf war was not worth its price in lives and other costs and was not likely to produce the opening for a lasting peace in the Middle East that Mr.
Bush has predicted.


Awards Sprouting With the Spring
Ah, late spring, time for fresh peaches and advertising awards.
At the One Club's One Show last night in New York, GGK, a London agency, won best of show for its television commercial for the Electricity Association.
The spot featured claymation animals discussing "creature comforts."


Advances on 2 Fronts Are Reported in Fight On River Blindness
A NEW technique to diagnose river blindness and a promising drug to treat the pernicious parasitic disease have been developed.
The disease, formally known as onchocerciasis, afflicts more than 18 million people in tropical Africa and Latin America.
It is called river blindness because tiny black flies that breed in fast-moving water spread the parasitic worms, Onchocerca volvulus, to people and inflict agonizing itching, disfigurement and loss of sight.


Book Editors Irate Over Comments In Magazine
The publishing industry is up in arms, stung by a brisk attack in the current issue of The New Republic and particularly outraged by criticism of two of its most esteemed editors, Jason Epstein of Random House and Alice Mayhew of Simon &amp; Schuster.
Mr.
Epstein, the editorial director of Random House, said in a letter to the editor of The New Republic, Hendrik Hertzberg, that the article showed a reckless disregard for the truth and that the magazine "should be ashamed of itself." In an interview he added that he was "certainly contemplating a libel suit."


U.S. Belligerence Colors Cuban Attitude
To the Editor:
Latin Americans frequently feel that the United States takes disproportionate credit for its positive accomplishments in the region, while evading responsibility for its negative actions.
Your news article on President Bush's overture to Cuba's Fidel Castro seems to perpetuate this pattern.
In situating the context of Mr.
Bush's remarks, your reporter writes: "Today's anniversary marks the inauguration of the first Cuban President on May 20, 1902, four years after the Spanish-American War ended Spain's control over the island" (some editions, May 21).
This summary description, however, reflects several misconceptions about Cuban history that have helped to poison United States-Cuban relations for decades.


Trade Deficit For Germany
Germany's merchandise trade balance showed a deficit last month for the first time in nearly a decade partly because of German unification, the Government said today.
The trade balance slipped to a deficit of 1.4 billion marks, or $790 million, from a surplus of 2.8 billion marks, or $1.6 billion, in March, the Federal Statistics Office said.


U.S. Rebuffed On Rates Cut
The world's top central banking body today dismissed calls from the Bush Administration for lower world interest rates, saying it was more important to tame inflation than to act hastily to overcome recession.
The Bank for International Settlements implicitly rebuked the Treasury Department for calling on other leading economies to use rate cuts to spur growth.


The Pentagon Papers
At The New York Times 20 years ago, the publisher and a small group of editors and reporters were handed one huge untidy package, take or leave it, that made them suddenly confront many things of great importance to them:
The meaning of patriotism and national interest, the purpose of journalism, the boundaries of constitutional freedom, the reputation of the newspaper around which their lives were built, and their own careers.


Nonsexist Dictionary Spells Out Rudeness
This is an age of what could be called linguistic sensitivity, when many groups, especially feminists and minorities, have made society more mindful of the way words can wound and offend.
Now appearing on bookstore shelves is a new dictionary, the Random House Webster's College Dictionary, that seems to fit the current mood.
The dictionary, which was published on May 15, is, Random House contends, notable for several reasons, among them that it has far more entries than any of its competitors (180,000) and many new words and phrases, from acquaintance rape to zouk (a Caribbean style of dance music).


Bailey's Personal Triple Crown
Jerry Bailey sat in the jockeys' lounge at Belmont Park yesterday afternoon, reflecting on New York's most gripping weekend of racing in memory and said: "I've been riding 17 years, but I don't understand the scope of what happened to me. And I may not understand it until I retire."
What happened to him was that he rode three major horses in three major races and won three major victories, two of them in photo finishes that will be remembered as classics.


Can Republicans Save the Rights Bill?
Senator John Danforth of Missouri and his group of nine moderate Republican sponsors of compromise civil rights legislation are acting in their party's finest tradition.
They seek to break a Congressional logjam, extricate their party and President from a quagmire over quotas and perhaps deliver a law that the nation's majorities and minorities can live with.
Last year, by impressive margins, the House and Senate passed bills to restore and strengthen job discrimination laws battered by a string of Supreme Court decisions.
But President Bush, clinging to his "quota bill" slogans and growing increasingly irritated with people who question his commitment to civil rights, threatens to repeat last year's veto.
Enter the Republican centrists.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
New figures show that the banking industry is still deep in crisis.
The disclosure came as the nation's senior auditor prepared to tell Congress that the savings and loan bailout is in such disarray that its costs cannot be estimated.
On the banking front, the nation's senior regulator doubled his estimates forlosses to the fund that insures deposits in commercial banks.  [ Page A1. ]


CHRONICLE
JOHN MILLER, the police reporter for WNBC-TV, was arrested yesterday by Deputy Chief JAMES P. McCABE JR.  on the route of the parade for the troops from the Persian Gulf war.
Mr.
Miller demanded access to an area that was off limits to everyone but paraders, after war protesters broke into the area.
When Mr.
McCabe refused, Mr.
Miller hurled an unprintable epithet.
The insulted officer arrested him and issued a summons for disorderly conduct.
Mr.
McCabe is the second-ranking officer in the patrol division for southern Manhattan, which policed the parade.


BAGHDAD REBUILDS BUT HAS FAR TO GO
Three months after the cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war, Iraqi engineers have produced a tally of achievement that says something about their ingenuity in rebuilding some of their land -- and more, possibly, about the precision, extent, and ambiguities of the allied bombing campaign.
As the summer heat builds along the Tigris, residents here say electric power has returned for up to 16 hours a day, water runs from faucets, gas stations pump gas and, sometimes, even a telephone rings.


Indians Preparing to Monitor Foreign Satellite Broadcasts
Hoping to fend off the invasion of satellite television, the Indian Government is building a $6 million receiving station to monitor and possibly screen out foreign broadcasts, an Indian newsapaper reported today.
Government officials did not respond to questions about the purpose of the earth station, reported by The Times of India to be going up in the western state of Maharashtra.
But a Government study completed in February raised the issue of "alien" influences on Indian society from international satellite networks.


Citicorp Plans to Spur Loans for Companies
Citicorp said yesterday that it would begin a financing program this week that would help corporate customers borrow up to $1 billion in the commercial paper market.
Under the arrangement, which several other banks are studying, Citicorp's Citibank subsidiary will refer corporate customers with strong ratings from Moody's Investors Service and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation to Premium Funding Inc., which was created by Citicorp and Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.


Calvin Holt Dies at 66; Owned Specialty Cafe
Calvin L. Holt, a founder and owner of Serendipity 3, the "restaurant-general store" at 225 East 60th Street, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 66 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from heart bypass surgery, a family spokesman said.


CHRONICLE
When EDITH CRESSON, France's new Prime Minister, saw a drawing of the puppet that would be used to represent her on "Bebete," a satire on politicians that runs each evening before the news on French television, she roared with laughter.
The puppet, a panther called Edith Amabotte ("lick my boots"), was introduced last week on the program by the froglike Kermitterrand, whose best-known line is, "Just call me God." She purrs while glued to Kermitterrand and echoes his every word.
Another popular puppet is Marchy, the piglike representation of GEORGES MARCHAIS, leader of the French Communist Party.
The show, created in 1988 by STEPHANE COLLARO, JEAN AMADOU and JEAN ROUCAS, is one of France's most popular.
The word "Bebete" has a few meanings, including "idiotic" and "silly goose."


E.P.A. Chief Is Hopeful on Pollution in Gulf
William K. Reilly, head of the Environmental Protection Agency, brought back encouraging news today from his tour last week of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, where he was sent by President Bush to assess the "environmental catastrophe perpetrated by Saddam Hussein."
Mr.
Reilly expressed his horror at seeing such vast pollution, but said initial studies indicate the damage is not as severe as first predicted.


Rev. V. P. Miceli, 75, Author and Ex-Jesuit
The Rev.
Vincent Peter Miceli, an educator, author and a former member of the Jesuits, died on Sunday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Islip, L.I.
He was 75 years old and lived in Front Royal, Va.
He died of cancer, said a friend, Roger McCaffrey.


RWE's Tender
RWE A.G.'s RWE-DEA unit said that as of Friday it had accepted for payment more than 85 percent of the common stock of the Vista Chemical Company in response to its $55-a-share cash tender offer.
RWE-DEA, the American subsidiary of the German energy and chemicals conglomerate, said that based on a preliminary tabulation by the company, just over nine million shares had been tendered, with 1.7 million being tendered by guaranteed delivery.
Vista, a specialty chemicals maker based here, will become a unit of RWE-DEA.


Gains Seen at Any Age For Smokers Who Quit
Smoking kills at every age, and even smokers who reach their 70's are likely to live longer if they quit, a new study concludes.
Researchers who conducted the study in three United States communities say it provides some of the strongest evidence yet that it is never too late to quit smoking.
"It shows that no matter how old you are or how long you've smoked, there are real benefits that occur when you give up cigarettes, and some of those benefits begin to appear almost immediately," said Dr.
John Holbrook of the University of Utah.


Music in Review
Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra
Carnegie Hall
More than most Mahler symphonies, the Sixth lends itself to abstract treatment.
Though intimations of tragedy may color its tone, they do not cloud its structural logic.
As Pierre Boulez and the New York Philharmonic have shown, a white-hot account of the Sixth, incisive, driving and virtuosic, can be at least as overpowering as a red-hot one that gives full scope to the portentous emotion.


Time Warner's Stock Stabilizes After Three-Day Plunge
After plummeting nearly 20 percent in just three days, Time Warner Inc.'s stock stabilized yesterday, losing 50 cents, at $94.125.
The decline came in continued response to the company's proposed $3.5 billion rights offering for 34.5 million new shares of stock that would help reduce Time Warner's $11 billion debt burden.
The company is now aggressively selling the deal to investors.
But many were still trying to figure out yesterday whether it would be accomplished.
One portfolio manager, who declined to be identified, said he felt it was likely that the deal would be completed.
"I am as sure as you can be about anything in this complicated deal," he said.


4 Judges Take Leaves in Corruption Inquiry
Four state judges in South Florida identified as targets in a Federal corruption investigation have taken indefinite leaves with pay.
The investigation was disclosed Saturday by United States Attorney Dexter W. Lehtinen and Janet Reno, the State Attorney for Dade County, who said they were announcing it because court-authorized searches were being conducted at the homes and offices of the judges and a defense lawyer.


Bertice Reading, 54, Jazz Singer, Actress And Star in Cabaret
Bertice Reading, an American jazz singer and actress who became a theater and cabaret star in Britain, died on Saturday at King's College Hospital.
She was 54 years old.
Ms.
Reading collapsed during rehearsals for "Notre Dame," a new musical based on "The Hunchback of Notre Dame" that is to open this month in Oxford.
She died after a stroke, said Barbara Jebson, a spokeswoman at the hospital.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a dispute between the Episcopal and Roman Catholic prelates of Newark rendered a phrase incorrectly in a comment from the Catholic Archbishop, Theodore E. McCarrick.
He said the Catholic Church promoted "natural birth control," not "natural childbirth."


Iran Says Iraqi Troops Are Attacking Shiites
Iran said today that Iraqi forces had begun an attack on hundreds of thousands of Shiite Muslims trapped in Iraq's southern marshlands.
Iranian television said that fighting between Shiites and President Saddam Hussein's forces also broke out in two southern Iraqi cities, Amarah and Nasiriyah.


Prices of U.S. Issues Little Changed
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed in light trading yesterday, momentarily stemming last week's steep slide.
To some traders, the lack of activity came as something of a surprise, given the sea change in market perceptions wrought by economic data that strongly suggest the recession is about over.


Big East Wants Out
The Big East intends to withdraw a year early from an early-season basketball series with the Atlantic Coast Conference, according to Mike Tranghese,the Big East commissioner.
The four-year contract between the conferences and ESPN, which televises the eight-game annual series, is to run through the 1992-93 season.
But because of scheduling conflicts and increased opposition from Big East officials, the A.C.C.-Big East Challenge could conclude with this year's games, scheduled for Dec. 2-5.


Q&amp;A
Moths in the Closet
Q.
Do moths actually eat wool, or something on it? Does cedar keep them away?
A.
Some moths do eat wool and digest the fibers, especially if the wool is soiled, said Louis Vasvary, an expert in urban entomology and an extension specialist at Cook College of Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.


People
*
Marianne Bess has been promoted to senior vice president at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, from vice president. *
Raymond L. Kotcher has been named to the board of directors of Ketchum Communications, where he is executive vice president and chief of United States operations of Ketchum Public Relations.
Also, Paul Capelli has joined Ketchum Public Relations in Chicago; he previously was corporate communications manager at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York. *
Kelly M. Shipp was appointed senior vice president of the public affairs group at Edelman Public Relations, Washington, from press secretary at the Department of Agriculture.


Virginia Feud Intensifies, With Wilder Hinting Robb Had a Role in Eavesdropping
The political feud between Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia and Senator Charles S. Robb intensified today, with the Governor's office asserting that "those who are sworn to uphold the law" had been part of a "criminal and illegal" effort to embarrass Mr.
Wilder through telephone eavesdropping.
The allegation came in a statement that never actually mentioned Mr.
Robb, a Virginia Democrat who has been a Wilder rival for a decade.
But it took note of the Senator's acknowledgement over the weekend that an anonymous donor had once sent him a copy of a tape of a phone conversation Mr.
Wilder had made on a cellular telephone, a tape that Mr.
Robb kept for two and a half years before destroying a few weeks ago.


Space Tomatoes
After a five-year voyage aboard a satellite, some seeds exposed to space radiation grew into plants that were stunted, striped or doomed, scientists said.
Researchers reporting on how space affected the seeds, spores and shrimp eggs flown on the Long Duration Exposure Facility, or L.D.E.F., said that while there were some bizarre mutations, the radiation of space had a less serious effect on the life forms than expected.


Civil Rights Bill Alters Fairness of '64 Law; Army Quotas Worked
To the Editor:
Your June 2 issue reports President Bush's address at West Point extolling the armed forces for their policies of equal opportunity while castigating Congress for allegedly advocating "quotas."
Coincidentally, while reading some old letters today for another purpose, I came across this paragraph in one I wrote May 4, 1952, when I was a lieutenant with the United States Army in Europe:


By Design; Sheer in the City
Every time the temperature soars, a new look seems to emerge as a favorite for city street wear.
This time, it's transparency.
Popular with everyone is the loose shirt in a gauzy fabric teamed with opaque cigarette pants or leggings.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about a bankruptcy filing by Bridgeport, Conn., misstated the way in which a $12 million gap would be filled in the budget imposed by the state.
Property taxes would be raised by 18 percent.


New York Salutes; How Many People at the Parade? Let's See, 5,000 a Block, 16 Blocks, Plus. . . .
According to the Police Department, 4.7 million people watched yesterday's ticker-tape parade from the Battery to just past City Hall.
If so, more people squeezed onto 16 blocks along Broadway than live in Leningrad or Milan or eight Bostons.
Toss in the marchers and you have Denmark. Or almost a Nyack on every block.
Where did that 4.7 million figure come from?
"It's based on reports from commanders in the field, the temporary district commanders along the route," said Capt.
Robert K. Cividanes, commanding officer of the Police Department's public information division.
"But," he added, "we're checking into it."


Coors and Partners Give Baseball to Wild West
A franchise here will give major league baseball a new time zone, a convenient stopover between the Midwest and the West Coast, and a stake in the nation's great Wild West.
Indeed, promoters of a Denver franchise talk of a regional team that will cultivate loyalties from Kansas to Utah, Wyoming to New Mexico.


Spira Lets Lawyers Go
HOWARD SPIRA, who was convicted of attempting to extort money from GEORGE STEINBRENNER, yesterday dimissed his lawyers, DAVID GREENFIELD and BENJAMIN EPSTEIN, and said he had spoken with Massachusetts lawyer ALAN DERSHOWITZ about a prospective appeal.
Spira said Dershowitz hasn't committed himself to representing him.
Spira is to be sentenced in Federal Court in Manhattan on Sept. 19. (AP)


Italian Voters Strongly Back Election Reform
Italian voters sent a ringingly clear message to their national leaders today that they want a new brand of politics that is less corrupt and more efficient than what they have lived with for the last four decades.
By a margin of 19 to 1, voters approved a binding referendum to eliminate an electoral system that dishonest officials and even the Mafia had manipulated to install their preferred candidates, especially in the country's hard-pressed south.


Looking Up
What television couldn't show is how
soft
the day was.
The last thing one would have thought of, arriving at the great homecoming parade yesterday, was dusty death.
The air was hot but not humid and there was a breeze to stir the flags.
The transit people were cordial; so were police.
And so, most of all, were the people, joined in a day of overlapping aims.
This being New York City, it started out as a day for commerce.
The first sight, on coming up out of the subway station, was a pleasant young man selling buttons (like "Stormin' Norman for President").
"Business is great, if you hustle," he said, turning to assure a Navy officer that yes, the buttons would be collector's items.


Toolmaker Acquiring Big Rival
In a move that will create the nation's largest machine tool producer, Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the Cross &amp; Trecker Corporation.
Giddings is known principally for its development of flexible manufacturing systems, while the larger Cross &amp; Trecker is now the nation's third-largest maker of machine tools.
The combination will create a formidable machine tool producer that executives say can capitalize on what many in the industry consider to be brighter prospects in European markets and in future years in the automotive industry.
The transaction, valued at $225 million, would push the combined company ahead of Litton Industries and Cincinnati Milacron Inc., now ranked first and second.
Better Position Abroad
The acquisition, agreed to on Friday, will stretch the reach of Giddings &amp; Lewis, which is based in Fond du Lac, Wis., into Europe and give it a stronger foothold in the American automobile market.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-13
A summit meeting in June is unlikely because of difficulties completing a nuclear arms reduction treaty, the White House said.
A meeting between President Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev is possible in July.
Page A3
The rebuilding of Iraq is progressing and Iraqi engineers have produced a tally of achievement that says something about their ingenuity and more about the precision, extent and ambiguities of the allied bombing.
A10


Big Legal Bills In Bankruptcy
Legal fees are approaching $90 million in the 17 months since Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, a court trustee said.
"We've tried to control the fees," said the Federal Bankruptcy Court trustee, Conrad Morgenstern, explaining that the largest retail bankruptcy in American history had involved numerous hours of legal work.


New York City Law Meets True Test of Campaign Financing
To the Editor:
You have taken your laudable support for public campaign financing and stretched it beyond the bounds of legality and common sense ("Strong City Council, Strong Smell," editorial, June 2).
If your goal is to encourage participation and encourage other legislatures to pass similar laws, you should at least be reasonable.


Honoring All Victims of Buchenwald


Exercise Alone Cuts Blood Pressure in Study
Exercise alone reduced blood pressure in people with moderate hypertension, researchers reported in the latest edition of the British medical journal Lancet.
The study of 16 people at John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford showed that people with moderately high blood pressure did not have to rely on anti-hypertensive drugs, said Dr.
Virend Somers, a leading investigator.


Watts Cancels Concerts
The pianist Andre Watts has canceled his appearances with the New York Philharmonic tomorrow through Saturday because of a wrist injury.
Andre Previn, conducting from the piano, will be the soloist in Mozart's Piano Concerto in C minor.
The rest of the program is unchanged.


Resource Crunch Is Earth-Sized Problem
To the Editor:
The account of Santa Barbara's water problems (news article, May 25) serves to illustrate by way of a microcosm of 85,000 people what environmentalists mean when they speak of limits to growth.
Human populations expand to fill the resource-space available to them.
The final crunch is the worst one (Santa Barbara, Calif., for example, has grown by 15 percent, from 74,414 in 1980).


DOS Goes on a Streamlined Diet
THE Microsoft Corporation is introducing an important new version of MS-DOS today.
MS-DOS is the operating system software that controls tens of millions of I.B.M.
PC and compatible computers worldwide.
The new version, MS-DOS 5.0, is a welcome upgrade that goes a long way toward lifting the curse that it has been under for a decade.
The curse, which limits the main working memory of MS-DOS to 640 kilobytes, was created by Microsoft and the International Business Machines Corporation when they collaborated on the original I.B.M.
PC in 1981.
Back then, 640 kilobytes seemed like more memory than anyone would ever use, since it was 10 times the amount available for the original PC.


And in This Corner, A Missing Heavyweight
What if the International Boxing Federation held a purse bid and MIKE TYSON didn't come?
That was the likely scenario yesterday in Newark as the financial sparring continues for the heavyweight title fight between Tyson and EVANDER HOLYFIELD.
Purse bids are made when a champion and a challenger cannot come to terms contractually.
Then promoters make competitive bids: highest bidder wins.


Gold Prices Rise a 4th Day; Oil Drops to 2-Month Low
Gold futures prices hit a four-month high yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York as a rally stretched into its fourth day.
Oil futures tumbled to their lowest level in two months on the New York Mercantile Exchange but the drop might have been a fluke because of light volume as many traders left their posts in lower Manhattan to watch the parade welcoming the troops home from the Persian Gulf.


Review/Dance; 'Ginastera,' By Harlem Company
It may sound strange to complain that a suite lacks unity.
Suites, being assortments of items, do not necessarily require unity.
Nevertheless, some sort of emotional or dramatic focus might have strengthened "Ginastera," the new ballet by Billy Wilson that Dance Theater of Harlem presented on Sunday afternoon at Aaron Davis Hall.
This choreographic suite was set to a potpourri of recorded instrumental and piano music by the 20th-century Argentine composer Alberto Ginastera.
Barbara Forbes's bright costumes implied that the action was taking place at a fiesta.
The scenic designs of Neil Peter Jampolis included a backdrop whose thick lines and splatters of paint resembled an Abstract Expressionist painting.
At the sides of the stage hung constructions suggesting both forest branches and window blinds.


Medchem Deal
Medchem Products Inc. said it had signed a $15 million agreement to acquire the distribution rights in Japan for the Avitene line of drug products from Alcon Pharmaceuticals, a division of Nestle S.A., the Swiss conglomerate.
Medchem said it intended to raise the money for the acquisition through a public common-stock offering.
The transaction is expected to be completed next month.
In 1987, Medchem bought Alcon's worldwide rights to market and sell the Avitene line except in Japan.
Medchem's stock was 50 cents a share lower today on the American Stock Exchange, closing at $12.375.


Return of Psychology Today Is a Goal of Magazine Talks
Psychology Today and Mother Earth News, two once-popular magazines that ceased publishing when their owner, the New American Company, fell on hard times, may soon reappear on newsstands.
Sussex Publishers Inc., a new company formed for the purpose, has agreed in principle to buy the magazines from New American.
A Sussex spokeswoman said yesterday that the proposed purchase was virtually set but that negotiations were still under way last night.
She said no one was willing to discuss terms or dollars.


Top Japanese Businessman Is Charged in Stock Fraud
A prominent Japanese businessman has fallen in a big stock market scandal.
Hirotomo Takei was arrested here last week on charges that he failed to pay about $24 million in taxes owed on profits he made by using inside information to trade stocks.
Mr.
Takei, a billionaire real estate entrepreneur, and Takatoshi Yasuda, an aide, were arrested on Thursday and charged with tax evasion.
Prosecutors accused the men of making more than $40 million by purchasing shares of companies whose stock was manipulated by Mitsuhiro Kotani, who is at the center of the year-old scandal.


Furlough at Fiat
Fiat S.p.A., the Italian automobile giant, said it would lay off 41,000 workers, or a third of its work force, later this month for one week to curtail production.
Since February, slack demand has been forcing temporary layoffs by the car maker.
Fiat said it had told unions that the 41,000 workers in its northern and southern Italian factories would be laid off beginning June 24 to cut production by 25,000 cars for the month.


In Colombia, Tale of a TV Priest and a Drug Baron
It was a scene evoking the magic realism of Colombian fiction: at a tightly guarded estate near here, the world's most wanted drug baron and eight of his lieutenants suddenly knelt down to be blessed by an 82-year-old man in a poncho, Colombia's "television priest."
This secret encounter, which took place recently between the drug baron, Pablo Escobar, and the Rev.
Rafael Garcia Herreros, is believed to have led the billionaire cocaine trafficker to say he will surrender to the authorities.


New York Salutes: Critic's Notebook; TV Reporters Compete In Yellow Ribbon Game
On all the channels that carried yesterday's parade, emotions sprouted like yellow ribbons and patriotic phrases were waved like flags.
Channel 7 announced that it was saluting "Our Heroes" and Channel 2 pasted the title "Heroes on Parade" on its coverage. (As it turned out, the focus was less on the paraders than on the watchers.) Channel 9's Sara Lee Kessler reported, "We had the will to do it, and we did it," the "we" presumably being forces outside Channel 9.
Another Channel 9 staffer wore a "Desert Storm" T-shirt with an American flag on it.
"These colors don't run" the reporter said.
Stationed down at Battery Park, Roz Abrams of Channel 7 seemed to be kept from flying out of her chair only by a clip board.
"We are psyched!" she said.


Business and Health; Detecting Fraud In Medical Claims
BLUE SHIELD of California has stepped up its efforts to detect fraudulent medical claims, and what it has uncovered will probably be distressing to those paying the bills, whether employers or individuals.
The big insurer has turned up a wide variety of abuses; what follows is a sampling of those it calls typical:


Fruit Juice and Infection: Preventive Effect Confirmed
RESEARCHERS in Israel have confirmed that cranberry juice can help prevent urinary tract infections.
Scientists had speculated that this effect had to do with the acidic content of the juice, but that turns out not to be the case.


New Finance Woes: F.D.I.C. Loss Worse; S.&amp; L. Crisis Deeper
Despite forecasts of a turnaround, new figures show that the banking industry is still deep in crisis.
And the financial woes do not end there: The disclosure came as the nation's senior auditor prepared to tell Congress that the savings and loan bailout is in such disarray that its costs cannot be estimated.
On the banking front, the nation's senior regulator doubled his estimates for losses to the fund that insures deposits in commercial banks.
The report that the fund could lose as much as $23.1 billion in 1991 and 1992 was tucked away in the last paragraph of a news release from L. William Seidman on the condition of the savings and loan rescue.
Mr.
Seidman is the senior official for both the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Resolution Trust Corporation, which oversees the savings and loan bailout.


Tandy Offers Certificates
The Tandy Corporation, Fort Worth, is offering $350 million in asset-backed certificates through the Tandy Master Trust.
Underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation said the certificates were backed by receivables of Tandy and of its Radio Shack chain of consumer electronics stores.


Chess
There are opening strategies that are too difficult to be played.
Of course, they are, in fact, played, but the grandmasters are really bluffing when they pretend to comprehend what they are doing.
They don't know any more about the terra incognita than Columbus did when he sailed west from Spain in 1492.
What the grandmasters have going for them is an intuition, a sense of how to struggle through, or just a determination to do battle, even in the dark.
They would like to know it all but are willing to settle for being masters of the murky, if that is what is needed to win.


U.S., in Shift, Will Back Aid to World Bank Unit
The Treasury has agreed to support a capital increase of up to $1 billion for the World Bank's private-sector lending division in exchange for organizational changes at the bank, Treasury and World Bank officials said today.
The Bush Administration had threatened to block the capital increase if the bank did not agree to devote 50 percent of its loans to the private sector in developing countries.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 7
May 31
June 8
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.2
6.9
Distillate production, daily
2.8
3.0
3.0
Gasoline stocks
215.6
213.2
217.1
Distillate stocks
108.3
107.4
104.5
Crude imports, daily
7.1
6.2
6.1
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.7
2.0
Crude stocks
353.2
349.6
385.6
Crude production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
88.4
89.6
88.1
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


When the Calories Go, Will the Taste Remain?
Like the fat substitutes that have preceded it, the biggest challenge to Stellar comes on the question of taste.
Products made with some of the other fat substitutes have already been reformulated to improve their flavor.
Stellar may find itself doing the same.
While fat contains nine calories a gram, and protein and carbohydrates contain four calories a gram, Stellar contains just one calorie.
A three-and-a-half ounce serving of ordinary cheesecake, for example, has 19 grams of fat and 450 calories.
But a cheesecake made with the fat substitute has 10 grams of fat and 300 calories.


T. Harvey Mathis; Olympics Organizer, 58
T.
Harvey Mathis, a real-estate developer who was chosen to be chairman of Atlanta's Olympic Games Authority last Thursday, died on Friday night at his home in Atlanta.
He was 58 years old.
Dr. John Cheatham, Mr. Mathis's physician, said the cause of death was a heart attack.


Officer Lost as Harbor Drill Becomes Emergency
It began as a routine exercise.
A police officer, playing the victim in a simulated rescue, jumped into the churning waters of New York Harbor yesterday so divers hovering in a helicopter could leap in and pick him up.
Within moments, the officer disappeared and the playacting turned real.
The officer submerged almost instantly, and is believed drowned.
Early this morning, helicopters and search boats were still scanning the waters despite a night of violent lightning storms and heavy wind and rain.
The accident took on an extra tragic aspect because the officer, 26-year-old Kenneth Hansen, is part of a family whose members have dedicated their lives to pulling people from New York's waters.
His father, a brother and his fiancee are also members of the Harbor Unit.
No Life Preserver or Rope
The accident stunned a department that has long been used to the idea that officers face danger on the streets daily, but that seemed bewildered yesterday that one of its own had died during a routine practice, apparently without anyone having taken any safety precautions.
The officer was not wearing a life preserver or scuba equipment, nor was he wearing a rope that might have allowed him to be pulled up if he sank.
When he jumped from a police boat 250 yards off Battery Park about 12:30 P.M., he was wearing only a pair of shorts.
"It's yet another instance of losing a police officer," said Mayor David N. Dinkins, who rushed to the scene.
"But we don't normally lose them in training exercises where the object is to save lives."
Officer John C. Cummings, a spokesman for the Harbor Unit, said he did not know why Officer Hansen had not been wearing a life jacket.
"I don't know why that happened," he said.
"The ones I've been involved with, people always wore one. It may have been a personal choice. There will be some hard questions to answer."
In all other regards, Officer Cummings said, yesterday's drill was typical.
Officer Hansen jumped into the water as 9 or 10 companions watched from the launch boat and the helicopter overhead.
Had all gone according to plan, he would have been in the water for only a few minutes.
But within seconds, he was under and divers in full scuba gear, realizing their mock emergency was now real, plunged after him.
Boats from the police and fire departments and the Coast Guard converged on the scene almost immediately.
Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said Officer Hansen was not a trained scuba diver but was "an experienced swimmer." His main duties were as a boatsman aboard a launch, helping boats in trouble, he said.
"He was posing as a victim and did not have scuba gear on," Mr.
Brown said.
Asked if all precautions were taken, he added: "Clearly we will critique the event. If the situation suggests changes, we'll make them."
Officer Hansen had been with Harbor Unit C in Brooklyn since April 1988.
He had joined the police force two years before and had received medals for excellent police duty and meritorious service, and one commendation.
On Monday, during the salute to the Persian Gulf troops, he pulled three men from the harbor who had parachuted into the water as part of the day's festivities, said Lieut.
Robert Nardoza, a police spokesman.
In transferring to the Harbor Unit, Officer Hansen was following a family tradition that began when his father, John Hansen, joined the unit in May 1968.
He is a detective with Harbor Unit A in Queens.
A 29-year-old brother, Officer John Hansen Jr., is also with Harbor Unit C, which is based at the foot of 52d Street and First Avenue in Brooklyn.
Officer Hansen's fiancee, Officer Diane Devine, 26, a six-year veteran, joined the Harbor Unit only three months after he did.
Another brother, James Hansen, 25, is an officer with the 61st Precinct in Brooklyn.
The accident set off a frantic search just off of the Marine Inspection Office Pier, between the Staten Island Ferry terminal and Battery Park, and on the pier itself.
Throughout the afternoon, the missing officer's older brother watched as police and fire department and Coast Guard boats gathered in the harbor and helicopters scanned the Hudson and East Rivers.
For 30 minutes, he was joined by Officer Devine, his brother's fiancee.
By late afternoon, there were 24 divers from the police and fire departments in the harbor, working as Statue of Liberty tour boats cruised by.
A torrential rain impeded their efforts in the late afternoon, and last night, despite lighting streaking across the skies, divers were doing a "Braille search" of the bottom, groping through the murky water by hand, following grids laid out with ropes.
They dropped Coast Guard sonar equipment and lights into the harbor and dragged a remote camera on a sled through the water.
Officer Cummings said that there was still a dim hope that the missing officer had somehow turned up on a piling along the shore.
"He was in good shape," said Officer Cummings.
"If anyone could survive, it would be him."
The accident happened where the Hudson and East Rivers meet off the tip of Manhattan and tides and currents create treacherous waters.
"The whole New York Harbor is tough," Officer Cummings said.
"The tides can be tricky and they run fast and furious, depending on the weather and the moon."
Information on exactly what Officer Hansen and the rest of team were doing was still sketchy last night.
Officer Cummings even speculated that the drill might have been staged for a training film.
Thus, he said, the officers on the helicopter might have been set to drop Officer Hansen a line.
Rotor Wash a Factor?
The downdraft of the Aviation Unit's helicopter's rotors overhead might have pushed the officer deeper into the waters, Officer Cummings said, but it was not immediately clear how close the helicopter was to the water.
Officer Hansen had probably gone through the drill many times, Officer Cummings said, though he did not know if he had ever played victim.
Officer Cummings said the person playing victim usually goes into the water without scuba gear or a rope.
Lieut.
Ronald Jurain of the Coast Guard, which sent two units to the search shortly after the alarm was sounded, said that in Coast Guard rescue drills, the person playing victim wears a flotation suit and that small inflatable boats are usually nearby in case help is needed.
No boats other than the launch Officer Hansen was on were used in yesterday's exercise, the police said.
Lieut.
Jurain said the Coast Guard drill teams did not tether the person jumping into the water out of fear the officer could become entangled.
The search continued into the early morning hours today despite periodic heavy rain and 20-knot winds blowing across the harbor.
The tricky, constantly changing tides further complicated the effort.
"The search will continue until we find him," said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman.


Voting Lenin Out of Leningrad
What's in a name?
Ask the people of Leningrad, and they'll tell you.
The Communist Party's reputation may be at stake in the race for president of the Russian Republic between Boris Yeltsin, the reformer, and Nikolai Ryzhkov, the party's favorite son.
But nothing less than Communism itself will be on the ballot in today's referendum on changing the name of the Soviet Union's second-largest city back to St.
Petersburg.
It's one thing for Mikhail Gorbachev and the leaders of the republics to drop "Socialist" from the country's name and call it the Union of Soviet
Sovereign
Republics. But vote Lenin out of Leningrad? To the party faithful, that's heresy.


ALGERIAN PREMIER FAVORS VOTE SOON
Algeria's new Prime Minister, Sid Ahmed Ghozali, has told close associates and potential ministerial appointees that he intends to pick a Cabinet of "independent personalities" who are not tied to political parties and will see to it that Algeria holds free parliamentary elections before the end of the year, Algerian officials say.
These comments and Mr.
Ghozali's meetings with Algerian technical experts suggest that he may end up choosing a Cabinet that is fundamentally independent from the ruling National Liberation Front, which has governed Algeria since independence from France in 1962, Algerian officials and Algerian affairs experts say.


HOUSE BACKS AID TO ANGOLA REBELS
The House voted today to continue covert American aid to Angolan rebels, less than two weeks after the country concluded a superpower-brokered peace accord ending its 16-year civil war.
But people familiar with the aid arrangements, which are supported by the Bush Administration, say the assistance is to be sharply pared back from the $60 million annual level the rebels have received through the Central Intelligence Agency in recent years, and will be strictly nonmilitary to conform with the peace agreement.


Presbyterians Adopt Guidelines To Curb Sex Misconduct by Clergy
The Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) today adopted its first detailed policy on sexual misconduct by the clergy, a problem that church leaders said had reached critical dimensions.
The policy, adopted on a vote of 491 to 26 by elected delegates who together make up the General Assembly, the highest governing body of the 2.9-million-member denomination, sets tough standards prohibiting sexual contact between the clergy and a parishioner or church employee, even if the parishioner or employee seeks to initiate it.


Robert L. Wilson; Church Sociologist, 66
Robert L. Wilson, a Methodist Church sociologist and commentator, died of bone cancer Sunday at his home in Durham.
He was 66 years old.
Mr.
Wilson had been a professor of church and society at Duke University Divinity School since 1970.
He directed the J. M. Ormond Center for Research, Planning and Development at Duke.


For Stage Fright, Rehearsal Helps
IT looked like a recipe for catastrophe.
While waiting in the wings to go on stage, the musician noticed a twitch in his hand.
Sure that it signaled more severe nervous tremors to come, he was gripped by the fear that he would fumble his performance.


Commons Votes Pit Bull Bill
A Government bill requiring American pit bull terriers and Japanese tosas to be neutered or destroyed after Nov. 30 was approved early today by the House of Commons and sent to the House of Lords, where approval is expected later this year.


Review/Readings; Immigrants' Memories In Ellis Island Festivity
The audience itself was the epilogue for "Immigrant Voices," an elaborate program staged Monday and last night on location -- that is, at Ellis Island, in the very hall where the forebears of many of the onlookers began a new life in the United States.
It was a thoughtfully wrought blend of readings of the words of those who had passed through there, with a musical framework that attempted to echo the soul-testing transits of this gateway to America.
Set in the restored Grand Registry Hall of the immigrant station, the program, on Monday night, was a pensive footnote to the day of extravaganza that had occupied the neighboring island of Manhattan, with parades and fireworks paying tribute to the might of a nation that imported its muscle from other corners of the world, whether by way of Plymouth Rock, slave ship, Ellis Island or John F. Kennedy International Airport.


Hollywood Bars Films To Protest Soviet Piracy
To protest the unauthorized copying of films onto videocassettes in the Soviet Union, the major United States film studios have agreed not to license any more films for showings there.
The studios have also agreed that, with the exception of several movies already promised, they will not provide films for the Moscow Film Festival next month.
The announcement was made today by Jack Valenti, the chairman and chief executive of the Motion Picture Export Association of America.
The Soviet Union has been trying to establish the festival as a major annual international film event.


Mellon to Redeem Preferred July 19
The proceeds of the Mellon Bank Corporation's $100 million debt offering early this week through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Brothers will be used in part to redeem its series A preferred stock.
Mellon, a major regional bank holding company, said the series A preferred will be redeemed on July 19 at $25.56 a share.
It was issued at an average price of $25.59.
The rest of the proceeds are expected to be added to the corporation's general funds and be available for general corporate financing purposes.


Review/Theater; Strindberg's 'Miss Julie' via Ingmar Bergman
It is midsummer night and the light through the windows of the kitchen has an unnatural glow.
In the course of Ingmar Bergman's staging of Strindberg's "Miss Julie," that light will go through many subtle changes, counterpointing the emotional turbulence of the characters onstage.
Their duel is a class war as well as a fierce battle of the sexes.
Despite all the portent, the play never loses its personal dimension, its sense of wounds mutually inflicted.
Strindberg called "Miss Julie" a naturalistic tragedy, a fact that has never been so evident as in Mr.
Bergman's stunning production.
This is the opening play of the Royal Dramatic Theater of Sweden's all too brief season at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.


A Wish List On Talks With Mexico
Withtalks about to begin by the United States, Mexico and Canada on creating a North American free-trade zone, business executives outlined today what they wanted from the negotiations and how they hoped to get it.
The Business Roundtable, a group of chief executives from 200 large corporations, said the negotiations should seek a comprehensive removal of trade and investment restrictions and greater protections for intellectual property like copyrights and patents.


Theater in Review
Nova Velha Estoria (New Old Story)  Repertorio Espanol Gramery Arts Theater 138 East 27th Street Through June 23 Conceived and directed By Jose Alves Antunes Filho; scenery and costumes by J. C. Serroni; lighting by Davi De Brito; sound by Raul Teixeira.
Grupo de Teatro Macunaima presented by Repertorio Espanol, Gilberto Zaldivar, producer, Rene Buch, artistic director, in association with The New York International Festival of the Arts.
WITH: Ondina Castilho, Helio Cicero, Geraldo Mario, Luis Melo, Samantha Monteiro and Yara Nico.
Theater is not often as enchanting as Jose Alves Antunes Filho's "Nova Velha Estoria" ("New Old Story"), a sly, wise, adult version of "Little Red Ridinghood" performed by Mr.
Filho's Brazilian company, Grupo de Teatro Macunaima, at the Repertorio Espanol's Gramercy Arts Theater as part of the New York International Festival of the Arts.


Sports People: PRO HOCKEY; Islanders Sign a Center
The Islanders yesterday signed CHRIS TAYLOR, a 19-year-old center they selected in the second round of the 1990 National Hockey League draft, to his first professional contract.
Taylor led the London Knights of the Ontario Hockey League last season with 50 goals and 78 assists.
He was second in scoring to ERIC LINDROS, the junior star who is expected to be the top choice in the league's draft on June 22.


Bailing Out Soviets: Bush Is Cautious
President Bush demonstrated again today that the game of diminished expectations can be played to advantage in diplomatic affairs as well as domestic politics.
In fact, he and his Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d, seem to have chosen that tactic as a continuing element in their approach to the knotty problem of relations with the new, multi-polar Soviet Union, which bears about as much resemblence to the old monolithic totalitarian state of Stalin and Brezhnev as television-era American politics do to those of Tammany Hall.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Clark Wants Out
JACK CLARK says he wants to be traded from the Red Sox.
"When I signed with the Red Sox, they told me that's what I'd be playing: part of the time at first base, part of the time in the outfield and part of the time as a designated hitter," Clark told The San Francisco Chronicle yesterday.
"But I haven't played an inning in the field, not even in spring training. Maybe some guys have the temperament to do this, but I don't." The 35-year-old Clark, who signed a three-year $9 million contract with Boston during the off season, is hitting under .200 this season. (AP)


Blood Tests Likely At Future Games
Blood samples are likely to be used in testing athletes for drugs at future Olympics, the chairman of the International Olympic Committee's medical commission said today.
The official, Prince Alexandre De Merode, presented a report on the issue to the I.O.C.
Executive Board at a meeting here and said he expected final approval by the I.O.C. next year.


Basketball; Magic's Act Could Disappear After Finals
Magic Johnson knows he could be playing his last game of the season Wednesday night.
Could he also be playing the final game of his career?
Johnson said today that he would take three weeks off after the National Basketball Association championship series ends to decide his future.
Asked if he might retire this summer, Johnson said: "It's definitely a possibility. I'm going to sit back and think about what I'm going to do. I may decide, 'Hey man, I'm tired.' I'm going to play one or two more years at the most anyway. I don't need the money. I've always wanted to go into business and I'm planning to do that. It'll all boil down to how I feel."


Bank Funds And C.D.'s Drop Again
Yields on bank certificates of deposit and money market accounts were down for the week ended yesterday, extending a three-and-a-half-month slide.
At the Treasury Department's weekly auction on Monday, however, average discount rates moved up again for the second consecutive week to their highest levels in more than a month.


Economic Scene; Semiconductor Semi-Success
THE Bush Administration negotiators who pieced together the new computer chip pact with Japan are proud as peacocks.
And with reason: They managed to dismantle protectionist rules that were anathema to the President's free-trade principles.
But the victory may prove bittersweet.
Japanese chip exporters remain vulnerable to retaliation under American laws that effectively prohibit foreign competitors from cutting a product's price near the end of its commercial life.
More important, the deal in no way alters the sobering reality that America has lost its deft touch in translating advanced technology into jobs and profits.


CHRONICLE
KING HUSSEIN was in stable condition yesterday in Amman, Jordan, after being hospitalized with an irregular heartbeat on Monday.
The King was walking around, but was expected to remain in the King Hussein Medical Center at least overnight because his heartbeat was still irregular, according to the hospital.
The hospital director, Dr.
Youssef Goussous, added that the King's condition had probably been brought on by overwork.
Over the weekend he met with political leaders to sign a bill introducing political pluralism to the kingdom.
He also took part in the army's 75th anniversary celebration.


Immigration Brings New Diversity To Asian Population in the U.S.
Unusually large waves of immigrants from Southeast Asia and South Asia in the 1980's transformed the Asian community in the United States, setting off an explosion of diversity among Asian-Americans, the nation's fastest-growing minority, figures made public today by the Census Bureau show.
The political upheavals and economic hardships that beset Asian nations from Sri Lanka and the Philippines to China and South Korea have sent more than two million immigrants across the Pacific Ocean in the past decade, according to Federal immigration figures.


Albania's Communists in Upheaval
Faced with loss of control of the Government they dominated for 47 years and near anarchy in much of the country, leaders of Albania's Communist Party battled each other at a party congress today, criticizing and defending the once-hallowed memory of their longtime leader and his Stalinist policies.
Today's polemics against Enver Hoxha, who ran Albania's Communist Government from its founding in 1946 until his death in 1985, revealed deep divisions between conservatives, who appear to have a wide majority in the congress hall, and party members who favor a full break with the organization's totalitarian past.


Treasury Issues Little Changed
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed and interest rates were stable in sluggish trading yesterday.
"We are in a trend to higher yields," one government bond trader said, "but nobody is going to do anything until they see what the inflation numbers look like when they come out on Thursday and Friday."


Books of The Times; Spying for Russia in Prewar Europe
Dark Star By Alan Furst  417 pages. Houghton Mifflin . $22.95.
The place and time is Paris in 1938, as Franco is driving to victory in Spain and before Hitler's invasion of Poland, which would draw all of Europe into World War II.
Kristallnacht, the night of broken glass in Germany, has shattered any illusions that the Third Reich might halt its murderous persecution of the Jews.
Andre Szara, a 40-year-old Polish-born Soviet Jew working as a Paris correspondent for Pravda and a spy for the People's Commisariat for Internal Affairs, better known by its more terrifying initials NKVD, is invited by an aristocratic Frenchman to his private club in Neuilly.
It is raining.


Brown-Forman
The Brown-Forman Beverage Company formed a new division to stengthen its focus on wine sales.
The division will market Korbel champagnes, Bolla Italian wines, Fontana Candida Italian wines, Brolio Italian wines, Noilly Prat vermouths and Korbel brandy.
William M. Street, president and chief operating officer, said the move was intended to bolster Brown-Forman's the premium wine business.
Brown-Forman Beverage, a division of the Brown-Forman Corporation, also markets Jack Daniel's, Canadian Mist and Early Times whiskies, and Southern Comfort.


Iran Says Iraq Is Planning New Attack on Shiites
Iran asserted today that the Iraqi Government was planning a fresh military offensive against dissident Shiite Muslims in southern Iraq, which could send a new flood of refugees across its border.
In a letter to the United Nations Security Council, Iran's United Nations representative, Kamal Kharrazi, said his Government had "credible evidence that the Iraqi Army is preparing for a general mopping-up operation in the south and southeast, where up to 700,000 Iraqi citizens are contained."


The Pop Life
Joining Voices
"I was 15 when my father died," Natalie Cole said the other day.
"It's a hard age for a girl to lose her dad, especially when you consider yourself to be Daddy's little girl."
She was remembering her father, Nat (King) Cole, who died of lung cancer 26 years ago.
He was 45 years old.


CHRONICLE
JULIA ROBERTS postponed her marriage to KIEFER SUTHERLAND, just three days before the wedding.
Her spokeswoman, Pat Kingsley, said yesterday that the decision had been mutual.
Ms.
Roberts, 23 years old, and Mr.
Sutherland, 24, met two years ago.
The wedding was to have been an event, even by Hollywood standards, held on a sound stage on the 20th Century Fox lot and attended by actors, producers, directors and just about everyone in the industry.


Roundabout Plans Move to Broadway
The Roundabout Theater Company, the Off Broadway troupe that has staged classics and other revivals for the last 25 years, will move to Broadway for next fall's theater season.
The not-for-profit company will transfer its productions to the Criterion Center/Stage Right, a 499-seat theater at 45th Street and Broadway, next October.
Future Roundabout productions at the theater will be eligible for Tony Awards.


Pager Company Is Short of Cash
The AT&amp;E Corporation, which once excited investors with its plans to develop wristwatch pagers, said it would seek bankruptcy protection later this week unless it received an infusion of cash.
The company, based in San Francisco, said it had placed most of its work force on unpaid leave, dismissed several officers and curtailed its operations substantially.
The company said that the Seiko Corporation, the Japanese watch company that is an investor in AT&amp;E, would not provide additional loans.AT&amp;E planned for a nationwide paging service using wristwatches that would display messages.
It ran tests in Portland, Ore., last year before a cash shortage forced cutbacks.
AT&amp;E stock closed on the American Stock Exchange today at $1.325, down 12.5 cents.
Last year, it reached $25.


About New York
Gerard Papa cruises the streets of Bensonhurst in his 1990 Lincoln.
He sometimes transports a dozen members of his amateur basketball team in the sky-blue automobile.
Today, he carries just one passenger, one who has come to hear the stories he tells again and again.
The trip is through time toward an elusive destination called meaning.
It begins in the tidy rowhouse where Mr.
Papa has lived all 37 years of his life, progresses to a diner where the pasta is perfect and pauses at the bingo hall of the Most Precious Blood Roman Catholic Church where the Flames, the basketball team Mr.
Papa founded -- the first interracial one in Bensonhurst, he thinks -- holds court.


Next Wave Director To Leave in December
Liz Thompson, director of the prestigious vanguard arts showcase the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, will leave that post in December, at the end of the 1991 series, the academy announced yesterday.
Ms.
Thompson, who had been artistic director and then executive director of the Jacob's Pillow dance festival in Massachusetts for 11 years, joined the academy in January 1990.
The 1990 Next Wave Festival had already been planned, so her work there involved the organization of this year's program.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Sara Vogan, a novelist and teacher of creative writing, omitted her survivors.
They are her parents, James and Bette Vogan, of Sun City, Fla.; a brother, Ritch Vogan, of Atlanta, and two sisters, Sheryl Haber, of Pittsburgh, and Jamie Gillie, of Los Angeles.


The President's Petulance
On March 6, President Bush appeared before Congress to celebrate victory in the Persian Gulf and to challenge the assembled legislators to convert triumph abroad into progress at home.
Mr.
Bush trotted out a crime bill and a transportation bill and said, "If our forces could win the ground war in 100 hours, then surely Congress can pass this legislation in 100 days."
Short of a miracle, Congress will not make the 100-day deadline on Friday.
Mr.
Bush knows this.
He thus plans a series of speeches, starting tonight, chiding Congress for sloth.


School Board's President Resigns; Dinkins Moves Fast on Successor
Mayor David N. Dinkins moved yesterday to place a more commanding presence in the top leadership position on the New York City Board of Education by announcing the resignation of its president, Dr.
Gwendolyn C. Baker, from the board.
The Mayor's action came after some of Dr.
Baker's fellow board members made clear that they intended to seek her ouster.
Instead of resisting the challenge, Mr.
Dinkins moved quickly to defuse it by appointing H. Carl McCall, a longtime Manhattan political figure and ally, to the board and proposing him as her successor as board president.


Return Tompkins Sq. Park to Those Who Live in Neighborhood
To the Editor:
It is obvious that the situation in New York City's Tompkins Square Park, long a homeless encampment, must be dealt with.
It is also obvious that Councilwoman Miriam Friedlander is not in touch with reality (news article, May 30).
You quote her as saying that the majority of neighborhood residents favor keeping the homeless in the park.
Her recommendation for solving the situation is to bring social services into the park to aid those living there.


Slick Mets Pitching On Slippery Shea Night
Frank Viola lost a perfect game on, of all bizarre things, a wild pitch after a strikeout in the sixth inning last night.
He lost a no-hitter on a high changeup two batters later.
The shutout went down with it.
But Viola was still precise enough on a wet and sticky evening at Shea Stadium that he did not lose the game.
He maintained a grip on things through some trying times and John Franco held firm to it in the ninth after some trying weather.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto racing
TEAM SAUBER MERCEDES -- Named Dr.
Harvey Postlethwaite technical director.
Baseball American League
AL -- Suspended Dave Valle, Seattle Mariners catcher, for three games for charging Texas Rangers manager Bobby Valentine during a game on June 1.


Preparing for 21st-Century Enemies
To the Editor:
Secretary of the Air Force Donald B. Rice's defense of the proposed F-22 fighter (letter, May 21) awakened some old memories.
In writing that "The F-22 is not designed for the threat of today, or even tomorrow, but to meet and defeat the threats of the 21st century," Mr.
Rice must surely have had in mind my favorite radio program of the 1930's, "Buck Rogers in the 21st Century!"


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17
An aid plan for the Soviet Union was approved by President Bush, who ratified $1.5 billion in agricultural loan guarantees.
He was also poised to send a much-delayed Soviet-American trade treaty to the Senate for its approval.
Page A1


Fuqua Chairman Out
Lawrence P. Klamon resigned yesterday as the chairman of Fuqua Industries, a departure that means the entire senior management of the manufacturing company has been replaced in recent months.
The chairman's post will not be filled.
The new team is headed by Charles R. Scott, who replaced Mr.
Klamon in February as president and chief executive.
Mr.
Scott is also the chairman of Intermark Inc., a holding company based in La Jolla, Calif., that is Fuqua's largest shareholder, with a 26 percent stake.
Mr.
Klamon, 52 years old, is considering other employment opportunities in Atlanta and expects to announce his plans shortly, the company said yesterday.
He had been running the company since J. B. Fuqua, the founder, stepped aside in 1989.
Mr.
Klamon joined Fuqua Industries in 1951 as general counsel.


BankAmerica-Shearson
The BankAmerica Corporation is considering buying the mortgage banking unit of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., according to mortgage industry officials.
Such a purchase would make the San Francisco-based banking company one of the nation's largest mortgage servicers.
BankAmerica is one of the biggest companies in home-loan originations and holdings.


U.S.-Japan Chip Accord
The United States and Japan today signed a new five-year agreement aimed at increasing to at least 20 percent the foreign share of the Japanese market in computer chips by the end of next year.
Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, and Ryohei Murata, Japan's Ambassador to Washington, led the signing ceremony at Mrs.
Hills' office, where negotiations concluded a week ago.
The pact takes effect Aug. 1.


Copy of Medical Exam Is Stolen in Wisconsin
One copy of a nationwide certification test for medical-school students was found stolen at the Medical College of Wisconsin here this morning, and the school responded by canceling the examination for the 207 students who were to take it there today.
Medical authorities said the results of the test, which students around the country are taking today and Wednesday, could be invalidated outright if investigators found that questions from the stolen copy had been distributed out of state.


AIDS Risk May Affect Treatment of Infants
Some infants with AIDS or at risk of developing the disease are probably being deprived of life-prolonging treatment for unrelated ailments, say researchers who surveyed 247 neonatal specialists.
One of the more disturbing findings was the number of specialists who said they would withhold certain treatments from infants who were at risk of developing AIDS because their mothers had the disease, said the main author of the study, Betty Wolder Levin, an anthropologist at Brooklyn College in New York.


Retired Head of Phelps Joins Walter Industries
"I just do not know how to retire," said G. Robert Durham.
Mr.
Durham, who is 62 and retired in 1989 as chairman of the Phelps Dodge Corporation, was named president and chief executive of Walter Industries on Monday.
In the late 1970's, he rejoined Phelps Dodge after two years in what he had planned to be retirement.
Walter Industries, which was taken private in a buyout led by Kohlberg, Kravis &amp; Roberts in 1988, is a successor to the Jim Walter Corporation, whose founder, James W. Walter, remains chairman.
The company said it had annual sales of about $1.3 billion and employed about 8,200 people.


Baseball; Expansion Losers Turn to Unlikely Plan 2
The four losers of the National League expansion race were left yesterday with only one alternative: lure an existing team to their supposedly greener pastures.
The immediate prospects do not seem bright.
With the cities of Miami and Denver an approval vote away from joining the National League, existing teams like the Houston Astros, the Seattle Mariners and the Cleveland Indians instantly commanded the attention of the hopefuls rejected by the league's expansion committee: Tampa-St.
Petersburg and Orlando in Florida, and Buffalo and Washington.


Sears Adds Executive To Catalogue Division
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company yesterday named Robert M. Abramson senior vice president of marketing and strategic planning for its catalogue and direct-marketing operations.
In the new post, Mr.
Abramson, 48 years old, will have primary responsibility for all marketing functions and strategic planning of those operations.
Sears said Mr.
Abramson would be the second-highest-ranking executive in the catalogue operations after Everett L. Buckardt, the unit's president.


Theater in Review
Stitsha  Amakhosi Theater, Zimbabwe  Performance Space 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street June 19 to 23 Written and directed by Cont Mhlanga; music by the performers.
WITH: Princess Dlamini, Doubt Dube, Sithembiso Gumpo, Patriciah Mhete, Alois Moyo, Andrew Moyo, Joyce Mpofu, Taurai Dumisani Muswere, Nomusa Ncube, Herebert Phiri, Pedzisai Sithole and Priscilla Sithole.
The Amakhosi Theater, a youthful 12-member ensemble from Bulawayo, Zimbabwe, is among 150 semi-professional theater companies in a country that has a tradition of agitprop theater.
During the country's protracted struggle for independence, exhortatory no-frills plays were often performed in township halls to dramatize and spur the struggle against British colonialism.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Dykstra Arraignment
Philadelphia Phillies outfielder LEN DYKSTRA waived a formal hearing on a drunken driving charge yesterday and will be arraigned on July 25 in Radnor, Pa., for an accident on May 6.
Dykstra, whose blood-alcohol content was 0.179 percent, and DARREN DAULTON, a Phillie teammate who was the passenger, suffered serious injuries in the accident.
After posting $1 bond, Dykstra left with his lawyer, FRANCIS LORD.
Both refused comment. (AP)


Winfield Keeps Slugging
If 162 games is the measuring stick for a major league season, then there's no mistaking the fact that Dave Winfield has had a heck of a year since leaving the Yankees.
As of yesterday, Winfield had played exactly 162 games since accepting a trade from the Yankees to the California Angels.
And all Winfield accomplished in that equivalent of a baseball calender year was the following: he batted .277, drove in 114 runs, scored 92, hit 31 doubles, 4 triples and 31 home runs.


Charles Loloma; Artist, 70
Charles Loloma, a Hopi artist who changed the look of American Indian jewelry, died on Sunday.
He was 70 years old.
The cause of death was not given.


Downpours and Floods Continue in Louisiana
A second day of heavy rains flooded streets and homes in parts of Louisiana today, interrupting bus and streetcar service and closing New Orleans City Hall.
Two children apparently drowned in rain-swollen ditches.
More than 12 inches of rain had fallen in some areas over two days.
The deluge that started during the evening rush on Monday caught New Orleans by surprise.
The rain abated overnight, then returned this morning.


Theater in Review
The Have-Little Intar 420 West 42d Street Through June 30  By Migdalia Cruz; directed by Nilo Cruz; scenic design by Donald Eastman; costumes by Gabriel Berry; lighting by Kenneth Posner; sound design, Fox and Perla Ltd.
Presented by Intar Hispanic American Arts Center, Max Ferra, artistic director; Eva Brune, managing director.
WITH: Divina Cook, Gabriella Diaz Farrar, Marisol Massey and David Roya.
At one point in their travels, Don Quixote and Sancho Panza happen upon a sumptuous wedding party and Sancho makes the observation, in Motteux's translation, "There are but two families in the world, the have-much and the have-little." The characters in Migdalia Cruz's play "The Have-Little" definitely belong to the second category.
Cervantes even figures in the plot.


Sports People: TELEVISION; Cosell Has Surgery
Sports announcer HOWARD COSELL was released from Mount Sinai Hospital yesterday, one day after he underwent a three-hour operation for removal of a malignant tumor from his chest, a source told The Associated Press.
A hospital spokeswoman would not comment on the hospitalization of the 73-year-old Cosell. (AP)


F.D.I.C. Deal With Fleet
The Fleet-Norstar Financial Group said today that it had reached an agreement with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to liquidate, collect and manage certain assets for three of the Bank of New England bridge banks.
Fleet said it had created a new company, the Recoll Management Corporation, to manage the assets, which will initially total about $5.5 billion.


Eating Well
Scene: Local supermarket.
Dramatis personae: Thirtysomething mother accompanied by preschooler in shopping cart.
Preschooler (his little body racked by sobs): No peanuts.
No peanuts.
These, Mommy.
These.
Like on TV.
Peanut butter cups.
Peanut butter cups.
Mommy, Mommy, please.


Elizabeth Etnier, 80, An Author, Is Dead
Elizabeth Jay Hollins, an author who wrote under the name Elizabeth Etnier, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 80 years old.
She died of cancer, her family said.


Salvadoran Leader in the U.S. To Seek Continued Arms Aid
With negotiations aimed at ending his country's decade-long civil war momentarily stalled, President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador began a three-day visit here today to press lawmakers and the Bush Administration for continued American military aid.
Hopes for a reasonably quick resolution to the war have dimmed in recent weeks with an upswing of violence that has prompted the Government and the guerrillas to accuse each other of bad-faith bargaining.


Ford Pulls Commercials From Audubon Show
The Ford Motor Company has pulled its television commercials from "New Range Wars," an episode of the National Audubon Society's series of specials on TBS.
The society said Ford had responded to pressure from ranchers and others who were angry about the program's exploration of the conflict between ranchers and animals on the range.


Timothy J. Murphy; V.F.W Commander, 81
Timothy J. Murphy, former national commander in chief of the Veterans of Foreign Wars and onetime Massachusetts legislator, died Thursday.
He was 81 years old and lived in Grantham, N.H., and Naples, Fla.
A Navy veteran of World War II, Mr.
Murphy held the rank of commander when the war ended.
He headed the national V.F.W in 1955 and 1956.


Wine Talk
AGASSAC, Angelus, Angludet, Ausone . . .
"Back in the mid-1960's, my wife and I took up Bordeaux reds." Thus began a letter from a Connecticut reader that outlined a most unusual wine odyssey.
The letter went on:


VOLCANO EXPLODES IN THE PHILIPPINES
A volcano 10 miles west of a giant American air base in the central Philippines erupted in fury this morning, forcing the temporary evacuation of the remaining 1,500 American workers at the base and thousands of panicked Filipinos who live nearby.
The 4,800-foot volcano, Mount Pinatubo, was rocked by a series of tremors, each spewing a miles-high, grey-greenish mushroom cloud of ash and smoke.
Philippine volcano scientists said that small rivers of searing gas, ash and molten rock had begun rushing down the mountain's lush slopes.


Premiere's Promotion For September Issue
Premiere magazine has sent out a promotional mailing to invite potential advertisers to place ads in its September "Sex In the Movies" issue.
A bright yellow condom was enclosed.
Marian L. Schwindeman, publisher of Premiere, said she had received more than 100 phone calls in response to the promotion, many of them from advertisers interested in switching their ads to the issue.
"If you look at all the people who use sex to sell goods, it made a lot of sense," she said.
"Also, any time I have the chance to give condoms away, I will."


Army's Chief Opposes Women's Combat Role
The Army Chief of Staff said today that he saw no reason for the Army to lift its ban on women in combat, despite legislation pending in Congress that would rescind the law barring combat roles for female pilots in the Air Force, the Navy and the Marine Corps.
The Chief of Staff, Gen.
Carl E. Vuono, who will retire next week, told reporters at a farewell gathering, "My personal view is the exclusion of women from some specialities, based on the way we operate with those specialities, is right."


Loss at Carter Hawley
Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc. said on Monday that it had lost $32.4 million in the three months ended May 4, the first full quarter after its bankruptcy filing.
Philip M. Hawley, the retailer's chairman, said the results improved later in the quarter.
The retailer, based in Los Angeles, filed for protection from its creditors on Feb. 11.
The first-quarter loss came on sales of $430.1 million.


Judge Says Remarks on 'Gorillas' May Be Cited in Trial on Beating
A judge has ruled that a police officer's comments likening a domestic dispute among blacks to the movie "Gorillas in the Mist" may be used as evidence against four white officers charged in the beating of a black motorist.
One of the officers, Laurence Powell, had asked that the comments, which were transmitted over squad car computers, be ruled inadmissible because they were made earlier on the same day, March 3, that the motorist, Rodney G. King, was beaten.
The officer's lawyers also argued that use of the comments would be prejudicial and would introduce other issues into the trial.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Clinical Technologies Associates Inc., Elmsford, N.Y., which conducts pharmaceutical research, appointed Richard I. Steinhart chief financial officer. *
Concurrent Computer Corp., Tinton Falls, N.J., named John T. Stihl executive vice president.


Joe Hamilton, 62, a Top Producer Of Television Specials, Is Dead
Joe Hamilton, a television producer whose variety series and specials included several starring Carol Burnett, his former wife, died on Sunday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 62 years old.
He died of cancer of the head and neck, his family said.


Dow Up 10.51; 3,000 Mark Topped Briefly
After briefly surpassing the 3,000 barrier yesterday morning, the Dow Jones industrial average ended the day with a gain of 10.51 to close at 2,985.69.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange rose to 161.6 million shares, from 127.7 million on Monday.


Saul Fromkes, Lawyer And an Executive, 83
Saul Fromkes, a New York lawyer who was founder and president of the City Title Insurance Company, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.
He died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Veterans to Receive Aid for Poison Gas Tests
World War II veterans exposed to mustard gas testing and sworn to secrecy for four decades will be eligible for disability payments under relaxed rules proposed today by the Department of Veterans Affairs.
"Mistakes were made, mistakes that we have to correct," said the department's Deputy Secretary, Anthony J. Principi, in an interview.


We Shouldn't Exclude Aliens With AIDS
To the Editor:
You report that the Bush Administration decided to shelve the proposal by Louis W. Sullivan, Secretary of Health and Human Services, to take acquired immune deficiency syndrome off the list of diseases justifying the exclusion of aliens from the United States (news article, May 28).
The Justice Department, you report, questions Dr.
Sullivan's documentation of his reasons.
Dr.
Sullivan and the Centers for Disease Control provided compelling reasons.


Doctors and Parents Sue Dinkins on Cuts In Health Services
A doctors' union and four parents sued Mayor David N. Dinkins and two New York City Health Department officials yesterday, contending that cuts in the proposed city budget that would eliminate some health services in schools are illegal.
The suit, spearheaded by Doctors Council, a union representing 3,000 doctors in the city, asks the State Supreme Court in Manhattan to prevent city officials from ending a school health program that provides immunizations, medical examinations, vision and hearing screenings and other services to students.
The latest budget plan would eliminate the program at a savings of $7.5 million.


Wha-a-a? A Mere 87 Tons of Ticker Tape?
It was billed as "the mother of all parades." And the organizers had promised that 12 million pounds of confetti, a million yellow ribbons and 6,000 tons of ticker tape would be dropped on the veterans returning from the Persian Gulf war -- more than in any other parade in the city's history.
But after more than 400 parks and sanitation workers had worked throughout the night and all yesterday morning sweeping up the debris in the Canyon of Heroes on lower Broadway, sanitation officials said they had collected but 87 tons of ticker tape.
That would be a fraction of the 1,262 tons reportedly dropped on the hostages returning from Iran in 1981 or the 648 tons said to have rained down on the World Champion Mets in 1986.


Kennard C. Baker, 81; Headed Shoe Company
Kennard C. Baker, retired chairman of Baker-Benjes, a New York shoe importer and distributor, died on May 31 at a convalescent home in Hobe Sound, Fla.
He was 81 years old.
He died of heart failure, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Justice Dept. Suffers by Thornburgh's Periled Run
With Attorney General Dick Thornburgh's plan to resign and run for the Senate from Pennsylvania in doubt as a result of a Federal judge's ruling on Monday, a Justice Department battered by problems in recent years appears to be heading into another period of anxiety about its future.
At least for the moment, Mr.
Thornburgh is a lame-duck Attorney General and political candidate, with all the attending difficulties that can produce in a large bureaucracy.
That includes the erosion of his influence in the Government at a time when important civil rights and criminal justice legislation is awaiting Congressional action.


Baseball; Yanks Rally, But So Do Twins
By the time the game reached the eighth inning tonight, the Yankees had already played out the critical parts as if from a familiar script.
They fell behind.
They came back.
They took the lead.
They turned it over to their bullpen.


Track and Field; Seoul 400-Meter Medalists Reunion
It was a glorious race and one of the finest moments for the United States in the track and field competition of the 1988 Seoul Olympics.
Steve Lewis led an American sweep in the 400-meter final, followed closely by Butch Reynolds, the world-record holder, and Danny Everett.
Then the fates took over, pushing them every which way but together again over the next 33 months, leaving an aesthetic hole in the sport and painful memories for two of them.


Review/Ballet; Showcase for Young Stars
Saturday afternoon's performance of the School of American Ballet Workshop at the Juilliard Theater presented Elizabeth Drucker and Sant'gria Bello as the principals in "Raymonda Variations," while "Gounod Symphony" was led by Brendali StaAnaand Daniel Wilkins.
Mr.
Bello's pure line was perfect for the nobility of the male role, and his partnering in the difficult directional changes of the pas de deux was not only superbly assured but also intensely musical.
He executed a sharp plie to catch Miss Drucker in her forward swoons, and she crossed her wrists as she dipped forward.


Quotation of the Day
"What we're finding out is that there are two recessions. One is the general recession and the other is the real estate recession. We have not yet seen enough recovery in the real estate recession and that has the most important effect on the banks." -- L. William Seidman, the head of the F.D.I.C.  [ D5:1. ]


The Purse and Heart of Baseball
The suspense has broken.
A major league baseball committee recommends that Miami and Denver be awarded National League teams, leaving the four other finalists -- Buffalo, Orlando, Tampa-St.
Petersburg and Washington -- in baseball despair.
The decision was unromantically commercial.
Deep pockets. Deep market.
Those were the commonly heard phrases as baseball lovers (some of them jilted) talked about the decision yesterday.


India Resumes Voting in Delayed Election Today
India goes back to the polls on Wednesday to resume elections that by most accounts will produce a more even distribution of political power than at any time in India's 44 years of independence.
In the rescheduled second day of voting, at least 105 million voters are expected to cast ballots in Bihar, Kerala, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra states.
A third day of elections is scheduled to take place on Saturday, but complete and final results will not be known until Punjab state votes on June 22.
The nation's 10th national election began May 20, with voting spread out over an extended period to allow thousands of security forces and police to move around the country and protect voters and polling booths.


Airbus Payment
Airbus Industrie, the four-nation Europoean aircraft consortium, said it would repay $900 million of the money it borrowed from European governments to build up its business.
The payment would come on top of $500 million that was repaid last year, the company said.
Last week, the United States complained to a committee of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which oversees world trade and resolves disputes, that the subsidies gave Airbus an unfair advantage over the Boeing Company and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the nation's largest aircraft makers.


Review/Pop; James Brown Returns, on Pay-per-View Cable
James Brown can still sing.
Shouting in "I Feel Good," moaning and emoting in "It's a Man's World," supplicating in "Please, Please, Please," grunting in "Get on the Good Foot," screaming in "Living in America," the voice that set off a million dance parties has maintained its old power.
That was the good news on "James Brown: Living in America," Mr.
Brown's first public performance since his release from prison in February.
The concert was on Monday night at the Wiltern Theater in Los Angeles and was telecast as a pay-per-view cable program that cost $19.95.
Viewers had to wait 90 minutes into a two-and-a-half-hour show to see Mr.
Brown and hear funk from its inventor.
The long warm-up was a tribute that trotted out celebrities (Quincy Jones, Denzel Washington, Mario Van Peebles, the disk jockey Frankie Crocker, Dan Aykroyd in "Blues Brothers" get-up) and current hit makers, including M. C. Hammer, Bell Biv Devoe, C. and C. Music Factory, Kool Moe Dee and En Vogue.
The program's executive producers were his wife, Adrienne Brown (billed as Mrs. James Brown), and Butch Lewis; it was produced by Ken Ehrlich and directed by David Grossman.


Any Messages? Now Get Them All
The last decade has seen the spread of many new ways to send messages -- electronic mail, voice mail, facsimile, cellular telephones, paging.
It has never been so easy to stay in touch.
Now the problem is retrieving all those messages.
The manager on the road might have to call one number for voice mail, log on to a computer for electronic mail and call a secretary for faxes.
Otherwise, messages that travel half way around the world in seconds could sit unnoticed in an office for days.


CRACKDOWN AIMED AT DRUG CONCERNS
The Commissioner of Food and Drugs, Dr.
David Kessler, warned today that the agency would prosecute individual doctors as well as companies involved in the use or promotion of unapproved drugs.
This approach would be a reversal of the agency's less strict regulatory policy of the past decade, and is the latest in a series of efforts by the Commissioner to invigorate the Food and Drug Administration.
Dr.
Kessler, who has been Commissioner of Food and Drugs for about six months, said companies and doctors would be pursued "with the full force of the law."


Schoeneman Sold By Bidermann
Bidermann Industries, a unit of Bidermann International of France, sold its J. Schoeneman Inc. men's clothing unit to the Plaid Acquisition Corporation, a subsidiary of Plaid N.V. of the Netherlands.
Terms were not disclosed.
Schoeneman makes men's clothing under the Bill Robinson, Burberry's and Halston labels.
Bidermann had bought Schoeneman and other divisions of Cluett, Peabody &amp; Company in March 1990 from West Point-Pepperell Inc., a textile company, for $350 million and the assumption of a $60 million note.
Bidermann, based in Secaucus, N.J., plans to retain the other Cluett businesses, which include Arrow shirts.


Two Killed in Stolen Truck at Lincoln Tunnel Entrance


Haoui Montaug; Disco Doorman, 39
Haoui Montaug, a well-known New York disco doorman and cabaret producer in the 1970's and 80's, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 39 years old.
He died of AIDS, said a spokeswoman for the New Music Seminar, where he was a panel director.


Washington Talk; Democrats Attack Bush Over 100-Day Deadline
Short of a legislative miracle, Congress will not pass transportation and crime bills by Friday.
And no one seems more gleeful at the prospect that the lawmakers will not meet President Bush's personal challenge to act on his two most pressing domestic priorities in 100 days than the President himself.
Mr.
Bush has scheduled a nationwide address from the White House grounds Wednesday night to chastise Congress for inaction.
In case people do not see that or do not get the message, he plans to repeat it Friday at a commencement address at the California Institute of Technology.


Beirut Journal; Under the Cedars of Lebanon, Violence Is Buried
Two clans, one Christian, the other Muslim, met recently in the shade of the cedar trees that stand as the symbol of a united Lebanon, and put an end to their 30-year blood feud.
Down below in the Bekaa region, school buses carried Christian pupils to the Roman ruins at Baalbek, long a Shiite Muslim center.
Teen-age boys and girls in shorts and light shirts were a startling sight for the bearded clerics and local women covered head to toe in black chadors.


The Specialness of a Special Manzanilla
Jose Luis Relinque slowly savored each syllable, "syb-a-rit-ic," as if the word were composed not of letters but of prawns freshly caught in the Bay of Cadiz and steamed.
He was speaking about the pale, nutty sherry in his glass -- "the freshest I ever tasted in the United States."
Mr.
Relinque was praising La Gitana Guadalquivir Especial, a bone dry manzanilla (man-than-EE-ya) from Sanlucar de Barrameda.
It was born for seafood, and he serves it at Iberia, his Spanish restaurant in Portola Valley, south of San Francisco.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the future of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People misstated the background of its general counsel, Dennis C. Hayes.
He was a lawyer in private practice before joining the N.A.A.C.P.; he was not on the staff of the American Civil Liberties Union.


Yeltsin Vies With 5 Today in Vote to Head Russia
After a brief but boisterous campaign, Boris N. Yeltsin faces five challengers on Wednesday in the Russian republic's first election for a new executive presidency.
There is little doubt on the eve of the election that the bulk of the votes will go to Mr.
Yeltsin, the popular chairman of the Russian Parliament who has emerged as the champion of radical reform and decentralization and as the prime political rival to the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The nation's senior auditor predicted that the banking industry may be headed for a large taxpayer bailout, and based on the past assessments of the Comptroller General, Charles A. Bowsher, there is good reason to believe him.  [ Page D1. ]


Laundering Bill Approved
The House voted today to crack down on banks that launder an estimated $100 billion in drug money each year by allowing regulators to lift their charters or revoke their Federal deposit insurance.
On a 406-to-0 vote, the House approved a bill that would also permanently ban bank officers convicted of money laundering schemes from working for a financial institution.


Francis Lonergan; Friar, 53
Brother Francis Lonergan, who was associate director of the Capuchin Mission Association, died on Monday at St.
John Friary in Manhattan, where he lived.
He was 53 years old.
The cause of death had not been determined yesterday.


Visa Planning Debit Service
Visa U.S.A., the largest issuer of credit cards, will start the first national on-line debit card program by the end of the year.
Under the system, customers would place their debit cards in machines at stores, enter personal identification numbers, and the amounts of purchases would be immediately deducted from customers' bank accounts and credited to the merchants' accounts.


Monroe Donsker, 66, N.Y.U. Math Professor
Monroe D. Donsker, a professor of mathematics at New York University, died on Saturday at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 66 years old and lived in Fort Lee.
N.J.
He died of cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


When the Medium Is Mashed Potatoes, Is the Message About Eating? Or Art?
IT is one of those conundrums that have stumped courts, perplexed museums and preoccupied publishing houses:
What is art?


Sports of The Times; The Perils Of Pauline, N.B.A. Style
MAYBE they should just cancel Game 5 of the National Basketball Association final playoff series tonight, mused a Laker fan, and run an old movie.
This seems a not unreasonable solution for many here who have a deep and abiding affection for their purple-and-gold-clad warriors, and would like to see them out of their misery.
It is also the appropriate locale for such a heartfelt alternative to the frayed Tinseltown Five, down 3 games to 1 to the Chicago Bulls and scheduled to meet them in what a growing number view as the fifth and final game of their four-of-seven-game series.


Baker Honored at Princeton
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, the film director Martin Scorsese and Neil Rudenstine, president-elect of Harvard University, were among nine people who received honorary degrees at Princeton University's commencement today.
Mr.
Baker, a graduate of Princeton, was honored for personifying "that familiar phrase, 'Princeton in the nation's service' "; Mr.
Scorsese for being an "interior mentor" to filmmakers who "inspires their sense of integrity and fearless artistic vocation" and Mr.
Rudenstine for being "an academic administrator sensitive to the human nature of a university."


U.S. Bailout For Banks Predicted
The nation's senior auditor said today that the banking industry might be headed for a large taxpayer bailout.
Some members of Congress and analysts of the nation's commercial and savings bank industry have made such warnings before.
But the prediction by the Comptroller General, Charles A. Bowsher, is significant because he is widely considered the most credible impartial voice in Government.
His early assessments of the problems of savings and loan institutions and later of the huge costs in that bailout have proved prophetic.


MTV's 10th-Birthday Show To Be Broadcast on ABC
MTV will celebrate its 10th birthday with an hourlong television special this fall -- on ABC .
The deal, which was announced yesterday by MTV, continues the cable network's growing alliance with ABC, and the special will be the third cooperative arrangement between MTV programmers and ABC.
MTV made a comedy pilot for the broadcast network this spring and it plans to produce a summer situation comedy for it, to be produced by MTV's sister channel Nick at Nite.


Duva Wins Rights to Bout
Dan Duva, the promoter of Evander Holyfield, yesterday won the International Boxing Federation purse bid for the Holyfield-Mike Tyson heavyweight title fight with an offer of $50,101,000.
By that sum Duva secured the right to stage a Holyfield-Tyson match, but it remains to be seen whether Holyfield and Tyson will fight under the I.B.F.'s aegis, or at all.


Old Dogs Are Better Dogs
American industry has long operated on the theory that the sooner aging workers are put out to pasture the better.
Early retirement is considered not only humane but smart.
It makes room for new people with new ideas.
And, as everyone supposedly knows, older workers have trouble handling new technology, are not as efficient as younger ones and are inclined to balk at taking inconvenient assignments.
Now a study just published by the Commonwealth Fund demolishes that old saw "you can't teach an old dog new tricks." The fund analyzed three companies, two in the U.S. and one in Britain, that deliberately sought out workers over age 50.
The results were myth-breakers.
Older workers did fine on computers, rarely balked at assignments and stuck with the companies far longer than the younger workers.


Eritreans Want Independence From Ethiopia
To the Editor:
"U.S. Plans to Be 'Midwife' to a New Rule in Ethiopia" (news article, May 26) states that "members of the Eritrean front do not even like to think of themselves as Ethiopians." They don't think of themselves as Ethiopians because they are not Ethiopians.
Eritreans did not expect their country to be subsumed under Ethiopia through a federation agreement arranged by the United Nations in 1952.
Ethiopia annexed Eritrea in 1962, canceling the agreement.


Ruth Hornby Page; Educator, 80
Ruth Hornby Page, an educator and former executive director of the New Jersey School Boards Association, died on Sunday at Jupiter (Fla.) Hospital.
She was 80 years old and lived in Tequesta, Fla.
She died of complications from heart surgery, said her grandson, Christopher Drew.


Personal Health
ENVIRONMENTALISTS have long warned that industrial and agricultural pollutants in our lakes, rivers, streams and seas are finding their way into seafood.
Now as fish begins to replace steak as the symbol of American affluence and nutritional savvy, consumers and public health officials are worrying as well about toxic chemicals despoiling this otherwise healthful food.
Thus far, more attention has been paid to parasitic infections that can result from eating raw fish.
But while harmful organisms can be avoided by fully cooking fish, potentially dangerous pollutants in aquatic animals are not removed by ordinary culinary techniques.
Neither does cooking remove the natural toxins that can contaminate certain fish.
The Problem
For more than a century, our waterways have been dumping grounds for all kinds of industrial and agricultural waste, runoff and seepage.
The devastating reproductive damage done by DDT to fish-eating birds and evidence of possible cancer-causing potential led to a ban in 1972; since then other pesticides chemically related to DDT have also been banned.


Just Part of the Pack For Strange This Time
For two consecutive years Curtis Strange came to the toughest tournament in the world as the defending champion and the focus of attention.
This year he comes to the United States Open as a 36-year-old touring pro groping to find his game, in part by drawing on past glories.
"I would like to do well, but I don't know if I expect to do well," said Strange, who hasn't won a tournament since he captured his second straight United States Open in 1989.
"I don't want to put my foot in my mouth, but if I'm on, I have the kind of game that can do well at a United States Open. It's the biggest golf tournament in the world for me."


CHRONICLE
A number of names in the news, past and present, are hosts of the Washington premiere tomorrow night of "Without Warning: The James Brady Story." They are current and former Presidential press secretaries: MARLIN FITZWATER (Bush), LARRY SPEAKES (Reagan), JODY POWELL (Carter), GERALD TER HORST and RON NESSEN (Ford) and RON ZIEGLER (Nixon).
About 500 people are expected at the National Press Club to see the film, the biography of JAMES S. BRADY, the Reagan press secretary, who was paralyzed by a bullet fired on March 30, 1981, that was meant for President Reagan.


France's BDDP Cements Alliance With Wells, Rich
WELLS, RICH, GREENE Inc. and BDDP Worldwide, the French-based advertising agency group, declared yesterday that they had enjoyed their honeymoon so much they decided to get married.
At a Manhattan news conference, the top executives of the firms announced a formal and financial agreement stemming from the alliance they forged in April 1990.
BDDP has increased its ownership stake in Wells, Rich to around 70 percent from 40 percent.
And Wells, Rich's senior managers obtained what is being termed a "meaningful" ownership share of BDDP, in addition to the 30 percent of their operation they will own.


Senate Leaders Changing Road Bill
As the Senate opened debate today on a major highway and mass transportation bill, proponents scrambled to alter the package to win support from several Senators who have attacked it as cheating their states.
The measure would provide for $105 billion in highway and mass transit programs in the next five years.
But Senators from several states have called for changing a decades-old formula under which about 20 states pay more money into the Highway Trust Fund through Federal gasoline taxes than they get back in payments for highway projects.


Review/Ballet; Student Workshop Program With Challenges and Spirit
The School of American Ballet's annual workshop programs help students make the transition from studio to stage.
The young dancers are challenged.
And audiences are rewarded with spirited performances.
This spring's offerings were shown twice over the weekend at the Juilliard Theater and concluded festively on Monday night when Peter Martins, the faculty chairman, announced winners of the annual Mae L. Wien Awards.
Elise Reiman, a teacher at the school since 1945, received the faculty award for distinguished service.
Two dancers, Megan Bonneau and Sant'gria Bello were honored for their promise, and Robert La Fosse won the Young Choreographer Award.


Food Notes
Guinness for Bloomsday
Sunday is Father's Day.
It's also Bloomsday.
June 16, 1904, was the day in the lives of Leopold and Molly Bloom, Dubliners, that was recounted by James Joyce in "Ulysses." Nowadays the date is usually celebrated with marathon readings of Joyce's works; sometimes that monumental novel is read in its entirety.
The Guinness flows like water.


Subpoena Sought for Boa Constrictor
The lawyer for a Taiwanese immigrant accused of taking part in the murders of three Vietnamese youths asked a Manhattan judge yesterday to subpoena a boa constrictor into court on the ground that the police had used the snake as an "instrument of terror" to coerce a confession from his client.
"Imagine the fear he felt," the lawyer, Paul Ascher, said as he tried to persuade Justice Richard T. Andrias of State Supreme Court to order that the seven-foot snake be brought into court.
The lawyer said he wanted the judge to experience the "terror of the snake" and thus hand down a ruling that his client's admissions to the police were involuntary and could not be used as evidence against him.  'Zoological Showcase'
Mr.
Ascher said there was a strong legal precedent to call the boa as a witness: a 1908 ruling by a New York State appeals court that overturned a decision in which a judge refused to allow into court a horse that was at issue in the case.


2 Giving Up Council Seats In New York
Two members of the New York City Council, including a powerful ally of Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, are planning to run for judgeships in the fall instead of seeking re-election, at a time when the Speaker could face a growing challenge to his power base.
Councilman Jerry L. Crispino of the Bronx, who was pitted against another incumbent in the recent redrawing of Council districts, said yesterday that he would seek a Bronx Civil Court seat.


Coastal to Buy Oil From Iran
The Coastal Corporation received approval from the Treasury Department to buy 2.5 million barrels of crude oil from Iran.
The company said it would deposit the purchase price into a special account set up by Iran to settle claims against the country stemming from the 1979 hostage crisis.
Last year, the Bush Administration eased trade restrictions on Iran imposed in 1987 in response to its attacks on Persian Gulf shipping.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 12


Shuttle Crew Relaxes After 6 Days in Orbit
The astronauts aboard the space shuttle Columbia took some time off today to relax and gaze at the world 174 miles below them.
"Enjoy," Mission Control told the seven-member crew as the space shuttle flew over the Pacific Ocean toward the Southern California coast at the start of its seventh day of a biomedical research mission.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Computer Sciences Corp., El Segundo, Calif., signed a $149 million contract with the New York State Department of Social Services to act as agent for its Medicaid program. *
Henley Group, Hampton, N.H., a maker of medical products, said no offers had been made for the company as a whole, but that talks were under way to sell various operations.


Man Is Indicted In Contributions To D'Amato Bid
A prominent Puerto Rican businessman was indicted today on charges of falsifying the source of $32,000 in campaign contributions to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato between 1986 and 1988, the Justice Department said.
The businessman, Eduardo Lopez Ballori, was accused of causing Mr.
D'Amato's campaign to file false campaign reports that said the contributions had come from 17 people, when the funds were actually given by Mr.
Lopez Ballori himself, according to the indictment returned by a Federal grand jury in Brooklyn.


Lawsuit Blames Guards In Meadowlands Death
The investigation into Adam Katz's death during a Grateful Dead concert at the Meadowlands Sports Complex in October 1989 has drifted along without resolution, left in limbo by one coroner's finding of murder and another's conflicting theory that Mr.
Katz died accidentally.
This week, his parents filed a lawsuit saying that four security guards chased Mr.
Katz, a 19-year-old college sophomore from South Orange, and beat him, fracturing his skull.
It says the guards then took his body by van from the parking lot at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena to adjacent Route 120 and left it in the roadway.


U.S. Posts a Trade Surplus From Gulf War Payments
The United States had a foreign trade surplus of $10.2 billion in the first three months of this year, the first quarterly surplus in almost nine years, the Government said today.
The Commerce Department attributed the surplus in the broadest measure of foreign trade, called the current account, to $22.7 billion in cash received during the first quarter from Saudi Arabia, Japan and other countries to help pay the costs of the Persian Gulf war.


Cuomo Again Vetoes Bill for Death Penalty
For the ninth consecutive year, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo vetoed legislation today that would have restored New York's death penalty.
A legislative override is considered unlikely.
The bill's chief sponsor in the Democratic-controlled Assembly said he did not believe he could muster the two-thirds vote needed.


Goodyear to Trim 600 Workers
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, which is working to overcome low demand and intense price competition, said yesterday that it would lay off up to 600 workers at two American plants and one in Canada.
The company said the layoffs were planned before the election last week of Stanley C. Gault as the new chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Gault, who replaced Tom H. Barrett, who resigned after two years as chairman, has said he plans to cut costs.


U.S. Companies in Japan Say Things Aren't So Bad
American companies operating in Japan say they face far fewer trade restrictions than in previous years, a long-awaited American-sponsored study released today concludes.
Surprisingly, it also says that they often benefit from Japan's much-criticized practice of organizing companies in tightly linked exclusive groups.
Many companies also enjoy far more lucrative returns here than at home, although it may take years to reach that level of performance.


Yields 5.6%-7.119% On Chicago Issue
A $200 million financing by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago was initially priced yesterday to yield a maximum of 7.119 percent for an issue due in 2011, through First Chicago Capital Markets.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities were priced to yield from 5.6 percent in 1994 to 6 percent in 1996, 6.65 percent in 2002, and 7 percent in 2008.
The bonds, which are indentified as general obligation debt, are noncallable and carry no credit enhancement.
Moody's Investors Service rated the issue Aa and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation rated it AA.


'I Hate Hamlet' to Close
"I Hate Hamlet," a comedy by Paul Rudnick, will close after the evening performance on June 22 at the Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street.
The play, directed by Michael Engler and starring Nicol Williamson and Celeste Holm, will have run for 80 regular performances and 24 previews.


Eritreans Want Independence From Ethiopia; U.S. Must Mediate
To the Editor:
"Good Deeds in Ethiopia, Punished" (editorial, June 1) concludes that "all that Washington can do is to press for reconciliation and a measure of democratic tolerance." This would have been adequate if a democratic tradition had existed in Ethiopia.
What most Ethiopians have known are feudalism and despotism.


Panel Says Much Research Is Needed Now to Reach Mars by 2014
A Federal study group today proposed an ambitious strategy for achieving President Bush's goal of sending humans back to the Moon and on to Mars, but the panel gave no cost estimate for the venture at a time when the space program is fighting to finance its current projects.
The plan for carrying out the President's proposed Space Exploration Initiative calls for Americans to return to the Moon by 2005 and for the first human explorers to reach Mars by 2014.


Electronic Data Bids for SD-Scicon
Electronic Data Systems Inc., a unit of the General Motors Corporation, offered $194 million for SD-Scicon, one of Britain's largest computer software companies.
The bid exceeded an offer of $185 million made by Cray Electronics Holdings on May 24.
Cray Electronics is a British telecomunications company that is not connected with the Cray Computer Corporation in the United States.
SD-Scicon rejected both bids as too low.
But British Aerospace P.L.C., which owns 25 percent of SD-Scicon, accepted Cray's offer to pay an undisclosed amount of cash for its shares.
SD-Scicon became vulnerable to a takeover when it posted a $33.4 million loss last year because of cost overruns on fixed-price contracts.


Staley Develops Starch Substitute for Fat
The pursuit of guilt-free food continues.
The A. E. Staley Manufacturing Company said yesterday that it had developed a low-calorie fat replacement made from corn starch that was smoother, less likely to curdle and better tasting than products currently on the market.
Called Stellar, it has slightly more than 10 percent of the calories of fat, or about one calorie a gram, compared with nine for fat.
It is made from corn starch and whipped into the consistency of cream through a process called shearing.


Sports People: Pro Basketball; Brown Will Discuss Job
Although he has two years remaining on his $3.5 million contract with the San Antonio Spurs, Coach LARRY BROWN has obtained permission from RED McCOMBS, the owner, to talk with officials of the University of South Carolina about the head coaching vacancy.
"They obviously want to talk to me, and I want to get this over with in the next day or two," Brown said at an impromptu news conference late yesterday outside his home in San Antonio.
"I will go and meet with them in the next day or two."
Brown has changed jobs several times, but he says he is not dissatisfied with the Spurs.
The reason he is particularly interested in the South Carolina vacancy is that his two daughters live in Charlotte, N.C., about an hour's drive from Columbia, S.C.
"I want to be close to the kids," he said. (AP)


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:  It is a hot, humid lunch hour, and as I leave my midtown office building I spot a group of Japanese tourists gathered in front of a deli.
There are eight of them plus a leader who, with great verve, is directing their attention to an outdoor display of apples.
Although I am unable to understand precisely what it is he is saying, I gather from his enthusiastic gestures that it is something like: "Look! Look! Apples!"
His followers are soon into the spirit of things.
Each one chooses an apple, then politely queues up at the cashier's counter.
Back outside the deli, they stand in a circle, each holding their apple in admiration.
They watch, open-mouthed, as their leader puts his fruit to his lips.
Eyes closed, he bites in and a smile of contentment spreads across his face.
They all bite in.
They all smile.
They are eating an apple in the Big Apple!
What could be a better tourist experience? They had indeed arrived in New York.


Newell Cuts Plan For Stanley Stock
The Newell Company, a maker of hardware and industrial products based in Freeport, Ill., said it was reducing the number of common shares of Stanley Works it was seeking to buy from 15 percent to less than 1 percent.
Stanley Works had about 41 million common shares outstanding at the end of the first quarter.
Newell, in amending its application to buy the shares under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act, said its new plan called for the purchase of more than $15 million worth of the common shares of Stanley Works, a maker of hand tools in New Britain, Conn.
Last week, Stanley sued seeking to block the purchase under antitrust laws.
Stanley's stock fell $1.375 a share today, to $39, on the New York Stock Exchange, while Newell's rose 50 cents, to $33.625.


A Road Linking Addis Ababa To the Red Sea Is Reopened
Forty trucks carrying fuel, relief supplies and fertilizer from the Red Sea port of Assab headed toward Ethiopia's capital today after a vital road linking the city with the coast was reopened.
The port, 400 miles northeast of the capital, Addis Ababa, is crucial to the delivery of relief supplies for many of the nation's estimated 7.3 million drought victims.
It also handles most of the nation's imports and exports and is home to Ethiopia's sole oil refinery.
United Nations officials have said that 40,000 tons of drought-relief supplies are backlogged in Assab.


Black-Migration Study Wins Journalism Award
Nicholas Lemann, the author of "The Promised Land: The Great Black Migration and How It Changed America," is the recipient of the Helen B. Bernstein Award for Excellence in Journalism, which is given annually by the New York Public Library.
The award, which carries a $15,000 prize, is given annually for the best book that highlights a pressing social and political problem and stems from articles that originally appeared in newspapers or magazines.
Mr.
Lemann's book was based on a series of articles in The Atlantic, for which he is a national correspondent, and was published by Alfred A. Knopf.
It explores the impact of the migration of five million blacks from the Deep South to large northern cities from the 1940's through the 1960's.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Great Western Bank is offering $150 million in 9 7/8 percent subordinated notes, due in 2001, at 99.654 to yield 9.93 percent through First Boston.
The notes, which are noncallable, are rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service inc. and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


American Indians, in Libya, Receive Prize From Qaddafi
American Indians have traveled to Libya in defiance of United States restrictions to pick up a $250,000 prize from Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi to honor their "struggle for freedom."
Colonel Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, did not attend the ceremony, on Monday night, which was used to criticize the "imperialist policies" of the United States, Israel and the West.


Baseball; Ryan Revives Sagging Rangers
Nolan Ryan pitched a six-hitter and struck out 10 for his 61st career shutout as the Texas Rangers beat the Chicago White Sox, 2-0, and stopped a losing streak at eight games.
It was the first complete game by a Texas pitcher since Ryan's no-hitter over Toronto on May 1.


Budget Veto Will Stand Until After Borrowing
New York's legislative leaders assured Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today that they would not try to override the Governor's budget vetoes before the state completes an extensive borrowing to make state aid payments to local governments and school boards.
But the chance of an override at any point diminished significantly today when members of the Assembly's Republican minority agreed in a meeting that they would not vote to override the Governor's vetoes.
At least five members of the Assembly minority, which voted unanimously against the $51.9 billion budget to begin with, would have to join the 95 Democrats to provide the two-thirds vote needed in the 150-member Assembly for an override.


People
*
Spencer Plavoukos has been appointed to the new position of president of Lintas Worldwide, New York.
Tony Miller will assume his position as chairman and chief executive of Lintas New York.
Succeeding Mr.
Miller, as president and chief executive of MacLaren Lintas, Toronto, is its chief operating officer, Martin J. Rothstein. *
Rick Plata has been promoted to senior vice president and director of business development at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, New York, where he had been senior vice president and media director.
Also, Matt Smith and Galen Greenwood have joined the office as senior vice presidents and associate creative directors; John J. Heins has been named new business account manager, and Jonathan Mandell has transferred from Hill, Holliday's Los Angeles office, where he was vice president and associate creative director, to New York, where he has been promoted to senior vice president.


Bridge
For bridge experts who are also students, this has always been a tricky question: Is it possible to study effectively and play serious bridge without either activity interfering with the other?
For some the answer is negative, but for one player this year the answer has been decidedly positive.
Alex Ornstein of Roslyn, L.I., satisfactorily completed his first year at Hofstra University Law School by cutting his bridge activity to a minimum.
But the little bridge he did play was most rewarding.


No Galley Can Make a True Salt Shake
THE prospect of cooking at sea can be daunting: a heeling sailboat, dishes sliding, wine spilling.
A mess of extraordinary dimensions.
But for those who have mastered preparing food sur mer, the results can resemble a nautical Norman Rockwell painting, with delectable dishes on a perfectly dressed table and tantalizing scents wafting on a quiet ocean breeze.


Who Runs Hong Kong for Now? British Firm
Britain has been widely criticized for bowing to Chinese pressure in recent years, but now it seems to have put its foot down in what has turned into a battle over who will actually run this territory in the next six years.
The Hong Kong government's plan for a $16.2 billion airport and port complex was conceived two years ago as a brave effort to restore optimism in this confidence-shaken territory.
But the project has been crippled by objections from Beijing, threatening the chances that it will even get off the ground before 1997, when the British turn over Hong Kong to Chinese rule.


Court Allows Investor's Suit
Investors who accuse a corporation's officers or primary stockholders of profiting from insider information do not lose the right to sue when the corporation merges with another, the Supreme Court has ruled.
The Court on Monday unanimously upheld the right of Ira Mendell, a former investor in Viacom International Inc., to sue.
Mr.
Mendell accused a group of Viacom stockholders of using insider information to make $11 million in profits in 1986.
He sued the group in Federal District Court in Manhattan in 1987.


Lindsay to Leave Post At Lincoln Center After 37 Productions
John V. Lindsay, who played a major role in bringing Lincoln Center Theater back from the dead, is to retire in November as chairman of the nonprofit theater company.
Linda LeRoy Janklow, a vice chairman, is to replace him.
Mr.
Lindsay, Mayor of New York City from 1966-73, took over as chairman of the theater in 1984.
He is to retire on Nov. 24, his 70th birthday.


Man Charged in Death Of a Car Dispatcher
A 27-year-old Queens man was arrested yesterday and charged with killing a car dispatcher in Brooklyn on Saturday night, the police said.
The suspect, Edward Nieves, of 849 Flushing Avenue, was arrested at 5 P.M. at the 90th Precinct, where he was being questioned, said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman.


Wheat Prices Up Sharply; U.S. Says Crop Will Be Off
Wheat futures prices rose strongly yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade in advance of a Government report that confirmed perceptions of a shrinking United States winter wheat crop.
On other commodity markets, grain and soybean futures were mixed; precious metals retreated; copper rose, and livestock and meat futures were mostly lower.


Amex Plans To Add Hour Of Trading
The American Stock Exchange announced yesterday that it planned to extend its trading time for stocks by one hour, allowing investors to buy or sell a security at its closing price from the regular session.
The announcement came just two days before the start of the New York Stock Exchange's move to expand trading hours, a first significant step in a plan to develop 24-hour trading by the year 2000.


INSIDE
fficial Gloom on Banks
The Government's senior auditor said the nation's banking industry might be headed toward a big bailout paid for by taxpayers.
Page D1.


Once-Leafy Land Is Now Haitian Dust Bowl
In the dust bowl valleys and rocky hills of northwestern Haiti, generations of environmental destruction have turned a land once prized by the Conquistadors for its mahogany-rich forests into a cactus wasteland whose dry climate and desperate living conditions resemble the poorest of sub-Saharan Africa more than any Caribbean island.
Here in the hunger belt of the hemisphere's poorest country, what few trees remain are being harvested to make charcoal, the domestic fuel of choice in Haiti but a product that few in this region can afford.


Moet Will Buy Guinness Shares
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the French luxury goods maker, will buy up to 23.4 million shares of Guinness P.L.C., the British brewer, at up to $:10 each, or about $16.60 each for a total of up to $390 million.
The French company, which said it was seeking to raise its Guinness holdings to the 24 percent level permitted under the companies' cross-holding arrangements, said S. G. Warburg Securities would acquire the shares by June 21.
LVMH already owns 23.4 percent of Guinness, and the British concern owns 24 percent of LVMH under the agreement.
The shares of Guinness, which said it welcomed the purchase, jumped 30 pence each on the London Stock Exchange today, to 696 pence, or about $11.55 a share.


Bills Will Come Faster With New Envelope Stuffers
When people in the mail packaging industry spoke of pushing the envelope, they were often referring to their goal of designing a machine that could stuff more than 10,000 envelopes an hour.
Now the Phillipsburg Company, division of Bell &amp; Howell, has cracked this barrier with a machine that will stuff 18,000 envelopes an hour.
The speed of older systems was limited not by equipment for folding and stuffing, but by the mechanics of grabbing individual sheets of paper.
Most systems depend on a mechanical arm that shuttles back and forth to place the sheets on a conveyor belt.


UPRISING BY ARABS LOSING MOMENTUM
After three and a half years, the uprising in the occupied territories appears moribund, no longer able to rouse the Palestinian people or to influence outside opinion, Palestinians are beginning to admit.
And more than before, out of anger and frustration, the Palestinians are now turning the violence against themselves.
That is splitting Palestinians and forcing their leaders to face up to the state of their revolt.


ROBB-WILDER FEUD TAKES A NEW TURN
Saying that "decisive steps are required," Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia put three top aides on leave today pending resolution of his feud with Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder over telephone eavesdropping.
The Democratic lawmaker, in a statement released tonight by his office, identified the aides as David K. McCloud, his administrative assistant; Steven D. Johnson, his press secretary, and Robert Watson, political director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, which Mr.
Robb heads.


Mets and Viola Prevail Over Braves


When Schools Compete -- A Special Report; The Rules of the Marketplace Are Applied to the Classroom
In New York City's East Harlem school district, students can choose among 24 junior high schools offering specialties from maritime skills to performing arts.
The choices have helped send test scores, teacher morale and parent involvement soaring.
In Milwaukee, children can use tax dollars to pay private school tuition.
But unlike public schools, private schools can abruptly go out of business.
And one in Milwaukee did, leaving 63 students who "chose" it stranded in the middle of the school year.


Panel Gets Complaint On Kennedy's Ethics
A conservative political group filed an ethics complaint today against Senator Edward M. Kennedy, alleging that his conduct in the rape case against his nephew violated Senate rules.
The complaint, filed with the Senate Ethics Committee by the Conservative Campaign Fund, a group that has about 15,000 members nationwide, asserted that Senator Kennedy had failed to assist the complainant, even though she said she screamed as she was raped by the Senator's nephew, William K. Smith, on the grounds of the Kennedy estate in Palm Beach, Fla., on March 30.
Mr.
Kennedy, a Massachusetts Democrat, has said he heard no screams that night.
Mr.
Smith has pleaded not guilty in the case.


CHRONICLE
A.
M.
ROSENTHAL is to receive the Human Rights in Media award from the International League for Human Rights tonight at a dinner at the Whitney Museum in Manhattan.
The award will be presented by JEROME J. SHESTACK, the league's chairman.
A columnist for The New York Times and its former executive editor, Mr.
Rosenthal has written many articles on human rights abuses in Tibet, China, the Middle East, Poland and the Soviet Union.
He was among the first foreigners to visit a Soviet prison camp in 1988.


Return Tompkins Sq. Park to Those Who Live in Neighborhood; History of Unrest
To the Editor:
As I found in research for my book "The New Bohemia," published in 1966, Tompkins Square Park was from the first a scene of civil unrest.
Three hundred years ago, the East Village was Peter Stuyvesant's bouwerie, or farm.
According to one source, his original home stood on what is now the south side of East 10th Street, 200 feet west of Second Avenue.
Tompkins Square Park was part of a salt marsh, originally known as Stuyvesant Swamp, which extended to the East River.


Senators' Effort On Gun Control Includes N.R.A.
Supporters of a Senate anti-crime bill are negotiating with the National Rifle Association before taking to the floor a package that incorporates a seven-day waiting period for handgun purchases.
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, and supporters of his proposal for a waiting period are searching for the votes needed to retain the item as part of a crime law overhaul that would also ban the manufacture of certain semiautomatic weapons.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE all-American turkey is most often thought of in the fall around holiday time, but it makes a fine centerpiece for summer meals as well, especially for barbecues.
Turkey meat has been cooked over flames as far back as the Aztecs and the Indians of the Southwest, who domesticated the bird as a dietary staple.
Farther east, they were part of the diet of the Plains Indians and tribes throughout New England.
So I felt a strong link with North American history when I fired up my barbecue grill and cooked turkey breast steaks for dinner.
Turkey can be found in supermarkets year round, and the boneless steaks are ideally suited to quick cooking.


Foreign Affairs; Memo For Mr. Bush
Many who support you and wish you well are trying to tell you something that goes to the heart of your speech this evening on domestic affairs.
Here is their message:
1.
Our nation is falling apart, even if we pull out of the current recession and even if the Dow Jones average continues to hover around 3,000.


Real Estate; New Offices Going Up in Santa Monica
THIS affluent coastal city, long viewed as hostile to growth, has become the most active construction area in the West Los Angeles area, almost in spite of itself.
Nearly a million square feet of office space is rising in three projects, with 1.25 million square feet to follow as the market allows.


Seeing Beyond Burgers and Soapsuds
FOR some, an entry level job in a restaurant may only mean serving fast food or washing dishes.
For others, it may be the beginning of a lucrative and challenging career.
But now a number of professionals in the food service industry are devising training programs for those who might otherwise have no prospects beyond the burgers and dirty dishes, enabling them to rise through the ranks in the food business.


Another Exit Set at U.N.L.V.
Four days after Coach Jerry Tarkanian announced that he would leave Nevada-Las Vegas, another key figure in the N.C.A.A. investigation into the university's basketball program said he planned to leave before the next season.
"I don't plan on being here a whole lot longer," said Mark Warkentien, who was an assistant coach under Tarkanian from 1980 to 1987.
"It's no secret that I'm talking with people in the Las Vegas community and outside of it about other career paths.


After Boom and Bust, Denver Enters Big Leagues
While difficult for some to fathom, the organized play of costumed young men, who spit tobacco and scratch where it itches, adds a cosmopolitan flair to any American metropolis.
Major-league baseball will soon confer that distinction upon Denver.
But even before the news on Monday that baseball will come to Denver as soon as the team owners take a formal vote, this old city at the edge of the Rocky Mountains was poised for a civic transformation.
After going from cowtown to boomtown to bust, Denver is ready to come of age as a diverse, all-purpose city, with all the virtues and vices of urban America.


Wine Makers Mix Leisure and Lobbying
Several dozen California wine makers in the capital this week got a chance to familiarize themselves with foreign policy and domestic issues and to approach Congress with a little soft-sell lobbying.
"It's vitally important to us as an industry to be informed about events around the world," said John De Luca, president of the San Francisco-based Wine Institute , a trade association for the California wine industry that planned the three-day program of luncheons, dinners, receptions andn Capitol Hill seminars.
"But certainly, we take the opportunity to discuss issues that are of concern to us -- questions of advertising, labeling, taxes."


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about product expansion at the Polaroid Corporation misstated the company's involvement in the floppy disk business.
Though Polaroid has scaled back its investment in the disks, it still sells them.


In the Nation; An Unwinnable War
The Persian Gulf war evoked many echoes of Vietnam; and the quick and overwhelming victory in the desert awakened many of the old charges -- in Vietnam the U.S. sold out a loyal ally, failed to use sufficient force, but still lost the war only for lack of support at home.
One of the most important contributions of the memoirs of Clark Clifford, just published by Random House as "Counsel to the President," is to demolish these arguments with the authority of an extraordinary public man who played a vital role in most of the Vietnam era.


Man in the News: H. Carl McCall; A Grass-Roots Minister of Education
H.
Carl McCall, Mayor David N. Dinkins's candidate for president of the Board of Education, once taught for six months in a Boston high school, and the experience, he said, soured him on a career in teaching.
Even his hiring, he recalls, was disillusioning.
A recruitment official took one look at his tall frame, and without checking his credentials, said: "You're just what we need at Jamaica Plain High School. You're big and you can keep order."


Marion J. Wise Jr.; Investment Adviser, 82
Marion J. Wise Jr., an investment adviser, died on Friday at the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, a family spokesman said.


Book Notes
Hearst Book for U.S.S.R.
William Randolph Hearst and his newspapers were such implacable critics of Communism that it sounds odd for a Soviet publishing house to have bought rights to the book "The Hearsts: Father and Son," by William Randolph Hearst Jr. with Jack Casserly.
Another oddity: "The Hearsts" will be published in this country by Roberts Rinehart Publishers of Niwot, Colo., rather than by William Morrow or Avon Books, which are Hearst owned.


Basketball; A Flower Child Turns On the Bulls
Much has changed in the life of Phil Jackson since he arrived in New York as the Knicks' 1967 second-round draft choice from the University of North Dakota with degrees in religion, philosophy and psychology.
His hair is shorter now, and flecked with gray.
The beard is gone.
He is no longer a vegetarian.
The player Earl Monroe once called "a flower child," has traded his maverick ways for conservative business suits and a home in the Chicago suburbs where he lives with his wife, June, and five children -- three girls and twin boys.


Dr. Irvine H. Page Is Dead at 90; Pioneered Hypertension Research
Dr.
Irvine H. Page, a physician whose research helped shape the modern understanding and treatment of high blood pressure and heart attacks, died on Monday at his home in Hyannis Port, Mass.
He was 90 years old.
Dr.
Page died of a heart attack, said a spokesman for the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, where he directed research for 21 years.
He had been in failing health for many years after a stroke and his first heart attack in 1967.


School Medication Trial Starts
Jury selection began today in a lawsuit filed by parents who refused to medicate their young son to control his hyperactivity in school.
The parents, Michael and Valerie Jesson, contend the Derry School District violated the constitutional rights of their son, Casey, when it said he would have to take Ritalin or an alternative drug or be isolated from other students.


Rikers Officer Held in Theft of $500,000 in Bail Funds
A correction officer at Rikers Island was charged yesterday with stealing $500,000 in payments that friends and relatives of inmates had made to bail them out of jail.
The theft was discovered during an audit of accounts in which bail money was deposited and then disbursed to those owed bail refunds, said Peter Benjaminson, a spokesman for the New York City Commissioner of Investigation, Susan E. Shepard.





Police Officer Kills Man Holding A Hostage in a Robbery Attempt
A police captain killed a man yesterday, firing six bullets into his head, during an attempted robbery in Manhattan in which the man held a knife to a woman's throat and doused her with a flammable liquid, the police said.
The captain, Charles Wells, was one of several officers at the scene, a drygoods store on Eighth Avenue, just off 38th Street, in the Garment District, said Officer Hugh Barry, a police spokesman.
The suspect, whose identity was unknown to the police, was pronounced dead at the scene.
He appeared to be in his early 30's, the police said.


Dollar Ends a Bit Higher; Gold and Silver Prices Drop
The dollar ended narrowly higher against most major currencies yesterday in quiet trading motivated largely by technical factors.
Gold prices declined after rising in Hong Kong.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $370.90 a troy ounce, down $2.80 from late Monday.
The Republic National Bank in New York quoted a late bid for gold at $370 an ounce, off $2.70.


Weicker Says New Budget Is Compromise
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. presented today what he called a compromise budget that he said included the best thinking from the legislature and the administration on how to resolve the state's revenue crisis.
But he left intact most of the core provisions and demands, including the income tax on wages, that have led the two branches of government to reject the other's best thinking so far.


More Wheat for China
China has been authorized to buy an additional two million metric tons of American wheat at subsidized prices, Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan said today.
Mr.
Madigan said the allocation would be open to China for a year.
The wheat, about 73.4 million bushels, would have a current value of about $194 million under the department's recent price estimates of $2.64 a bushel.


'Twin Peaks' Finale Draws Low Ratings
"Twin Peaks," once the most talked about show on television, did poorly in the ratings when its closing show was broadcast on Monday night on ABC .
The finale finished a distant third in its time period, beaten by three rerun shows on CBS and a rerun movie on NBC .
The two-hour episode of "Twin Peaks" attracted only a 6.7 rating, while CBS's shows -- "Murphy Brown," "Designing Women" and "Northern Exposure" -- averaged an 11.5 rating and NBC's movie, "Original Sin," had a 10.1 rating.
Each rating point represents 931,000 households.
When the series, which was created by David Lynch and Mark Frost, was first broadcast in the winter of 1990 it had a 21.7 rating.
It was canceled last month because of low ratings.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.73
5.83
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.60
7.74
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.78
5.78
7.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.16
8.16
8.50
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.47
8.47
8.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.53
9.54
9.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.29
7.27
7.51
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Trump Debt Deal Reported
Donald J. Trump's creditors have agreed to the broad terms of a debt reorganization, a Trump official said yesterday in a letter to casino regulators.
"I'm pleased to report that the banks have agreed to the business terms of the overall restructuring," Steven Bollenbach, the chief financial officer of the Trump Organization, said in the letter.


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices were off slightly today.
The Nikkei index of 225 stocks closed 179.90 points down, or 0.73 percent, at 24,482.69.


John Michael Pierce; Oil Executive, 67
John Michael Pierce, a North Sea oil developer and the chairman and chief executive officer of Ranger Oil Ltd. of Calgary, Alberta, died on Saturday at his ranch in Turner Valley, Alberta.
He was 67 years old.
A spokesman for the oil company said Mr.
Pierce collapsed while taking part in a cattle roundup and that the cause of death was not available.


Latex Linked to Allergy Peril
Exposure to latex products can cause a spectrum of allergic reactions, from itchy skin and hives to severe shock on an operating table, according to a recent study.
Responding to a set of separate outbreaks, the Food and Drug Administration issued an alert last week after 14 people died, possibly from contact with latex.
The agency advised doctors to quiz their patients about allergies to the substance.


BUSH BACKS LOANS FOR SOVIET FARMS WORTH $1.5 BILLION
President Bush approved $1.5 billion in agricultural loan guarantees for the Soviet Union today, a major step toward helping President Mikhail S. Gorbachev bolster his country's economy.
The loan guarantees, which Mr.
Bush had recently indicated he would approve after extending $1 billion in similar credits last December, will be made available in three installments starting this month with $600 million, said Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman.


Levine, Huntley Fills Media Executive Post
Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver reached out to an affiliate yesterday to replace a departed top media executive.
James T. Bell, 42 years old, was named executive vice president and director of communications services, a new post.
He will relocate to New York from Burbank, Calif., where he was executive vice president and general manager of Grey Entertainment and Media, which, like Levine, Huntley, is owned by Grey Advertising Inc.


Accounts
*
The International Olympic Committee, Lausanne, Switzerland, to Grey Advertising and its public relations subsidiary, GCI Group, for the 1992 Winter and Summer Olympics.
Billings are not yet determined. *
K Mart Corp., Troy, Mich., to Burrell Advertising, Chicago, for black consumer marketing.
Billings were not announced.. *
Rayfield Morton Unlimited Productions Inc. to Andreozzi Scharfman Aucone, New York, for its account billing $2 million to $3 million.
No previous agency.


McEnroe Is on Attack, Rallying Round Flag
Wearing a white T-shirt with a large American flag on the front under his red, white and blue United States Davis Cup warmup suit, John McEnroe today lamented the lack of patriotism among his country's young tennis stars and singled out Pete Sampras, Andre Agassi and Michael Chang.
Here for this weekend's quarterfinal Davis Cup match against Spain, McEnroe said he was, as usual, thrilled with the chance to play for his country and Coach Tom Gorman.
But he said he couldn't understand how the younger American stars could reject the invitations they received from Gorman.
McEnroe and Brad Gilbert will play singles, joining doubles specialists Jim Pugh and Rick Leach for the United States, which is defending the cup for the first time since 1982.


Can Vouchers Hurdle Church-State Wall?
Proposals to give parents public education money, or tuition vouchers, to spend at parochial schools of their choice have long been scoffed at as violations of an essential tenet of the United States Constitution: the separation of church and state.
But as the debate heats up on Capitol Hill over President Bush's proposed education legislation, which would provide Federal funds to states and districts that let public dollars follow students to private and parochial schools, many legal experts say that a church-state argument against such programs may prove ineffective.


Time to Eat More Cauliflower And Look Less Like One
WHEN the days grow longer and I can feel the approach of summer, I occasionally like to have a completely vegetarian dinner, finishing it off with seasonal berries.
It's a refreshing change after the heavier diet of the winter months, and it usually comes in response to a gentle nudge from my wife, Gloria, to lose a few pounds in preparation for picnics at the beach and bathing suits.
In the warm vegetable salad on the accompanying menu, I feature zucchini, carrots, celery, cauliflower and radishes.
But feel free to substitute vegetables that are more readily available.
Often, when shopping for vegetables for this dish, I go to the rack at the rear of the store that holds slightly overripe produce at reduced prices.


Eritreans Want Independence From Ethiopia; Now Tyranny Reigns
To the Editor:
As an Ethiopian and a scholar of Ethiopia of many years, I am appalled by the outcome of the so-called London talks, supposedly mediated by the United States and Herman J. Cohen, Assistant Secretary for African Affairs.
The United States actually failed to mediate between the Ethiopian Government and the rebel groups.
The only mediation was a ceasefire agreement reached by all parties May 27.
Subsequent talks were held between Mr.
Cohen and the rebels.
The Ethiopian Government was not represented.


Fannie Mae Tie To London Rate
The Federal National Mortgage Association said yesterday that it had begun to issue mortgage-backed securities tied to the London interbank offered rate, the rate used by major London banks as the basis for short-term borrowings in the international and domestic capital markets.
The Fannie Mae securities are backed by adjustable-rate mortgages.
James A. Johnson, Fannie Mae's chief executive officer, said the issuance of the Libor-adjustable-rate security was another step in the corporation's effort to provide attractive products for overseas investors.
To date 15 percent of Fannie Mae's mortgage-backed securities has been going to overseas investors.


Met, Citing Budget, Is Dark For Museum Mile Festival
The Metropolitan Museum of Art stayed dark last evening as Mayor David N. Dinkins opened the 13th Museum Mile Festival directly across the street at Goethe House.
It was the first time the Met had not participated in the annual three-hour event staged by the 10 museums that line upper Fifth Avenue, from 82d to 104th Streets.


Mary Loveless, 92, Doctor Who Devised Bee-Sting Immunity
Dr.
Mary Hewitt Loveless, a physician and immunologist who was an innovator in the treatment of allergies, died on June 2 at her home in Westport, Conn.
She was 92 years old.
In the 1940's Dr.
Loveless was an early leader in venom immunology.
She developed an injection to prevent the sometimes fatal allergic reaction of people susceptible to shock from bee and wasp stings.


Results Plus
HIGH SCHOOL BASEBALL Lafayette Wins Title  The last time Lafayette was in the Public Schools Athletic League championship game was in 1986.
It lost to Tottenville.
Yesterday at Yankee Stadium, the Redmen from Brooklyn turned the tables on the Pirates from Staten Island, 2-1, in the P.S.A.L. final.
Behind the two-hit pitching of Kenny Meade, a 6-foot-6-inch junior right-hander, Lafayette captured its 14th city baseball championship, but its first since 1974 and its first for Coach Joe Gambuzza, whose team had a 32-7 record in his 14th year as head coach.
Tottenville finished at 29-4.
The last two batters in the Lafayette order, shortstop Jackie Sofia, who was 3 for 3, and catcher Lou Reyes figured in both Lafayette runs.
Reyes knocked inRob Butmankiewicz with a bases-loaded sacrifice fly in the second, and Sofia raced home from second on an infield single in the fourth.
TENNIS  Chang Wins in London Michael Chang won his second-round match at the Queens Club tournament yesterday in London, making up a 0-3 deficit and beating Britain's Danny Sapsford, 6-3, 6-3.
Sweden's Mats Wilander continued his slide, losing, 6-4, 6-4, in the opening round to Germany's Patrik Kuhnen.
Wilander also suffered a knee injury.
Unseeded Australian Pat Cash breezed into the second round with a 6-1, 6-4 victory over Felix Barrientos of the Philippines. (AP) CYCLING  Lelli Takes Stage Massimiliano Lelli outsprinted fellow Italians Gianni Bugno and Claudio Chiappucci to the finish line in Selva Di Valgardena yesterday to win the 16th stage of the Tour of Italy, his second victory in the race.
Italy's Franco Chioccioli, who finished fourth, five seconds behind the winner, held to his overall lead with five stages left in the three-week cycling race. (AP)


3 Secaucus Officials Indicted
Three Secaucus officials, including the municipal court clerk and a utilities commissioner, were indicted today on Federal charges of fixing a $15 million construction contract by allowing a contractor to submit a blank bid form and then filling it out themselves.
The United States Attorney for New Jersey, Michael Chertoff, said the three and an unindicted co-conspirator extorted $135,000 from the James P. Horan Company of Elmwood Park, N.J., in return for rigging the bid on a project to upgrade the town's Koelle Boulevard waste-water treatment plant.


Nuggets Trade Adams to Bullets
The Denver Nuggets, seeking to rebuild their team after finishing the season with the worst record (20-62) in the National Basketball Association, yesterday traded their leading scorer, MICHAEL ADAMS, to Washington for the Bullets' first pick in the draft, the eighth selection over all.
The Nuggets also sent their 19th pick in the first round and future draft considerations to Washington.
The Nuggets now have the fourth and eighth selections in the draft, their highest two choices ever.
Adams, who averaged 26.5 points and 10.5 assists a game, returns to the team that sent him to Denver in 1987. (AP)


Theater in Review
The Bay of Naples  La Mama E. T. C. 74A East Fourth Street.
Through Sunday Written and directed by Joel Dragutin; administrator, Martine Potencier; production coordinator, Anna Kouyate; stage manager, Pascal Levesque; production assistants, Betty Sanchez and Anne-Marie Puppo.
WITH: Jean-Claude Bonnifait, Bernard Charnace, Mr.
Dragutin, Francoise D'Inca and Elisabeth Tual.
It's much more amusing to visit the people in Joel Dragutin's "Bay of Naples" ("Baie de Naples") than it would be to dine with them, for in the course of the evening they utter almost every cliche one has ever heard at a dinner table.


Ex-Officer Says Pretoria's Military Fans Violence
The South African military has been supplying weapons and covert assistance to fan the violence that has raged through many black townships, according to a retired army major who said he worked for military intelligence.
The former officer, Nico Basson, said that the aid had been provided to members of the Inkatha Freedom Party to attack and weaken the African National Congress by battling its followers and thus aggravate rivalries among blacks.


Walesa Seeks Special Economic Powers
Sharpening his confrontation with a Parliament still dominated by former Communists, President Lech Walesa asked legislators today to empower the Cabinet to rewrite the nation's economic laws by decree.
The move reflects growing tension over the effects of this country's pioneering economic program, and frustration within the Government over the lawmakers' failure to approve more than two dozen pieces of economic legislation pending since January.


Volvo Searching Hard for Relief
Although he professes to be optimistic, Christer Zetterberg, president and chief executive of Volvo A. B., has plenty of reasons to be gloomy.
The Swedish car company's most important markets -- the United States, Britain and Sweden -- remain severely depressed as the company tries to sell its most important new lines of luxury cars in nine years.
The latest is the 850 GLT, a sporty sedan with a five-cylinder engine and front-wheel drive introduced today in Sweden.
Volvo hopes the new car will attract younger buyers, many of whom now consider Volvo's offerings cumbersome and boring.


Corrections
The Chess column on April 23 characterized the Mechanics Institute of San Francisco incorrectly.
A letter dated April 24, delayed in reaching the columnist, points out that the institute, which sponsored the Pan- Pacific Grandmaster Tournament, is a nonprofit organization open to all applicants for a $10 application fee and $45 a year in dues.


MacGregor Sports In Bankruptcy Sale
MacGregor Sports Inc., the bankrupt sports equipment manufacturer, put more than $2.2 million of equipment up for auction.
The sale at MacGregor's three plants in Wisconsin was forced by the First Wisconsin Bank of Sheboygan, which foreclosed on MacGregor, saying that it owed more than $4.5 million.
MacGregor once made uniforms for the National Basketball Association and sold a wide range of sports equipment.
The company, whose sales fell to $40 million in 1989 from $60 million in 1986, shut most of its Wisconsin operations after seeking protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code earlier this year.
MacGregor has been plagued by financial difficulties since 1989.


Review/Ballet; Nilas Martins Dances 'Apollo,' A Family Rite
History recalled rather than repeated was presumably on everyone's mind at the New York State Theater on Sunday night when Nilas Martins made his debut in the title role of "Apollo," the same work in which his father, Peter Martins, made his debut with the New York City Ballet in 1967.
It was a family affair.
Lise La Cour -- the associate artistic director of the Royal Danish Ballet, who is Nilas's mother -- was in the audience with Frank Andersen, the director of the Danish company; both father and son were trained at its school.


Racal Is Set to Spin Off Phone Unit
Racal Electronics P.L.C. announced its final plan to restructure the company today by distributing its 80 percent stake in Racal Telecom P.L.C. to stockholders.
The British conglomerate said it would distribute 57 Racal Telecom shares for every 100 Racal Electronics shares.
Racal Telecom, which like Racal Electronics is based outside Reading, England, would also pay a special dividend of 5 pence, or 8.35 cents, a share if the restructuring is approved at a shareholders meeting on Aug. 9.


Review/Dance; Cak and Legong, Two Indonesian Styles
Nature was kind to art on Tuesday night when a troupe of Balinese dancers and musicians appeared at the World Financial Center in lower Manhattan.
The entire performance was scheduled to take place outdoors on the center's plaza along the Hudson River, and that was indeed where the first half of the program was staged.
The rain waited until intermission, giving dancers and spectators time to move indoors, where the show continued under the trees of the center's Winter Garden.


Execution 'Engineer' Settles Criminal Case
In a case that pitted Holocaust survivors against Holocaust revisionists, a builder of execution machines who was charged with misrepresentation for calling himself an engineer has avoided trial by reaching a settlement with state prosecutors.
Under the agreement, which was struck Tuesday, the defendant, Fred Leuchter Jr., will serve two years' probation for practicing engineering without a license.
The charge, which was filed late last year, could have resulted in a $500 fine and three months in jail had he gone to trial.


A Miller Account Chief Is Returning to B.S.B.
There was advertising news on two fronts yesterday involving the Miller Brewing Company.
In New York, Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. announced the return of Frank Assumma to work on its Miller account.
On June 17, Mr.
Assumma will rejoin the agency, where he worked as an executive vice president from 1984 to 1989.


Challenge For India; Exemplary Post-Colonial Democracy Faces Daunting Test as Vote Resumes
As voting resumed today in India's traumatic national election, three weeks after it was interrupted by the assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, it was unclear whether any faction will be able to form a stable national government.
By June 20, when Parliament is due to reopen, the nation that set an example of nonviolent liberation from colonialism after World War II will have tested the ability of its Parliament, parties, election machinery and presidency to produce a strong government.
At this point, few are predicting that one will emerge of its own accord.


Viola May Be 'Outta Here' Unless Mets Come to Terms
Ask Frank Viola for his gut feeling about where he will be playing next season and the pitcher concedes he does not think it will be with the Mets.
Viola is in the final year of a $3.16 million contract and the Mets have not discussed contract terms with the player's agent since the spring.
The two sides are not scheduled to meet until October and Viola might be set on testing free agency by then.


Top Effie Award Goes for Humorous Ads That Helped Win Senate Seat
AN advertising award honoring results, as well as creativity, has been presented for an unusual series of humorous ads that achieved the ultimate result in politics: They helped a candidate for the United States Senate win election.
The New York chapter of the American Marketing Association last night presented its Grand Effie Award, for the most effective advertising of 1990, to the Wellstone for Senate campaign (that's campaign as in series of ads, not as in stump for office).
The chapter is calling the award -- previously won by product-selling pitches for Absolut vodka, Quaker oatmeal, Pizza Hut and other consumer marketers -- the first such national honor bestowed on political advertising.


Bills Sign 4 Players
The Buffalo Bills have signed four World League of American Football players as free agents, including two of the league's top kickers.
The Bills signed place-kicker BJORN NITTMO, a former Giant, and punter CHRIS MOHR, both of whom played for the Montreal Machine; inside linebacker RON SANCHO of the New York/ New Jersey Knights and wide receiver JOHN GARRETT of the San Antonio Riders.


Sports of The Times; The Sky's The Limit For Jordan
FLYING back to Chicago this afternoon, one could reasonably expect to look out the window of the airplane and see Michael Jordan flying right alongside, smiling and waving in his basketball suit.
After all, we've recently seen Jordan flying in other places, like Chicago Stadium and the Forum here, so why not in the clouds, too?
In this National Basketball Association final playoff series with the Lakers, it had become customary to see Jordan of the Bulls soaring.
He has continued to amaze fans and players alike, and if Sir Isaac Newton, who thought he had explained gravity, were around today, he'd surely be baffled about Jordan, too.


Money-Market Fund Yields Down Moderately in Week
Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down moderately for the week ended yesterday.
IBC/Donoghue's analysts said the short end of the fixed-rate market continued to trend down, affecting money-market fund yields.


Harry Smoler, 79, Dies; Entered Assembly at 67
Harry Smoler, a Brooklyn Democrat who was elected to the New York State Assembly when he was 67 years old, died yesterday at Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn.
He was 79 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of heart disease, a family spokesman said.


Dropout Rate In New York Shows Decline
The tide of dropouts from the New York City school system may finally be rolling back.
The Board of Education's annual dropout report shows that fewer high school students are dropping out before their original graduation date and more are staying in high school for five, six or seven years.


The Brady Bill, Made Better
Supporters of the Brady gun control bill were suspicious when the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, talked of improving it.
Now it's clear that the skeptics were wrong.
The original version of the Brady bill mandates a national seven-day waiting period between the purchase and delivery of a handgun so that police can check out the purchaser's background.
States with similar laws have used them to block tens of thousands of illegal gun sales.
Federal agents believe, with reason, that a law applied nationally will frustrate the urban smugglers who now purchase guns in states with lax laws and resell them in cities with strict ones.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.79
7.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.57
7.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.80
5.78
7.58
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.21
8.16
8.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.54
8.47
8.37
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.58
9.53
9.54
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.31
7.29
7.50
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Chest Harnesses In Autos Viewed As Possible Peril
A safety belt system that has won great praise for automatically strapping in drivers is drawing scrutiny from safety experts who say the belts are often misused in a way that can create a danger of its own.
The system consists of a motorized shoulder belt and a manual lap belt.
Manufacturers have been installing them since 1984 in millions of cars.
Each costs several hundred dollars less than an air bag, an alternative way to meet Federal safety requirements.


Leningrad, Petersburg and the Great Name Debate
"Do you wish to restore to our city its original name, St. Petersburg?"
That question, put to Leningrad's voters on Wednesday alongside ballots for a mayor and the president of the Russian republic, has set off one of the most impassioned debates across the Soviet land since Mikhail S. Gorbachev first lifted the 70-year Communist monopoly on how history is written.


Drug-Corruption Cases Dropped in Detroit
Federal drug-trafficking and corruption charges against 11 Detroit area police officers and two other people, including a niece of Mayor Coleman A. Young, have been dropped to allow more time for investigation, the authorities say.
The Mayor's niece, Cathy Volsan-Curry, and the 12 other suspects were arrested last month on charges of arranging police protection for drug dealers and money launderers.


Unguarded Guardians: A Special Report; F.D.I.C. Wields Powers in Deals With Few Checks and Balances
Early in the evening of Saturday, April 20, officials of the BankAmerica Corporation gave Federal regulators their final offer for the failed Bank of New England.
Their bid of $237 million came after months of negotiations and just in time to meet what they thought was the deadline.
On its face the bid was far higher than any other; nevertheless it ultimately fell short.
Two days later, 20 minutes before the directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation met to pick the winning offer, another bidder, the Fleet/ Norstar Financial Group, revised its final bid, raising it to $125 million from $100 million.
And at the meeting the F.D.I.C. put its own value on BankAmerica's bid, lowering it by more than $112 million for accounting and other reasons it never fully explained.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
EXTERIOR house paint is now less toxic and less harmful to the environment than it was.
It is also easier to apply.
But for paint to live up to manufacturers' claims for durability and long life, surfaces to be painted must be carefully prepared.
Preparing outdoor surfaces for painting is often the most difficult and tedious part of a painting project; it can also pose a health hazard if the existing paint contains lead.


John C. Keaveney, 52, A Marketing Executive
John C. Keaveney, a sales and marketing executive, died yesterday at his home in Rockville, Md.
He was 52 years old.
He died of cancer, his wife said.


Ames Stores' Loss Narrows
Ames Department Stores Inc., which filed for bankruptcy protection in April 1990, said today that it cut its first-quarter losses by more than $380 million from the company's huge losses a year ago.
For the quarter that ended on April 27, Ames reported a deficit of $47.8 million, compared with a loss of $429.4 million for the comparable period last year.


Jordan Crowns Career and Bulls Reign in N.B.A.
It ended seven years of frustration for Michael Jordan.
It ended 25 years of frustration for the Chicago Bulls.
And it ended in perfect fashion for the Bulls, because they did it not by relying solely on Jordan, but by relying on each other.
The Chicago Bulls are the new National Basketball Association champions, by virtue of their emotional 108-101 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers tonight.
By ending the series in five games and winning the final four games of the series, the Bulls turned what was supposed to be a classic confrontation into a personal coronation.
Chicago steamrolled through the playoffs with a 15-2 record, smothering teams with their defense, dazzling them with their offense and surprising them with their confidence.


Head Quits At Ferruzzi
Six months after losing a battle for control of Italy's chemical industry, Raul Gardini has resigned as chairman of the family holding company that runs the Gruppo Ferruzzi agriculture and industrial empire.
Arturo Ferruzzi, 51 years old, Mr.
Gardini's brother-in-law and the only son of the group's founder, Serafino Ferruzzi, will succeed Mr.
Gardini.


Accounting Panel Poses New Borrowing Rule
Bowing to criticism that it is too lax, a self-regulatory body for the accounting profession proposed a far-reaching new rule yesterday that would prohibit its 300,000 members from getting new loans from audit clients.
"There are plenty of financial institutions around where you can get loans that are non-audit clients," Thomas Kelley, a group vice president for the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, said, summing up the conclusions of the institute's professional ethics committee meeting in Washington yesterday and the day before.


GULF INTELLIGENCE DRAWS COMPLAINT BY SCHWARZKOPF
Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf complained to Congress today about the quality and timeliness of intelligence given his forces during the Persian Gulf war.
The general was especially critical of the analyses of intelligence provided to his staff by specialists in Washington on the Iraqi military, saying they had been "caveated, footnoted and watered down" to the point of being useless.


Morgenthau Defends '90 Deal With Suspect
The man charged with stabbing a former Rockette to death was indicted yesterday as prosecutors remained under pressure to explain their handling of an earlier case against the defendant.
The Manhattan District Attorney's office has been criticized for allowing the defendant to plea bargain 15 months ago to a trespass charge after having been charged with attacking a woman with an ice pick.
The defendant received a 45-day sentence and served 30 days.


Not Really Counterfeits, Not Really Real, Either
THERE are Chagalls and Miros, Picassos and Vlamincks, and quite a few Roualts.
"Thousands," Ellen Lagow said.
"I was offered a cache and I decided to go into business with them."


Russian Republic Votes for a President
Russia, the largest of the Soviet republics, held its first direct presidential elections today, in a historic step toward democratization.
Boris N. Yeltsin had sought the vote to give himself a popular mandate as leader of the Soviet Union's dominant constituent unit.


Vercors, 89, Author Who Wrote Of Nazi-Occupied France, Is Dead
Jean Bruller, who wrote under the name Vercors and whose clandestine wartime novella, "The Silence of the Sea," moved the French nation and those who shared with France the agony of the German occupation in World War II, died on Monday at his home in Paris, his family announced yesterday.
He was 89 years old.
The cause of death was not given.


Screens: 'Things Imagined or Dreamed'
SCREENS have been a major part of Arlene Slavin's work for 12 years.
Nine of them are on view at the Gallery at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law at 55 Fifth Avenue, between 12th and 13th Streets.
"It's a law school that has a gallery because they like their students to be well rounded," said Ms.
Slavin, an artist who lives in New York.


N.R.C. Clears the Way for Shoreham to Be Dismantled
In what may be the death blow to the Shoreham Nuclear Power Station, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission agreed yesterday to grant a license that clears the way for the eventual dismantling of the plant's nuclear systems.
Once these systems are taken down at the plant that was once the centerpiece of energy plans for Long Island, it will be virtually impossible to restore them and make Shoreham a nuclear plant.


Pop in Review
Julio Iglesias
Radio City Music Hall Tonight, tomorrow and June 21 and 22
Julio Iglesias is one of the few pop stars whose New York appearances attract a thoroughly multi-national audience.
And at Tuesday's opening concert, the Spanish balladeer took an informal audience poll in which as many people identified themselves as Spanish-speaking as English-speaking.


U.S, Canada and Mexico Begin Talks on Free Trade
The United States, Canada and Mexico began formal negotiations today on a North American free trade zone.
Top trade officials from the three countries gathered here for talks aimed at stripping away trade barriers and allowing the free flow of goods among some 360 million consumers.


NBC 'Nightly News' To Move to 6:30 From 7
The NBC "Nightly News" with Tom Brokaw will be moved to 6:30 P.M. from 7 P.M. in New York starting in September in favor of the syndicated show "Love Connection," officials at WNBC, the network's station in New York, said yesterday.
WNBC, Channel 4, announced the move as part of a reorganization of its evening programming.
On Sept. 9, the station also plans to cut back its local 6 P.M. newscast to a half-hour from an hour to make room for "Love Connection." Channel 4 will also add a new program called "Ruckus" at 7:30 P.M., replacing "Family Feud."


Thunderstorms Cut Electricity In Some Suburbs
Thunderstorms with high winds and heavy rain knocked out power to thousands of homes in Westchester County and parts of Connecticut yesterday, toppled trees, flipped over small aircraft and caused a jetliner to clear Shea Stadium by only 1,000 feet.
At the Westchester County Airport in White Plains, high winds overturned 11 airplanes, although they were parked and tied down with ropes, the Federal Aviation Administration said.
One was hurled several hundred yards and slammed into a nearby bus stop.


Bridge Repairs Delay Service on the N Line
Subway service on the south side of the Manhattan Bridge will not resume until that side of the bridge is completely rebuilt in 1995, city officials said yesterday.
When the N train service over the dilapidated bridge was suspended in December, transportation officials said it would be restored in a few months.


People
*
Barbara Ringel has been appointed senior vice president and planning director at Backer Spielvogel Bates, New York. *
Harry Koenig has been promoted to chief operating officer, AC&amp;R Advertising, New York, from chief financial officer, while remaining vice chairman.


Wheat at 10 1/2-Month Peak; Pork and Gold Prices Drop
Wheat futures prices reached a 10 1/2-month high yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after the Government reduced its estimate of the wheat crop and guaranteed $1.5 billion in loans to help the Soviet Union buy American grain.
Other grain and soybean futures ended mixed despite President Bush's approval late Tuesday of the agricultural export credit guarantees.


Bridge
A few hundred Europeans and one American will be in Killarney, Ireland, for the next two weeks.
The competitors in the European Championship will be trying to qualify for the world championship in Yokohama, Japan, while Ron Andersen of Chicago will describe their efforts from the commentary desk for the Vugraph audience.
Another American tried to be there as a player.
Bill Russ, who learned his bridge in New York City and now lives in Zurich, hoped to qualify to represent his adopted country, Switzerland.
He did not succeed, but he had occasion in the selection tournament to admire his partner's defense on the diagramed deal.
He sat West, playing with Luciano Caroni.


Market Place; Real Estate Issues Performing Well
DESPITE all the bad news about real estate, real estate investment trusts and other property-related stocks have widely outperformed the Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 major stocks over the last six months.
Equity real estate investment trusts posted total returns of 27.73 percent as of May (the latest available figures), easily exceeding S.&amp; P.'s 19.7 percent return in the period, according to the National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts.


In Britain, 3-D Diagrams Open the World of Art to the Blind
ALISON OLDLAND thought she was just getting a dog when, in 1988, she asked for a dropout from the local guide-dog training school.
But she was also embarking on a path that would change her life and add a new dimension to the lives of hundreds of blind people in Britain.
In gratitude for Emma, a docile yellow Labrador who failed to make the grade because of her lack of concentration, Mrs.
Oldland, a 61-year-old art lecturer, gave a talk on Impressionists at her home in this Hampshire village, about 10 miles south of Reading, to raise money for the guide-dog school.
After her lecture, one of her listeners asked her to record other talks on art.


Atlanta Mayor Calls for Crackdown on Begging
Mayor Maynard H. Jackson asked the City Council today to adopt a bill that would impose criminal penalities for aggressive street begging, sleeping in vacant buildings and hanging out in parking lots.
The proposed ordinance drew immediate criticism, particularly from advocates for the homeless.
Some of the advocates said the measure was another indication of the decline of public compassion for the homeless.


PRETORIA GAINING TRADING PARTNERS
On most mornings, Nico Nel, the director of the South African Trade Mission here, can look out of his downtown fifth-floor office and see hundreds of Zimbabweans lining the sidewalk.
Last year 240,000 Zimbabweans came for short-term visas that entitled them to cross the border, buy South African-made goods and hurry back to earn a profit on consumer products that are scarce in this struggling economy.


U.S. Missionary Killed
An American missionary was shot to death in the Philippines by a suspected drug addict, the Philippine military said today.
The missionary, the Rev.
John Speers, 42 years old, was talking with acquaintances on Tuesday along a roadside when one of three suspected drug addicts shot him at close range with a handgun, a fellow missionary, the Rev.
Kevin Johnson, said.


Mao Thawka; Burmese Poet, 64
Mao Thawka, a Burmese poet and speech writer serving a 20-year prison sentence for a poem critical of his country's military rulers, died today in a hospital in Yangon, the Burmese capital, a Western official there said, citing a report in the Government newspaper.
The poet was 64 years old.
In reporting the death, the Working People's Daily, the Government newspaper of Myanmar, formerly Burma, did not give the cause nor say when Mao Thawka was taken from prison to the hospital, said the Western official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Mao Thawka, whose given name was U Bathaw, was arrested in July 1989.
A former navy captain, he wrote speeches for Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, Burma's leading dissident, who has been under house arrest since July 1988.


Unorthodox Vaccination Technique May Become Weapon in Fighting AIDS
Intriguing but preliminary results from a new study suggest that a vaccine could help some people infected with the AIDS virus stave off the viral attack.
The new study was small and not meant to give definitive data on the vaccine's effectiveness.
Researchers cautioned that the work must be followed by larger studies that include, for comparison, people who receive a dummy injection as well as those who receive a vaccine.
They added that the study could not rule out the possibility that some people who received the vaccine might be harmed.


Jails Commissioner Unveils a New Plan For Riot Prevention
New York City's top jail official unveiled a plan yesterday to prevent or suppress uprisings by inmates at the city's 16 prisons.
But as the official, Correction Commissioner Allyn R. Sielaff, announced the plan, he had to fend off gruff criticism by members of a prison watchdog agency, who said he mishandled an uprising at Rikers Island last August and had failed to discipline guards who severely beat some of the inmates.


CHRONICLE
ITZHAK PERLMAN plans to be in the audience tonight at the concert by students in the Central Park East Violin Program in East Harlem.
About 130 children are performing what they fear may be the last recital of this program, which has been cut from the budget of Community School District 4 for the fall.
ROBERTA GUASPARI TZAVARAS teaches about 40 children from three East Harlem schools each year.
Tonight's concert, at the Central Park East I Elementary School at 1573 Madison Avenue (106th Street), is to raise money for the program; those attending will be asked to contribute.


Moe Spahn, 79, Dies; Headed Private School
Moe C. Spahn, a former camp director and private-school headmaster who was an all-America basketball player in the 1930's, died on Tuesday at the New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, his son said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on May 27 about Colombia's coffee exports misstated the type of coffee grown in Kenya.
It is arabica, not robusta.


Hollywood Uneasy at Its Summer Outlook
After a very slow spring, Hollywood is facing an unusually competitive summer with mounting anxiety.
The number of films scheduled for release is up dramatically over the summer of 1990, but the chances that one will emerge as a $200 million blockbuster on the order of "Batman" or "Ghost" seem to be growing slimmer.
Between Memorial Day and Labor Day, a period that traditionally accounts for about 40 percent of annual movie revenues, Hollywood's eight studios are scheduled to release 51 movies, compared to 37 last summer.
Independent distributors are scheduled to release an additional 22 films, creating a glut that theaters will have difficulty absorbing.


Treasury Issues Tumble in Price
Prices of Treasury securities fell sharply and long-term interest rates rose to their highest level in nearly seven months yesterday, as the pessimism that has enveloped the credit markets in recent days deepened.
Market participants said there was no single reason that caused the selloff.
The move was a defensive reaction in advance of coming reports on inflation and the economy, they said.


Pop in Review
Lionel Hampton
The Blue Note 131 West Third Street Through Sunday
Milt Hinton's bass started and ended Lionel Hampton's show on Tuesday night.
Mr.
Hinton began by walking a taut and muscular bass line, setting the tone for the whole set by swinging so hard he threatened to leave the drummer, Grady Tate, behind.


Havel, in Rebuff to Paris, Backs U.S.-Europe Ties
President Vaclav Havel today strongly affirmed Europe's ties with North America, which he said should be maintained regardless of political changes across the Continent after Communism's collapse.
Calling the American-European linkage "inevitable, logical and legitimate," Mr.
Havel made the issue a main theme of his opening address at a meeting sponsored by Czechoslovakia and France here on a future "European confederation."


'Don Giovanni' Rain Date
The Metropolitan Opera's free outdoor performance of Mozart's "Don Giovanni" that was canceled last night because of rain is to take place tonight at 6 o'clock on the Great Lawn in Central Park.
Christian Badea will conduct, with Thomas Hampson in the title role, Marilyn Mims as Donna Anna, Patricia Schuman as Donna Elvira, Kaaren Erickson as Zerlina and Paul Plishka as Leporello.
The Luciano Pavarotti concert that was interrupted by rain on Monday evening will not be rescheduled.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


Johnson &amp; Johnson In U.S. Inquiry
Johnson &amp; Johnson said it was being investigated over whether it promoted unapproved usages for Retin-A, its acne treatment drug.
The inquiry is being conducted by the United States Attorney's office in New Jersey, a spokesman said.
He said a 1988 article in The Journal of the American Medical Association reported on the successful treatment of wrinkles with Retin-A.
The spokesman said Ortho Pharmaceuticals, the Johnson &amp; Johnson unit that makes the drug, provided the article's authors with money to present their findings at a news conference.
A drug manufacturer cannot promote the use of a product that has not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
The company's shares fell $1.625 each yesterday, closing at $85.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company is based in New Brunswick, N.J.


Communists Study Shevardnadze Comments
The Soviet Communist Party's top watchdog body today ordered an investigation of former Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze because of his public appeals for creation of a broad democratic party to champion reform.
The order for a "party investigation" was issued by the Presidium of the party's Control Commission, its chief body for enforcing discipline.


Philippine Volcano Explodes Again, Threatening Base


Elegy to a Garden Suburb, Douglaston, Queens
BECAUSE he grew up there, Kevin Wolfe felt that he had to draw attention to the changing architectural character of Douglaston, Queens.
He has done so, with an exhibition, "The Environment of the American Dream: The Garden Surburb at Douglaston," at the Urban Center (457 Madison Avenue, between 50th and 51st Streets) through June 28.
It is cosponsored by the Municipal Art Society.


For a Touch of the Tropics, A Backyard Banana Tree
LIKE many other gardeners who travel occasionally, I take trips that turn out to be plant-collecting expeditions.
I avoid interstate highways whenever possible, for two reasons.
There are seldom any restaurants along the way that are worth investigating, and there are not any nurseries at all.
So I take back roads and old two-lane highways.
If I am down South, I can sniff out a roadside pit-barbecue stand a mile away, and wherever I may be, putting on the brakes when a nursery turns up is by now a reflex.


Phone Listings By Computer
The New York Telephone Company, a unit of the Nynex Corporation, has introduced a computer telephone directory service.
Nynex is the third regional telephone company in the country to offer electronic white pages for personal computer users, the company said.


I.B.M. Introduces Lower-Price PC's
I.B.M. introduced four low-cost personal computers aimed at increasing its share of the PC market, in which less expensive clones have cut into the International Business Machines Corporation's market share for years.
Don Young, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers, said the prices of the new models match all but the least expensive of the I.B.M. clones.
The new models start at just under $2,000 and are based on the Intel Corporation's 386 SX microprocessor.
Industry analysts said the new models represent an aggressive pricing strategy for I.B.M.


DEMOCRATS SHOW OPTIMISM FOR '92
A group of about 50 major Democratic fund-raisers today concluded a two-day meeting here with potential Presidential candidates, and several participants said afterward that they were optimistic about their party's prospects in 1992.
The group, Impac, was formed during the 1988 Presidential campaign as a way for the fund-raisers to get to know candidates and try to play a larger role in the process.


Johnson Heaps Praise On Bulls and Jordan
Magic Johnson wept no tears as the star of the losing team tonight.
"We played as hard as we could," he said, "but they made every big shot. We still feel good. We're a proud bunch of guys, and we gave it our best shot."


5 CHILDREN DROWN AT FLORIDA PICNIC
The bodies of five children who were last seen drawing their names in the sand during a picnic over the weekend have been pulled from a waterway where they apparently drowned trying to save one another.
One body was discovered Sunday, the day the children disappeared, and the others were found Tuesday after a three-day search by more than 40 divers of the Intracoastal Waterway, said sheriff's Lieut.
Jerry Girvin.


India Arrests Two Suspected Of Helping Gandhi Assassin
A man and his mother have been arrested in India's southern Tamil Nadu state and charged with sheltering the suspected assassin of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, the United News of India reported today.
The news agency said S. Bhagyanathan, 25 years old, and his mother, Padma, were arrested on Tuesday on charges of providing shelter to a woman suspected as Mr.
Gandhis assassin.


DIALOGUE: Israel and the Peace Process Does The U.N. Belong at the Table?; The Benefits Would Be Huge
By accepting the Middle East peace conference proposed by President Bush and Secretary of State James Baker, Israel could register a breakthrough for its central interests.
The benefits would include negotiations with Arab states, dialogue with mainstream Palestinians, intimate cooperation with the U.S. in a peace process, a new status in the European Community and diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union.
The total result would be an economic upsurge that would help Israel solve the problems created by the providential arrival of immigrants from the Soviet Union and Ethiopia.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Reed Publishing (USA) Inc. is issuing in the Euromarket $125 million in 9 percent bonds due 1996 at a price of 99.42 to yield 9.15 percent through Credit Suisse First Boston.
They are rated Aa-3 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P. *
TLC Beatrice International Holdings Inc. has filed with the Securities and exchange Commission for a $200 million offering of senior notes due 2001 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.


Executive Life Insurance
State insurance regulators have appointed an executive from Prudential Securities Inc. to temporarily run the First Executive Corporation's New York insurance unit.
As the Executive Life Insurance Company of New York's president and chief operating officer, Robert Giacomine will be in charge of day-to-day activities at the insurer while state regulators attempt to sell the company.
Mr.
Giacomine, on leave as first vice president of the expenditure control division at the Prudential Insurance Company's securities subsidiary, will report to Kevin Foley, deputy superintendent of the state insurance department.


Dinkins and Unions: Money Is Turning Friends Into Foes
The shouts of a furious Barry Feinstein, the teamsters' union leader, rang out from a conference room where a handful of New York City officials and union leaders last gathered in vain to discuss union concessions that could head off deep cuts in the city's budget -- and the layoffs of 20,000 city workers.
"Back stabbing" and "double dealing" were among the less salty gibes that were heard, interrupted at times by an angry retort from Milton Mollen, in ordinary times the most unflappable of Mayor David N. Dinkins's deputy mayors.
And when it was all over two hours later, union leaders stormed out, complaining that the city had been duplicitous, disrespectful and incompetent.


Quotation of the Day
"I think it's exciting, and the timing is good, We were celebrating Independence Day, and we certainly celebrated it with one big bang." -- Leandro Naguiat, an architect in a Philippine town near the volcano that erupted yesterday.  [ A14:4. ]


G.E. Boycott Is Working, Group Says
A group that has been pressing a boycott against the General Electric Company for five years to try to force the company's withdrawal from nuclear weapons work said yesterday that it had made a significant dent in the company's sales of medical diagnostic equipment.
But the company said that its share of that market was growing, along with its sales of consumer goods, and that the boycott did not appear to be having any effect.


New Jersey's Bond Ratings Put Under Review by S.&amp; P.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation announced yesterday that it might downgrade New Jersey's bond ratings because of changes in the state's fiscal year 1991 budget and had placed the state's debt under review for possible downgrading.
The move affects $3.2 billion of the state's top triple-A rated general obligation debt.
To close the current budget gap, the state had to use $180 million from its general fund.


Stocks in Broad Slide; Dow Falls by 23.92
Rising long-term interest rates, fears of renewed inflation and sell programs slashed stock prices yesterday.
But the day's largest losses were softened by some bargain hunting late in the session and by the relatively low volume of trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 23.92, to 2,961.99.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange rose to 166.2 million shares, from 161.6 million the day before.
There were 364 Big Board stocks up on the day and 1,238 issuesthat declined.


Newsprint Use Down
Early estimates indicate that United States newsprint consumption in April dropped 10.6 percent from a year earlier, to 927,603 metric tons, the American Newspaper Publishers Association said today.


BASEBALL: Two Young Pitchers Are Making Their Marks; Glavine Is 10-2 In His 4th Season With the Braves
Leo Mazzone, the pitching coach for the Atlanta Braves, thought back to an instructional league session of several years ago, and the sight of a young, slim left-handed pitcher.
Mazzone was a coach in the Braves' organization, working with prospects, searching for potential, looking to the future, testing his imagination.
"You always try to project what they would be like at the major league level," Mazzone remembered before last night's game against the Mets.
"When I thought of Tom Glavine, he reminded you of a Whitey Ford type. The way he goes about his business. The style of pitching, being offensive minded. Going out with that cockiness, but it's a good cockiness. He's just confident."


Jets Acquire Free Safety
The Phoenix Cardinals traded free safety LONNIE YOUNG to the Jets for an undisclosed future draft pick yesterday.
Young, a 12th-round draft choice in 1985 out of Michigan State, had been a Cardinal starter since midway through his rookie season.
He has 470 tackles in six seasons.
Last year, Young had 82 tackles plus two interceptions. (AP)


G.O.P. Senators Press Accord on Rights Bill
Senate Republicans who proposed a compromise civil rights bill last week said today that they hoped that quiet discussions with Administration officials and Senate Democrats would succeed in breaking the legislative impasse over the measure.
For the second day in a row, Justice Department officials met today with aides to Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri and eight other moderate Republicans who have sought to broker a civil rights agreement.
The group has been reviewing the Danforth package line by line.


Home Video
A Rush of Delays
For reasons related mostly to a soft economy, delays in the release of videos are becoming more frequent.
Perhaps the most noteworthy recent example was "Avalon," Barry Levinson's film from RCA/Columbia, which was due out on May 1, but was put off at the last minute until May 15.


Suit on Council Districts Threatens Elections
Acting on a suit filed by a Hispanic group that called New York's new City Council districts unfair, a Federal judge yesterday put the opening stages of November's elections to the Council on hold.
The judge, I. Leo Glasser, ruled that Council candidates could not begin submitting their nominating petitions on Monday, as scheduled, because the Justice Department had not yet approved the redistricting plan.


New Jersey High Court Asked to Upset School Financing Law
The lawyers who succeeded last year in having New Jersey's school financing law declared unconstitutional returned to court today to try to overturn the law that eventually took its place.
The lawyers urged the New Jersey Supreme Court to act quickly to overturn the law, which shifted millions of dollars originally earmarked for school aid to a property tax relief program.
They asked the court to order the Governor and Legislature to come up with a new plan by Dec. 31 to close what they described as a widening gap in spending between poorer urban school districts and affluent suburban ones.


Corrections
The Entertainment Events listing on Monday and a music listing in the Arts and Leisure Guide on Sunday misstated the date of a performance by the rock group Chicago at Radio City Music Hall.
It is July 10; the group did not appear on Monday night.


Wanted: A Persona
I was taught the lesson of the bear's paw by a newspaperman who believed that the only people who call themselves journalists are those who don't deserve to be called reporters.
He told me of a New Yorker cartoonist who threw his editors into a tizzy by drawing a bear's paw in place of a hand.
Put one such red flag in a story, he told me, and your editors will be so busy taking it out that they will leave in the rest of the good stuff.


Dravecky's Arm To Be Amputated
Dave Dravecky, the former San Francisco Giants pitcher, will have his left arm amputated next Tuesday to alleviate chronic infection and nerve damage in the arm, the Giants announced today.
The surgery will be performed at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
Dravecky, 35 years old, has undergone three operations to remove cancer tumors from the arm, most recently in May 1990.
"It is likely that the cancer has recurred in Dave's arm," said Dr.
Murray Brennan, who will perform the surgery, which is to remove the arm at the shoulder.
Brennan said the treatment was required because of a recurring staph infection.
He said cancer had not spread beyond the arm.


Healthnet Bids Under Review
Healthnet, a California health maintenance organization, said today that its board would consider two buyout offers, though a spokesman indicated that neither would be accepted.
Healthnet, a not-for-profit health-care provider, has asked the state to allow it to convert to a for-profit operation.
The move has attracted a number of offers.


Nassau County Prices Notes
Nassau County, L.I., priced $140 million in tax and revenue anticipation notes yesterday in competitive bidding.
The bulk of the financing was awarded to Lehman Brothers Inc., which took $80 million in revenue anticipation notes due April 15 and priced them to yield 4.6 percent.
The securities firm also took $30 million of the tax anticipation notes due March 2 and priced them to yield 4.55 percent.


For King-in-Waiting, It's a Long Way to Belgrade
Have crown, will travel is the message from Crown Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia, who hopes his disintegrating country will come to its senses and bring him back as a stabilizing symbol of national unity.
The only piece of his country this direct descendant of Queen Victoria of Britain has ever seen is Room 212 of Claridge's Hotel, briefly declared Yugoslav territory when he was born on July 17, 1945, so that when the day came he could legally succeed his father, King Peter II.


Fred Sherry to Step Down As Chamber Society's Head
The cellist Fred Sherry said yesterday that he would resign as artistic director of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center at the end of the 1991-92 season.
Mr.
Sherry was appointed to the position in 1988, succeeding Charles Wadsworth, who founded the society in 1969.
Mr.
Sherry said he was leaving to spend more time performing, something he said the administrative side of the directorship did not allow him sufficient time to do.


Review/Music; Riverside Church Carillon
It takes panache to play a large outdoor carillon and inflict your art, unbidden, on a neighborhood.
But that is not to say that the neighborhood is necessarily rendered defenseless.
The Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial Carillon of Riverside Church, on Riverside Drive at 122d Street, is said to be among the largest in the world.
But when James R. Lawson gave a recital there on Sunday afternoon, few seemed to notice.
Indeed, this listener's attempts to find a place within a radius of several blocks from which anything at all could be heard were mostly futile.


Salomon Official Going To Development Bank
Jacques Attali, president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, had great difficulty finding an American banker to head the merchant banking division of his institution.
When the bank opened for business in April, the important position was vacant.
But for Ronald M. Freeman, the head of European investment banking at Salomon Brothers Inc., who accepted the position last week, the job was welcomed.
"I did not have to be wooed," he said, even though the move meant a big pay cut.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-19
General Schwarzkopf was critical of the quality and timeliness of intelligence given his forces during the Persian Gulf war in a meeting with Congress.
Page A1
Iran says it fears "massacre" in Iraq A6


Dollar Hits a High for 1991 Against Mark and the Yen
The dollar surged to a new 1991 high against the mark and yen yesterday, lifted by the hope for a faster economic recovery in the United States and the absence of any central bank intervention to slow the rally.
The surge yesterday brought the dollar to a high of 1.7945 marks in trading during the day, which meant the United States currency had risen by 24 percent since this rapid rally began in early February.
The dollar rose to 142.10 yen during the day, up 11 percent since February.


World Bank Lending Favors Eastern Europe
The World Bank announced today that it had greatly increased its assistance to six formerly Communist countries in Eastern Europe with loans that will total $2.9 billion by the end of the month.
This figure is higher than what the lending institution had foreseen only a few months ago, said Eugenio Lari, director of the World Bank's Department of Eastern and Central Europe.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Republicans who met on the Bush Administration's legislative agenda misidentified a House member.
He was Representative Jerry Lewis. (Jeffrey R. Lewis, a Senate staff member, was not present.)


Pop in Review
Elliott Sharp and Carbon
The Knitting Factory
The composer Elliott Sharp led a pared-down version of his group Carbon at the Knitting Factory on Saturday night, and it rocked the club.
Whereas the larger group sends waves of overtones through a room, huge and rumbling car wrecks of sound, Carbon as a quartet stuck to tight and nasty riffs.
Mr.
Sharp kept his compositions short -- they averaged about four minutes each -- and turned in a concise set that borrowed from pop music much more liberally than usual.


Edward G. Bathon; Lawyer, 84
Edward G. Bathon, a lawyer in Manhattan for more than 60 years, died on Tuesday at his home in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
He was 84 years old.
He died of cancer, a family spokeswoman said.


World Bank Aids Poland
The World Bank awarded $680 million in loans to Poland today and said it hoped the financing would help stimulate economic recovery and foreign business confidence in the country.
Ian Hume, the World Bank's representative in Warsaw, said the loans would provide $280 million for the privatization of state-owned companies, $100 million for agricultural development and $200 million to develop banking.
About $100 million would be provided to cushion unemployment, which reached 1.4 million, or 7.7 percent of the nation's work force, last month.


Automated Fare for Subways Hits a Snag
New York City's plans to install an automatic fare-collection system, which would allow bus and subway riders to pass through electronic turnstiles using a prepaid card, fell into turmoil yesterday when transit officials announced that they would reopen the bidding for a contract to build the system.
The decision is expected to further delay the installation of the system.


Miscellany
*
The American Association of Advertising Agencies' annual survey of television commercial production costs has found that the average cost of producing a national spot in 1990 rose by 4 percent, to $174,000, from $168,000 in 1989. *
TDI International, a unit of Transportation Displays Inc., New York, has expanded its outdoor media network to Prague.


Hartford Fights Bankruptcy Bid By Bridgeport
The State Attorney General, Richard Blumenthal, asked a Federal court today to dismiss Bridgeport's bankruptcy petition, saying the filing is unjustified and could worsen the city's already dire fiscal problems.
In an objection filed in United States Bankruptcy Court in Bridgeport, Mr.
Blumenthal said the bankruptcy petition should be dismissed because the city had no authorization from the state to file for protection from its creditors under Chapter 9 of the Federal bankruptcy code.


Here Comes the Bride. But Wait. Here Comes Another One.
AS party concepts go, this one was a trifle formal: guests were asked to wear the clothes they were married in.
But it all came off without a hitch (that having been taken care of some time ago).
On a photo-album June day, about 150 no-longer-blushing brides and 150 not-very-nervous grooms turned out in wedding dresses, morning suits and various states of the dinner jacket.
The party, held last Sunday on a horse farm near Kingston, N.Y., celebrated the 50th anniversary of I. Kleinfeld &amp; Son , the Brooklyn bridal emporium.
It was a big day for tulle.


Alas, No Power Hitter To Win a Baseball Team
This city of lobbyists regularly delivers billion-dollar contracts to arms producers and multimillion-dollar tax breaks to the wealthy.
But it was unable to twist enough arms to bring back major league baseball to the nation's capital.
Actually, hardly anyone, even in Washington, gave the idea a slow ball's chance.
"Baghdad has a better chance of getting a team," groused Glenn Brenner, a local sports broadcaster, even before a National League committee recommended over the weekend that two new franchises be established in Denver and Miami, making losers out of Washington and three other hopefuls in the expansion race.


Return to the Road Leaves Yanks in a Familiar Position
This is no time to panic, but two days into a nine-game road trip of some importance, the Yankees are beginning to admit concern over their current state.
They have lost twice, and they have all but lost the momentum they gained from a marvelous home stand that thrust them back into the American League East race.


Democrats Fearful of Fallout As Virginia Politicians Feud
Hoping to end a political feud that is threatening their political careers and Democratic unity, Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia and Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder held a peace talk by phone late tonight after several weeks of lobbing long-distance verbal bombs at one another.
Aides refused to provide details of the talk, which took place after Mr.
Robb warned in a Capitol Hill press conference today that the feud had become "a political demoliton derby."


Solar Storm Causes Renewed Disruptions on Earth
Waves of charged particles thrown off by the Sun have caused renewed disturbances in Earth's magnetic field in recent days, disrupting radio communications and apparently disabling power transmission equipment in Virginia.
At midday yesterday, a new wave of the particles hit the magnetic field, indicating that "we're beginning a very disturbed period," said David Speich, a scientist at the Space Environment Laboratory of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, in Boulder, Colo.
His agency predicted that as result of the disturbance the Northern Lights could be visible as far south as Tulsa, Okla.


Alvin B. Rubin, 71; Judge Was Known For Rights Rulings
Alvin B. Rubin, a Federal appeals judge in Louisiana known for his rulings on civil rights, died Tuesday at Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center in Baton Rouge, La.
He was 71 years old and lived in Baton Rouge.
Judge Rubin died of liver cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


The Real Story of '68 Vietnam Bombing Halt
To the Editor:
William Safire's May 23 column ("Clark Clifford's Confession") turns history on its head about the covert operation mounted in October 1968 by Richard M. Nixon, John Mitchell and Anna Chennault to ditch President Lyndon Johnson's agreement with Hanoi for serious peace negotiations to end the Vietnam War.
I participated in the events of that month and have recently done extensive research on the period for my own historical purposes.
Mr.
Safire states that Mr.
Johnson's bombing halt announcement on Oct. 31, 1968, looking to immediate negotiations, was an "election-weekend stunt." On the contrary, "Counsel to the President," Mr.
Clifford's memoir, shows that Mr.
Johnson's terms for a bombing halt, worked out in late June 1968, never changed.
As Mr.
Clifford relates with feeling, Mr.
Johnson resisted many attempts to soften or shade these terms, forcing a platform confrontation that played a big part in the disastrous Democratic National Convention in August.
Some election stunt!


One Down; Three Coming Up


Greece Expels 26 Palestinians In Botched Attack That Killed 7
The Greek Government said today that it had ordered 26 Palestinian diplomats and students expelled from the country in connection with an attack on a British consulate in which seven people were killed and eight wounded.
Seven Palestinians have already been charged with murder in connection with the attack, and have been jailed pending trial.


Dioxin Verdict Following 3 1/2-Year Trial Is Voided
In a case that resulted in one of the nation's longest jury trials, a state appeals court has thrown out a $16.28 million verdict that was returned against the Monsanto Company four years ago because of a dioxin spill.
The ruling that voids the judgment was issued Tuesday by a unanimous three-judge panel of the Illinois Appellate Court in this town 70 miles southeast of St.
Louis.
The judges said that since the jurors at the trial had not found that any damage was done by the spill, there was no basis for an award.


Eye-Opening Pillows
The Pillowry
19 East 69th Street, New York, N.Y. 10012; (212) 628-3844. Closed in August.
In "Eyes of Laura Mars," a 1978 suspense movie, the actress Faye Dunaway sinks deep into a sofa covered with pillows, nearly all made from kilims.
The pillows were designed by Marjorie Lawrence, whose company, the Pillowry, has used vintage fabrics to make ready-made and custom-made pillows for 20 years.


Events: A Sunday Stroll Around the East Village
History on the Hoof
Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1034.


Mesa Partnership Raises $616 Million
The Mesa Limited Partnership, the big natural-gas producer headed by T. Boone Pickens, eased its bulging debt troubles today by raising $616 million in long-term debt from several insurance companies and other large institutions in a private transaction.
Mr.
Pickens pledged more than half of Mesa's total reserves, including 1.2 trillion cubic feet in the Hugoton field of Kansas and Oklahoma, as security for the notes.
Mesa has 2.1 trillion cubic feet of total reserves.


Carry Me Out of Old Virginny
Remember that silent-movie classic in which Laurel and Hardy destroyed their neighbor's car while he grimly took apart their house?
The same tit-for-tat demolition is happening within the Democratic Party.
Gov.
Douglas Wilder is a Virginian, a Democrat, a Korea combat hero, the first elected black Governor of any state.
Senator Charles Robb is a Virginian, a Democrat, a Vietnam combat hero, L.B.J.'s son-in-law, chairman of the Democrats' Senatorial Campaign Committee.
Both want to be President and they have long detested each other.


Busiest Public Library System May Face Severe Cuts in Service


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Japanese Defend Microwave Pricing
The Sharp Corporation and the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, both of Japan, denied they were dumping microwave ovens on the American market.
Last week, the Menumaster Inc. unit of Litton Industries filed an anti-dumping petition with the Commerce Department and the International Trade Commission, asking them to investigate the pricing of imported Japanese commercial microwave ovens.
"We have been exporting and selling microwave ovens at the fair price," Sharp said.
"We believe Sharp's exports do not injure U.S. microwave oven markets." Matsushita added, "We believe Matsushita is not dumping microwave ovens in the United States."


The Boss Who Plays Now Pays
More than 10 years ago, speculation was rampant that William Agee, the Bendix Corporation's chairman and chief executive, was having an affair with Mary Cunningham, a 29-year-old vice president who had received two promotions in a matter of months.
Ms.
Cunningham left; Mr.
Agee stayed.
Fast-forward a decade.
Earlier this month, word got out that Standley H. Hoch, head of the General Public Utilities Corporation, a power company, was having an affair with Susan Schepman, the vice president of communications.
Mr.
Hoch resigned; Ms.
Schepman is still there.
Why the Different Outcomes?
Why were the outcomes so different?
In good part, say some scholars and other business-watchers, because they took place in different eras.
Mr.
Agee worked when women executives were few, male executives usually winked at one another's affairs and, in case of trouble, the woman left the company.
In Mr.
Hoch's time, women executives are often just down the hall, or at customers, suppliers and competitors.
Disentangling business and romance can be far more difficult.
And business people have become more prominent, known and judged by their conduct as well as their corporate performance.


Failures Rise in Japan
Japanese corporate bankruptcies reached a three-year high last month because of rising interest rates, sluggish stock prices and labor shortages, a private credit research agency said today.
The agency, the Teikoku Data Bank Ltd., said bankruptcies among companies with total liabilities of more than $71,000 totaled 892, up 6.8 percent from April and up 77.7 percent from May 1990.
The number was the highest since 955 cases were recorded in April 1988, the agency said.


Review/Dance; Inventive Effort and Effortlessness
A man enters, seemingly headless, or rather his head is hidden by a woman on his shoulders who wraps herself around his face.
The surreal image of a man with a woman for a head sets the tone for a passionately performed dance piece, "Ah! Finir . . ." by a Swiss experimental choreographer, Philippe Saire.


Five Indicted for Insurance Fraud in California
In what prosecutors said was one of the largest cases of insurance fraud, a Federal grand jury today indicted five California residents, including two doctors, on charges of trying to bilk insurers of more than $1 billion by filing falsified medical claims.
Prosecutors said the four men and one woman had been charged with luring thousands of people into medical clinics in Southern California, primarily through phone calls from sales agents promising free or very inexpensive medical tests.
Operating Since 1984
The indictment charged that patients would undergo a battery of diagnostic examinations, including blood, urine and allergy tests, regardless of their medical condition or need for tests, and often before being examined by a doctor.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The Labor Department said it had filed suit against two corporations that financed payments to retirees with annuities bought from an insurer whose financial problems later left it unable to meet all its obligations.
The move is an attempt to clamp down on companies that refinance pension plans by buying investment contracts from insurance companies.  [ Page D1. ]
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield will eliminate group coverage for more than 100,000 members of professional and trade associations and fraternal orders.  [ D1. ]
The last issue of The National Sports Daily will be sold today.
The paper spent 16 months trying to make a success of being the nation's first daily paper devoted to sports.  [ D1. ]
Racal Electronics plans to restructure by distributing its 80 percent stake in Racal Telecom P.L.C. to stockholders.  [ D4. ]
Mesa Limited Partnership eased its bulging debt troubles by raising $616 million in long-term debt.  [ D5. ]
A group boycotting G.E. for five years to force the company to withdraw from nuclear weapons work said it had made a dent in the company's sales of medical diagnostic equipment.  [ D5. ]
A $16.28 million dioxin-spill verdict agianst Monsanto was thrown out by an appeals court.  [ A20. ]
A vaccine by MicroGeneSys may help people infected with the AIDS virus stave off the viral attack.  [ B10. ] The Economy
The F.D.I.C. has come to operate in the commercial world with a range of discretionary powers and exemptions from Federal checks and balances.  [ A1. ]
The savings and loan industry posted its first quarterly profit in four years, the Government reported.
The $626.8 million profit for the first three months does not include the huge losses at hundreds of savings associations that have been seized by regulators.  [ D1. ]
A certified public accountants group proposed a far-reaching new rule that would prohibit its 300,000 members from getting new loans from audit clients.  [ D2. ] Markets
New trading sessions that begin on the New York Stock Exchange are being greeted with uncertainty and ambivalence by some stock traders and brokers.  [ D10. ]
The American Stock Exchange disclosed details of its plan to allow listed companies to issue separate classes of stock with unequal voting rights for shareholders.  [ D10. ]
The Dow lost 23.92 points, to 2,961.99.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange rose to 167.6 million shares.  [ D10. ]
Prices of Treasury securities fell sharply, and long-term interest rates rose to their highest level in nearly seven months.  [ D18. ]  Yields were down moderately on money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.  [ D9. ]
The dollar surged to a new 1991 high against the mark and yen, lifted by the hope for a faster economic recovery in the U.S. and the absence of any central bank intervention to slow the rally.  [ D19. ]
Wheat futures prices reached a 10 1/2-month high on the Chicago Board of Trade after the Government cut its estimate of the wheat crop and guaranteed $1.5 billion in loans to the Soviets.  [ D19. ] Today's Columns
Washington officials are fighting over who should regulate the thousands of brokers and banks that sell trillions of dollars in government securities.
Stephen Labaton: Business and the Law.  [ D2. ]
Real estate investment trusts and other property-related stocks have widely outperformed the Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks over the last six months.
Market Place.  [ D10. ]
The Grand Effie Award went for an unusual series of humorous ads that helped a candidate for the United States Senate win election.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D22. ]


S.&amp; L.'s Have First Profits in Four Years
The battered savings and loan industry may be slimming down to its healthy core.
The Government reported today that the industry had posted its first quarterly profit in four years.
"Clearly, there is a segment of this industry that will survive," said T. Timothy Ryan Jr., director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, which regulates savings associations that are not in Government hands.
"These have been some of the toughest years that anyone has encountered, and some of these institutions have been able to do quite well."


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 13
Neither Ted Williams nor Joe DiMaggio played today. Both teams had the day off.


Tyson Rumor Mill in Fine Condition
Last week, Mike Tyson punched the lens of an ABC-TV camera in Las Vegas, Nev., where he is training for a rematch with Donovan (Razor) Ruddock at the Mirage on June 28.
An ABC employee who was there said later that Tyson had looked lethargic, and that he had broken the camera because he was disgusted with his effort that afternoon.


Japanese Stocks Gain
Japanese stock prices made a sudden turn upward today, their entire gain coming in the last half-hour of trading.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed at 24,808.17, up 325.48 points, or 1.33 percent.


Manslaughter Verdict Voided Because Driver Paid Ticket
Because he paid a $35 traffic ticket, a drunken driver cannot be convicted of manslaughter for a motorist's death, Maryland's second-highest court has ruled.
In a decision issued last month, the Court of Special Appeals said that in paying the ticket, the drunken driver, John Charles Glasser, was convicted of the conduct that resulted in the accident and could not be convicted of the same offense a second time.


Accounts
*
Clothestime Inc., Anaheim, Calif., to Kresser/Craig, Los Angeles.
Other finalists were Foote, Cone &amp; Belding; Della Femina McNamee, and McCann-Erickson, all of Los Angeles.
The company said the account, which has billings between $8 million and $14 million, had been handled by Ad Marketing, Los Angeles. *
Courvoisier Cognac, a brand marketed by W. A. Taylor &amp; Company, to Bozell Hong Kong for business in Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore and Taiwan.
The agency said the account, which had been handled by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, has billings of about $3.5 million.


What Hi-fi Means When You're Past 40
To the Editor:
Youngsters ignore oldsters not only in advertising as James Greenfield reports in "The Slo-Go's and the No-Go's" (Editorial Notebook, May 28).
In audio, there is similar disregard of age by young engineers and producers.
It is well known that hearing slowly deteriorates after the age of 40, but it's largely overlooked in the sound tracks of motion pictures, television, compact disks and tapes.
The most common hearing deterioration is loss of high frequencies at low levels, reduced dynamic range and poorer understanding of speech in the presence of background music or noise.


Bangladesh Sentences Ex-Leader to 10 Years
H.
M.
Ershad, deposed as President of Bangladesh last December after eight years of authoritarian rule, was sentenced today to 10 years in prison for possessing illegal weapons.
General Ershad, who is 61 years old, also faces corruption charges.
His lawyer said that today's conviction, which followed a four-month trial before a special court, would be appealed.


Where to Find Yosemite
To the Editor:
The congestion you report in Yosemite Valley in "National Parks: an Endangered Species" (front page, May 27) could be likened to a crowded doorway.
Most visitors never make it out of the valley to see more of the beauty of Yosemite.
Unfortunately, this entrance is filled with many of the toys that belong to a faster-paced world.


Associations' Coverage Cut By Blue Cross
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which provides health insurance to 9.5 million New Yorkers, said yesterday that it was dropping group coverage for more than 100,000 members of professional and trade associations and fraternal orders.
The groups losing coverage include 700 lawyers who are members of the State Bar Association, several hundred members of the New York Association of Independent Schools, more than 100 foreign journalists in the Foreign Press Association and dozens of other groups like the Peekskill Chamber of Commerce and New York Women in Film.


Growing Up With Help From Penelope Leach
THERE are moments in life when a parent wants to do nothing but scream, "The ship is sinking!" The baby has been up all night -- again.
Or the terrible 2-year-old is perfecting a new form of self-expression, the tantrum.
Or the 3-year-old is on a streak of creativity, redecorating the walls with crayons.
When all is bleak, a great many parents feel their only hope is to reach for their trans-Atlantic lifeline.
It is the empathetic voice of Penelope Leach, a British psychologist who has become a popular dispenser of advice on how to survive parenthood and nurture a happy and healthy child at the same time.


Suspect Seized in Abduction And Abuse of Manhattan Boy
A homeless man was arrested and charged yesterday with abducting and sexually abusing an 8-year-old Manhattan boy whose disappearance late last month prompted an extensive police search through Central Park.


Recycling and Incineration Dispose of Different Kinds of Waste; Increases Costs
To the Editor:
Barry Commoner states, "Since the cost per ton decreases as the rate of recycled material rises, expanding the program will reduce costs" (Op-Ed, May 29).
This is untrue.
Expanding the program will increase total costs, even if it lowers costs per ton.
New York City has a $3 billion deficit because of this type of garbage.
The United States is not running out of landfill space.
Modern landfills are often the most cost-effective and ecologically sound method for solid waste disposal.
Where recycling is truly competitive, there is no need to create composting industries or detinning facilities.


AIDS Vaccine Test Gives Hint of Promise
Preliminary results from a very small study suggest that a vaccine given after infection may improve the immune response of people with AIDS, but researchers are expressing extreme caution about the study and its results.
The study did not include a comparison with a group of patients that did not receive the vaccine, a standard procedure in medical research.
And the study could not rule out the possibility of harm to some patients.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THERE is a natural rivalry between parents and the people who look after their children during the day.
Parents want their children to feel close, but not too close, to day-care workers and preschool teachers.
They see the attachments the children form to these people and wonder if, in the children's eyes, they are being replaced.
"It's normal for parents to feel competitive with child-care providers and teachers," said Ellen Galinsky, a president of the Families and Work Institute, a Manhattan research group that advises companies on child care.
"It's also normal for child-care providers to feel competitive with parents. For the relationship to work, both people have to step beyond those feelings."


Balinese Troupe Brings Indonesia to New York


Review Is Reported On Pratt Engine
The Federal Aviation Administration is investigating the Pratt &amp; Whitney Company's JT8D jet engine for corrosion after an accident that destroyed a Boeing 727 freighter, according to an article in The Washington Post today.
The Ryan International Airlines flight crashed in Connecticut on May 3.
The three crew members were not injured, but the cargo of mail was destroyed.
The National Transportation Safety Board said metal fatigue had caused a fan disk to fly apart during takeoff, severing fuel and hydraulic lines and knocking a hole in the fuselage.
A spokesman for Pratt, based in East Hartford, Conn., told the newspaper that the company was not alarmed by one corrosion failure in the jet's 400 million flight hours.


Veterans to Receive Aid for Poison Gas Tests
World War II veterans exposed to mustard gas testing and sworn to secrecy for four decades will be eligible for disability payments under relaxed rules proposed Tuesday by the Department of Veterans Affairs.
"Mistakes were made, mistakes that we have to correct," the department's Deputy Secretary, Anthony J. Principi, said in an interview.


A Cool Treat for Children (But Watch Out for Dogs)
EVEN children who are fortunate enough to escape the city during the hot months might just get nostalgic for this staple of urban summer: the hydrant.
At least that's what the toy company Fisher-Price seems to have had in mind when it recently introduced the Fun Hydrant Sprinkler.


Top School Post Uncertain for Dinkins Choice
Members of New York City's Board of Education said yesterday that it was not certain that Mayor David N. Dinkins's new appointee to the board, H. Carl McCall, would have enough votes to become its president as the Mayor intends.
One board member, Michael J. Petrides of Staten Island, said Mr.
McCall was not the choice of the majority of the seven board members.


CHRONICLE
After accusations, insults and litigation, DELTA BURKE has finally been dropped from "Designing Women." The producers of the CBS-TV series said yesterday that they had not renewed Ms.
Burke's contract for a sixth season.
A spokeswoman for Columbia Pictures Television, the production company for "Designing Women," said yesterday that possible further changes in the show are now under discussion.
JULIA DUFFY, formerly in ABC's "Baby Talk," and JAN HOOKS, who has appeared on "Saturday Night Live," are reportedly in negotiations to join "Designing Women," but CBS would not comment yesterday on any changes.
Ms.
Burke's spokeswoman, Annette Wolf, said yesterday that Ms.
Burke had not been formally notified.
Ms.
Burke, she said, has a deal with Universal Studios for a series, which she would produce and star in.
Ms.
Wolf said Columbia Pictures Television wanted Ms.
Burke to return, but that the network and the producers did not.
"The studio has been really terrific to Delta," she said, "but the others obviously felt differently."


The National Sports Daily Closes With Today's Issue
After 16 months of trying to make a success of being the nation's first daily paper devoted to sports, The National Sports Daily announced yesterday that the clock had run out.
Today's issue will be the last.
"The payoff was too far down the road," said Frank Deford, the celebrated former sportswriter at Sports Illustrated who is The National's editor and publisher.
"It just became a very prudent business decision."


Recycling and Incineration Dispose of Different Kinds of Waste
To the Editor:
In "Why Dump Recycling?" (Op-Ed, May 29), Barry Commoner makes a good point: we could recycle more than we do.
However, he is mistaken in his belief that waste-to-energy plants -- which burn garbage as fuel -- are in economic competition with recycling facilities.
As a major supplier of both, we firmly believe that an integrated solution of recycling, composting of leaves and yard waste and, finally, burning the rest in modern waste-to-energy plants, makes the most sense.


Japanese Study Additive
Japanese companies are poised to enter a fast-growing market for a chemical that provides a cleaner and higher-octane motor fuel, industry officials said today.
The additive, known as methyl tertiary butyl ether, is used by refiners to raise oxygen levels in gasoline and cut exhaust emissions.
The United States Clean Air Act requires refiners to sell gasoline with higher oxygen content in some areas by next year.


The Key to the City
Anyone wanting access to government documents in this town of 2,200 people will have to wait a couple of weeks.
The papers are locked in file cabinets, and the city clerk went on vacation with the only key.
Mayor James Beavers says the clerk, Charles Hicks, is an elected official who does not answer to the Mayor.
"For some reason, he just wants to make sure that everyone knows he is in charge," the Mayor said.


What Were the Women 'Asking' For?
Last month a 21-year-old woman rented a cottage on Cape Cod with seven other young women.
They were celebrating their graduation from Smith, and friendships that had begun during their freshman year.
All they wanted to do was lie on the beach, swim if it was warm enough and eat as many lobsters as possible.
What they did not want to do was spend any time with the young men, students at a university outside Boston, who'd rented the house next door.
The young women would never again have a week like this, with nothing on their minds but sun, old times and a graduation ceremony to get through, and their privacy was precious.
It wasn't precious to the young men, however.
They couldn't imagine eight young women choosing to forgo the pleasure of their company.
Persistent as tomcats, they and an army of acquaintances stalked the young women.
They wheedled, they coaxed, and one night one of them howled.
He threw a brick through the picture window.


British Official Begins Talks With Syria on Freeing Western Captives
Douglas Hogg, a minister in the British Foreign Office, began talks in Damascus with Syrian Government leaders today about the fate of Western hostages, and a Teheran newspaper said one or two American captives would be released "very soon."
Mr.
Hogg went to Syria after four days of discussions in Lebanon.
Twelve Westerners missing in Lebanon are believed held by pro-Iranian Muslim Shiite fundamentalist factions.


Louisiana Insurance Official Is Sentenced
Louisiana's insurance commissioner was sentenced today to 25 years in prison for using his position to help an ailing insurance company and taking bribes from the company's owners.
Commissioner Doug Green, 41, was found guilty March 13 of 28 counts of mail fraud and conspiracy and 2 counts of laundering campaign loans.
Under state law, he was suspended without pay.
Gov.
Buddy Roemer has appointed an acting commissioner pending a November election.


Chicago Takes First N.B.A. Title
Twenty-five years after joining the National Basketball Association, the Chicago Bulls won their first championship last night by defeating the Los Angeles Lakers, 108-101, and winning the final series, 4 games to 1.
They did it behind a 30-point performance by Michael Jordan, above, who was the unanimous choice for most valuable player in the finals.
And they did it by capturing four straight games in the four-of-seven game series, including the last three on the Lakers' home court.


Lawmakers Vote to Have Mayor Select New Boston School Board
Boston's embattled School Committee, the oldest elected school board in the nation, may be facing its final days.
With a vote of 102 to 50, the Massachusetts House of Representatives gave all but final approval to a bill today to replace Boston's 13-member elected board with a 7-member one appointed by the mayor.
The House is to vote once more on the bill, which was amended today to give the superintendent more power over hiring.


INSIDE
Bush's Domestic Vision
President Bush, blaming Congress for not meeting his legislative schedule, sketched his own approach to unleashing the "magic of America" against social ills.
Page B12.
U.S.
Warns China on Arms


New York's Ordeal: The Tax Exit
New York State's budget ordeal is as misleading as it is endless.
No matter how stubborn the confrontation between Gov.
Mario Cuomo and the Legislature, New York does not have to choose between savage service cuts and an irresponsible, unbalanced budget.
Like other states hit by the recession, it has a third option: more tax increases.
Recommending higher taxes is rarely a favorite political strategy.
Assembly Speaker Mel Miller tried that earlier this spring and was shot down by the Governor and the Senate majority leader, Ralph Marino.
But if raising taxes is unpopular, so is hacking school aid, state police and support for embattled New York City.
New Yorkers can avoid, or at least soften, anguishing choices with moderate tax increases, preferably of the broadest-based, fairest kind: income taxes.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly SPECIAL COMMITEE ON DECOLONIZATION -- SUBCOMMITTEE ON SMALL TERRITORIES -- 10:30 A.M.
Economic and Social Council DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM -- GOVERNING COUNCIL -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM -- BUDGETARY AND FINANCE COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Industries Dispute Air Law
A joint study by auto makers and oil companies disputes key parts of the recently enacted Clean Air Act, which requires refiners to change the makeup of gasoline to cut pollution.
The legislation forces oil companies to make gasoline with oxygenates while reducing other chemicals to cut the amount of ozone released into the atmosphere.


Seasoned Stars Are Arriving in Formidable Style for U.S. Open
The United States Open is always as much a test of maturity as ability, but this year in particular it suits the field, since some of the oldest players are also among those who have been playing the best golf.
The prime example going into Thursday's first round at the Hazeltine National Golf Club is the 46-year-old defending champion, Hale Irwin, who has finished no worse than fourth in his last four tournaments and will be gunning for his fourth Open title.


Surgery Is Successful
HEATHER FARR, a pro golfer who is suffering from a recurrence of cancer, has undergone a successful operation to have a tumor removed from her skull.
Farr underwent five hours of surgery Tuesday at the University of Colorado Hospital.
The 26-year-old Farr, a former Arizona State standout before joining the L.P.G.A. tour, had a mastectomy in 1989 after breast cancer was discovered. (AP)


Rhode Island Mayor Is Accused of Extortion
The Mayor of Pawtucket, R.I., was arrested today on Federal charges that he had extorted money from a company that held a city contract.
The Government charges that the Mayor, Brian J. Sarault, asked a state legislator who heads an architectural landscaping company to participate with him in a kickback scheme.


More Exemptions at Open Needed
TO understand how the United States Open assembles the 156 golfers who will tee off today at Hazeltine National, you need only to know the story of the resigning United States Golf Association official who wondered what to do with his blue blazer.
"You can keep the blazer," he was informed, "but you have to send the buttons back."


George H. Guilfoyle, Retired Bishop, 77; Led Camden Diocese
Bishop George H. Guilfoyle, retired head of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Camden, N.J., and a former Auxiliary Bishop of New York, died on Tuesday at Our Lady of Lourdes Medical Center in Camden.
He was 77 years old.
He died of complications from a respiratory ailment, for which he had been hospitalized for a month, a spokesman for the diocese said.


Daly in Accord on Pact
CHUCK DALY has agreed to a contract extension to coach the Detroit Pistons through the 1991-92 season, the team announced yesterday.
Daly signed a two-year contract last summer that included an option for the 1991-92 season.
He had 15 days after the playoffs concluded to decide if he would return next season.
Daly, the National Basketball Association's oldest coach at 60, led the Pistons to the N.B.A.
Finals for three consecutive years, including championships in 1989 and 1990.
Last February, Daly was named head coach of the 1992 Olympic team, the first squad that will be allowed to use professional players. . . .
San Antonio Spurs Coach LARRY BROWN said yesterday that he had met with South Carolina officials about the school's coaching job, but that no job offer was made. (AP)


Space Shuttle Crew in Biomedical Experiments


BASEBALL: Two Young Pitchers Are Making Their Marks; Twins' Erickson Is Real Surprise With 9-2 Record
His run of success has been so long and so fruitful that Scott Erickson still isn't quite sure how to describe it.
When he chose a word today, it almost sounded inappropriate.


Denver and Miami a Step Closer To Obtaining Expansion Teams
Denver and Miami today moved one step closer to getting major league baseball teams after a committee of baseball owners unanimously approved their selection as the two new National League franchises.
"Our function is completed and the matter is now in the hands of the expansion committee and the leagues themselves," said Fred Kuhlmann, president of the St.
Louis Cardinals and chairman of the ownership committee, which is composed of four National League and four American League owners or their representatives.


62 Queens Libraries Await Deep Cuts
At the Elmhurst branch of the Queens Borough Public Library, elderly men pore over Chinese newspapers while others borrow books by Louis L'Amour, in Mandarin or Korean.
A few miles away, at the Vleigh branch, Orthodox Jewish families arrive just before sunset on Fridays to take out a weekend's worth of books.
Danielle Steele is a favorite, in both Hebrew and English.


Amex 'Supervoting' Plan
The American Stock Exchange yesterday disclosed details of its plan to allow listed companies to issue separate classes of stock with unequal voting rights for shareholders.
The details were disclosed in a filing the Amex made yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Under the rules, Amex-listed companies would be able to issue "supervoting" shares, which would provide disproportionate voting powers to their holders, once the companies met certain conditions.


Middle Age (and Later) Is Frisky for Fictional Men
Being middle-aged or older is positively grand and frisky on television these days -- that is, if you're a man.
Middle-aged women generally have to behave like, well, ladies.
A 50-ish or 60-ish male seems to be, more than ever, an altogether admirable figure, commanding awe and admiration when not being adored as an outright sex object.
White hair conveys a certain majesty.
A touch of thickness around the waist connotes substance.
Being a bit crotchety speaks of experience.
Times, obviously, could hardly be better for incipient codgers.


Dinkins Faults Council on Plan For '92 Budget
With negotiations on New York City's budget still stalemated, Mayor David N. Dinkins warned the City Council leadership yesterday that their taxing and spending proposals were not realistic and would leave the city at least $565 million short of the balanced budget required by law.
In a letter to the Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, Mr.
Dinkins also took pains to remind the Council that while it has the power to approve the budget, the Mayor has the sole power to set the estimates of the revenue that the city will have to work with.


Pirates Set Back Dodgers, 201, As Drabek Stays in Fine Style
Doug Drabek again flashed his Cy Young Award form, allowing one run in seven innings as the Pirates beat the Los Angeles Dodgers, 2-1, tonight in the first game this season between the two National League division leaders.
Helped by a Dodger baserunning blunder and a rare Pittsburgh double play, Drabek (5-7) continued his comeback from a 1-6 start by winning his third in a row.
Mike Morgan (6-5) took the loss.
Padres 7, Cardinals 2
SAN DIEGO (AP) -- Tony Fernandez hit a tie-breaking single to ignite a five-run rally in the eighth inning, preserving a fine effort by Bruce Hurst for San Diego.


Baltimore Bancorp Election Results
A dissident shareholder group of the Baltimore Bancorp said it had won six seats on the Baltimore Bancorp board.
The group said the final report on the election last month showed that it had also succeeded in increasing the size of the board by 10 directors, to 28, and in winning the 10 new board seats.
The dissidents said, however, that the election of the 10 additional directors might be delayed because of a lawsuit in Federal District Court in Baltimore.
The group, led by Edwin F. Hale, a Baltimore executive, said the bank planned to file a suit challenging an independent inspector's certified results.


USAir Settles Suit of 2 Black Pilots Charging Bias
USAir has agreed to discontinue a hiring practice that gave preference to the relatives of employees as part of the settlement of a lawsuit brought by two black pilots who said they had been discriminated against.
Federal District Judge Donald Ziegler approved the settlement Monday between USAir and the pilots, Philip A. Garland, 37 years old, of Las Vegas, Nev., and Larry C. Taylor, 41, of Carson, Calif., who applied for jobs in the early 1980's.


Albania Appoints a Non-Communist Cabinet
Parliament tonight approved Albania's first non-Communist Cabinet in the postwar era, formally breaking the grip of hard-line rule.
A "government of national salvation" was approved just a week after the Communist Cabinet of Prime Minister Fatos Nano resigned in the middle of a crippling nationwide general strike and a badly shaken economy.


Bryant Park Journal; After 3 Years, a Park Awaits a Wary Public
Whenever a warm, sunny day beckoned Arlene Hirko into Bryant Park for lunch, she seldom made it past the first bite of her sandwich.
First, bellicose drunks would try to bully her off her bench.
Then pushy drug dealers would parade past her, peddling their goods like hot dog vendors at a baseball game.
"Smoke? . . .  Smoke?"
"They took over the place," recalled Ms.
Hirko, who works at a shoe repair shop near West 40th Street and the Avenue of the Americas, across the street from the seven-acre park.
"I stopped going there. It was too dangerous."


John T. Dudich, 51, Publicity Agent, Dies
John T. Dudich, a public relations representative for many classical music artists, died on Sunday in Anaheim, Calif.
He was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from AIDS, said Steven Kitezh, a friend.


Hollywood P.R. Figure Leaving
Henry Rogers, one of the doyens of Hollywood public relations, who is credited with making Rita Hayworth a star, is leaving the profession after 56 years.
Mr.
Rogers, 77 years old, said yesterday that his contract with Rogers &amp; Cowan, which he founded in 1950, had expired and that he "has had enough." The agency was sold in 1987 to Shandwick P.L.C. with a four- year employment agreement for Mr.
Rogers and the firm's other principals.


Rifle Association Becomes a Scapegoat
To the Editor:
Russell Baker (column, May 28) asks, "Who is the N.R.A.?" We are, and we have human faces.
We have run the ridiculously bureaucratic gantlet required to regain the constitutional right to bear arms.
And we have exercised that right.
Neverthe less, we are law-abiding citizens, striking terror in the heart of no one.
The problem is not proliferating firearms, but that the Government insures that the proliferation is in the hands of criminals through gun-control legislation, which criminals do not heed, and through lax enforcement, which keeps criminals on the street.
Thus, gun control only disarms the law-abiding in society, while doing nothing to disarm criminals (witness New York City).


Baker Warns China Against Selling New Missiles
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d warned China today that there would be "profound consequences" for Chinese-American relations if Beijing sold newly developed ballistic missiles to Syria and Pakistan.
China's arms exports have become a matter of controversy as Congress considers President Bush's proposal to renew Beijing's preferential trade status.
Mr.
Baker said the United States had no "evidence or any indication" that China had actually shipped surface-to-surface missiles to Syria, despite a recent press report suggesting that a deal was near completion.


CHRONICLE
DAVID MERRICK was detained by Federal agents yesterday for trying to carry too much undeclared money -- $135,000 to $145,000 -- out of the country.
The limit is $10,000.
The producer, 78 years old, and NATALIE LLOYD, his companion, were detained as they passed through customs for a flight to London from John F. Kennedy Airport.
"Mr. Merrick signed a cash declaration, which was understated," said Lawrence W. Pollack, his lawyer.
The money, which is being held by the authorities, was in the form of cash, money orders and traveler's checks.
Mr.
Pollack added that "Mr. Merrick will appear in court whenever he is required to."


Park Benches for All Seasons


First, a Good Read Before Renovating
FOR many homeowners, summer is the time for major remodeling and renovation projects.
And what better way to start work than by curling up with a good book?
Interest in home-improvement books reached a peak in the 1970's, said Norman Mack, a group editor at Reader's Digest General Books.
Sales declined in the 1980's, but now there is a resurgence, brought on by the flagging real-estate market.


At the F.D.I.C., Army of Temps
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation differs from other Federal agencies in several respects.
Thousands of its employees work on a temporary basis, with fewer benefits than full employees, because the agency has been granted an exemption from Civil Service regulations.
The F.D.I.C. says that the temporary emergency nature of its work -- taking over failed banks and making whatever collections can be made on their bad loans -- demands flexibility.


New N.T.T. Unit
The Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation plans to set up a new company in Germany near the end of the month.
N.T.T. will own 90 percent of the new company, N.T.T.
Deutschland G.m.b.H., to be based in Dusseldorf, and two of its other subsidiaries will evenly split the remaining 10 percent.
The German operation will encourage the development of new business and coordinate technical operations between N.T.T. and European telecommunications companies.


Undergraduate Loans Have $13,250 Ceiling
To the Editor:
For those with college-age children, I have a correction and a clarification to offer on "Student Aid at a Glance," which accompanies "Battle Is Looming on U.S. College Aid to Poor Students" (front page, May 27), your report on the Bush Administration plan to cut eligibility under the Higher Education Act.
The maximum loan under the Stafford student loan program, or guaranteed student loan, is $2,625 for each of the first two years of undergraduate study and $4,000 for the third and fourth year, or a four-year cumulative loan of $13,250.
There are provisions for $4,000 more for a fifth year of study in certain programs, which would yield your total of $17,250.


Police Say Officer Should Have Worn Life Jacket
Police commanders said yesterday that an officer who drowned on Tuesday afternoon during a routine training exercise in New York Harbor should have been wearing a life preserver.
Chief of Department Robert J. Johnston Jr. said the officer, Kenneth Hansen, who was assigned to the Police Department's harbor unit, violated police regulations when he dived into the harbor without a life preserver at 12:30 P.M.
Tuesday.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Amoco Corp., Chicago, named Rady A. Johnson senior vice president of government relations, and Terrance R. Weaver vice president of public and government affairs. *
Barneys New York appointed John P. Hoeller senior vice president of store operations, and Sylvia Hemmingway vice president of marketing.


Bush Hails Salvador Chief, Saying Rebels Block Peace
President Bush praised President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador today for strides taken to end that country's decade-long civil war, and blamed leftist guerrillas for blocking the final path to peace.
After a two-hour meeting between Administration and Salvadoran officials, the State Department's senior Latin American specialist, Bernard W. Aronson, amplified Mr.
Bush's remarks, accusing the rebels of "stalling deliberately" on a cease-fire plan while stepping up their violence.


Georgia Issuing Revenue Bonds
The Georgia State Tollway Authority issued $97.5 million in guaranteed revenue bonds through competitive bidding won by a group of underwriters led by Dean Witter Reynolds.
Yields on the tax-exempt issue range from 5.45 percent for a bond due in 1995 to 6.25 percent in 2001, 6.75 percent in 2006, 6.9 percent in 2009 and 6.95 percent in 2010 and 2011.
Underwriters said the debt offering had been rated Aaa by Moody's Investors Service and AA+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.


President Has Left Whitman's Chocolate
Jay G. Shoemaker has resigned as president of the Whitman's Chocolate Company, the 149-year-old confectioner that makes the Whitman's Sampler candy assortment.
Mr.
Shoemaker, who is 39 years old, joined Whitman's as president last August.
His resignation comes after the company reported that first-quarter sales had fallen 12.1 percent from the level a year earlier.


Pop in Review
God Is My Co-pilot
The Knitting Factory
Tuesday night's show at the Knitting Factory, featuring a local band, God Is My Co-pilot, had a deceptive sense of chaos to it.
The group -- two drummers, a bassist, a guitarist and a singer -- made lots of spastic noise, then suddenly stopped.
Some arrangements had complicated counter rhythms and changing tempos.
At times the bass was the prominent instrument, keeping a song together with a riff while the other band members mashed or howled away; other times the drums were the primary instrument.
Calculated and precise in their sloppiness, the band made an esthetic decision out of what had been, in the late 1970's and early 80's, a political one.


Pacific Bell Debt To Yield 8.78%
Pacific Bell, a San Francisco-based subsidiary of the Pacific Telesis Group, priced $200 million in notes yesterday through underwritrers led by Lehman Brothers Inc.
The notes, which reach final maturity in 2001, have an 8.7 percent coupon and are priced at 99.473 to yield 8.78 percent, or about 45 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.
The issue is noncallable and is rated Aa-3 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Musings on a People Untouched by Politics or Change
The Last Italian Portrait of a People By William Murray 254 pages.
Prentice Hall Press . $21.95.
Growing up as a youth in Italy, William Murray didn't dream of founding a famous publishing house, like Angelo Rizzoli, or becoming the head of Fiat and an international jet setter, like Gianni Agnelli, although both the Rizzoli and Agnelli dynasties appear in Mr.
Murray's "Last Italian: Portrait of a People." No, Mr.
Murray aspired to become something even more attractive in the eyes of many Italians -- an opera star, a "golden throat."


2 Concerns Sued Over Pensions
The Labor Department said yesterday that it had filed suit against two corporations that financed payments to retirees with annuities bought from an insurer whose financial problems later left it unable to meet all its obligations.
The move is an attempt to clamp down on companies that refinance pension plans by buying investment contracts from insurance companies.
The suits, filed against Maxxam Inc. of Houston and Magnetek Inc. of Los Angeles, seek to make the companies responsible for any losses suffered by their retirees.
The insurer, the Executive Life Insurance Company, which was seized by California insurance regulators in April, is also named as a defendant in the Magnetek suit.
Losses for Annuity Holders
Executive Life, under the direction of regulators, is currently paying only 70 percent of scheduled payments to holders of its annuities, including company pension plans.
Regulators have said they expect annuity holders to have significant losses in a sale or liquidation of Executive Life's holdings, much of which are high-risk "junk bonds." An annuity is an agreement to make payments over a long period at a certain rate of return, usually in return for a single lump payment up front.


The Shoehorn School Of Doing Shakespeare
The name of the entertainment is "The Complete Works of William Shakespeare (Abridged)," and brevity is certainly the soul of its wit.
In fact, the production is performed by the only traveling Shakespeare company in the world that prints a medical warning in every program: "Not recommended for people with heart ailments, back problems, English degrees, inner ear disorders, and/or people inclined to motion sickness."
Why the disclaimer?
This company presents 37 Shakespeare plays and 154 sonnets in just under two hours.


Darling Collapses as Avery Out-Pitches, and Almost Out-Hits, the Mets
Ron Darling temporarily saved himself and preserved a shutout with some nifty glovework last night in the fourth inning.
The Braves were twice denied because Darling alertly shoveled bunt attempts forward with his glove to teammates to gain outs.
Darling would have needed a few more outfielders and a few more gloves to rescue himself from Atlanta one inning later.
The Braves eschewed the bunt and started sending uncatchable rockets into the outfield.


VOLCANO IMPERILS PHILIPPINES BASE
Two big eruptions shook a Philippine volcano overnight after a series of blasts Wednesday morning, throwing a huge column of ash and smoke 80,000 feet into the air and sending thousands of people fleeing from nearby areas.
The eruption of Mount Pinatubo in central Luzon Island threatened the future of Clark Air Base, one of the largest American military installations outside the United States.
But life went on much as usual in Angeles, a city adjacent to the base whose 300,000 inhabitants kept a wary eye on the volcano but went ahead with a parade to commemorate the Philippines' independence day.


Agnes Gund New Head Of Modern Museum
Agnes Gund, a collector, art educator and vice president of the Museum of Modern Art, was named president of the museum yesterday.
The appointment had been expected.
Ms.
Gund was elected to the prestigious volunteer post by the museum's board of trustees.
She succeeds Donald B. Marron, who served five years, the maximum term.
He was elected a vice chairman.


Lendl and Sampras Mowed Down in Tune-Up
In a tournament they intended to serve as a tune-up for the grass courts of Wimbledon in two weeks, Ivan Lendl and Pete Sampras ran into opponents that resembled turbocharged lawnmowers today and were beaten in their first matches of the Stella Artois event.
Lendl, the two-time defending champion and the player seeded second this year, fell to the impressive serve and volleying of Grant Connell of Canada, 5-7, 6-3, 6-4.


Punjab Campaigns to Resume In an Election Steeped in Fear
In Punjab, the only state in India where secession is a major campaign theme, politicians are beginning a delayed election race steeped in fear but determined not to be left out of the democratic process.
At stake is not only representation in Parliament but also the revival of state government after four violent years of central-Government rule.


For Want of a Gauge, The Records Were Lost
Dan O'Brien began yesterday by running the fastest 100 meters ever in a decathlon, a remarkable sprint of 10.23 seconds.
He then soared 26 feet 1 1/2 inches in the long jump, a leap that put him well ahead of Bruce Jenner's American record pace, which once put Jenner on a Wheaties box.


Dialogue: Israel and the Peace Process Does the U.N. Belong at the Table?; In the End, We Would Loose
Most observers seem confounded by Israel's response to the latest U.S. proposal for a Middle East peace conference.
Israel's insistence on excluding a U.N. representative and its opposition to reconvening the conference after it launches direct talks are viewed, at best, as petty, pedantic and irrelevant.
At worst, Israel is accused of insincerity and intent to undermine the peace process.
It is difficult for Westerners to understand that despite 43 years of Israel's solid presence and growing power, the Arab world still deems it a passing, aberrational and illegitimate phenomenon.
That is why, while professing a desire for peace, the Arab regimes are unable to do what any nation would do if it genuinely wanted peace: sit down with its adversary, hammer out differences and reach an agreement.


Plate Under a 'Ring of Fire'
Similar geological processes are responsible for major eruptions of volcanoes in Japan and the Philippines, but they are too far apart to be directly related, geologists say.
In each case a section of sea floor known as the Philippine Plate is plunging into the deep earth under the islands.
That generates the earthquakes common in the region and, when the descending plate reaches a depth of about 60 miles, it produces molten rock that rises to the surface and feeds volcanoes.


G.M. Warranties
The General Motors Corporation will waive the $100 deductible for warranty work after the first 12 months of coverage for its 1992 cars and light trucks.
The warranty on a 1992 model will cover the entire vehicle for three years or 36,000 miles.
Warranties for 1989-91 models were effective for three years or 50,000 miles and had a $100 deductible after the first 12 months or 12,000 miles.


Monkeys in the Kitchen, Fish in the Bathroom


In One City, Signs of an Upturn
If the chief characteristic of emerging recovery is that the various individual economic signals are mixed, Berks County is now watching a recession fade into history.
Fitfully, sometimes almost imperceptibly, business here is gradually improving, accompanied by growing confidence that, by summer's end, a rebound -- most likely a modest one -- will be obvious, to all.


Business and the Law; Regulating Treasury Issues
UNTIL 1986 the world's largest market that for securities and bonds backed by the United States Treasury -- had no regulatory or Federal supervision.
For several years a Federal law that changed that situation but it is about to expire, and officials in Washington are fighting over who should have the new authority to regulate the thousands of brokers and banks that sell trillions of dollars in Government securities, as well as the financial instruments issued by the large Government-backed mortgage lenders.


16 Artisans Return To the Scene
IT has been 10 years since Bebe Pritam Johnson and her husband, Warren, opened the doors of Pritam &amp; Eames in the pressing room of a former laundry in East Hampton, L. I.
To celebrate its first decade, the crafts gallery is presenting an exhibition, "10 by 16." Sixteen artists were invited to submit new works, which are on view alongside pieces made 10 years ago by the same cast of characters.
The exhibit offers a chance to see how the artists' work has evolved.
For some, there has been a continuum of expression; for others, a turnabout.


CHRONICLE
PRINCE CHARLES has given up polo temporarily, after suffering acute back pain.
He was advised by his doctor to avoid violent exercise and has withdrawn from a match next Tuesday.
A press report from London said he had given up polo until at least the end of the month, and perhaps longer.
He had planned to play more than 60 games this season.
Last summer the Prince suffered a fractured right arm playing polo.
That put him on the sidelines of his favorite sport until six weeks ago.


After Hours at Big Board to Start Today
New after-hours trading sessions that begin today on the New York Stock Exchange are being greeted with uncertainty and ambivalence by some stock traders and brokers, as they try to divine what effect it will have on their business.
For the first time in history, the closing bell today on the Big Board will not signal the end of the trading day.
Rather, the exchange will begin for the first time allowing trading to continue after hours through two new sessions that are the exchange's beachhead in its move to create a 24-hour trading day.  'Fundamental Things Going On'
"I don't think people are going to jump into the system," said Jeffrey Tabak, an partner with Miller Tabak Hirsch &amp; Company.
"But we know that there are fundamental things going on here that could be very important to the overall marektplace."


EX-OFFICIAL LINKS K.G.B. TO A KILLING
The former K.G.B. official who was in charge of foreign counterintelligence from 1970 to 1979 has disputed the Soviet agency's assertions that it had nothing to do with the killing of an exiled Bulgarian dissident in London in 1978.
The ex-official, former Maj.
Gen.
Oleg D. Kalugin, said he personally sent two K.G.B. operatives to Sofia that year to provide the Bulgarian secret service with dissolving poison pellets, concealed in a sharp umbrella tip that was jabbed into the leg of the exiled writer, Georgi Markov, at a bus stop.
He died days later in a hospital.


Cosell Resting
"This is HOWARD COSELL. I'm fine."
So said Cosell yesterday in a voice that left no doubt that it was not an imposter who answered the phone at the Cosell residence in Manhattan.
The 73-year-old Cosell, who underwent surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital on Monday for the removal of a cancerous tumor from his chest, referred a caller to a brief statement issued by his family.


Bush Outlines an Attack on Domestic Ills
In response to accusations that he lacks a domestic policy, President Bush tonight blamed Congress for failing to meet his legislative schedule and sketched his approach to unleashing the "magic of America" to cure serious social problems.
The philosophical underpinning of Mr.
Bush's speech, delivered on the White House South Lawn but not broadcast live on television, was a significant departure from the views of his predecessor, Ronald Reagan, as Mr.
Bush called for a synthesis of Reagan-era economics with government and community-based social action.


Richardson Will Get Another Opportunity
MICHEAL RAY RICHARDSON, the former Knick and Net playmaker with a troubled past, will try to return to the National Basketball Association after an absence of almost five years.
The 36-year-old former All-Star, who was banned for the minimum of two years in 1986 after testing positive for drugs a third time, will begin his comeback attempt at the Indiana Pacers' rookie and free agent camp July 15-17.
If he does well, he will accompany the Pacers to play in the Detroit Pistons' four-team summer league, July 18-21.


Citicorp Looks At Card Profits
Citicorp's largest profit center, its American credit card business, will earn about the same or slightly less this year than in 1990, because of slow growth and continued high delinquencies and loan losses, according to James L. Bailey, who heads that part of the bank.
At a recent analysts' meeting, Mr.
Bailey said the bank's credit card profits could be slightly below or equal to the $600 million to $700 million earned last year.
He noted that the credit card industry might grow only 10 percent this year, down from more than 16 percent in 1990.


Japanese Volcano Erupts Again and Scientists Fear Worse to Come
With a powerful midnight explosion that hurled stones more than three miles, a Japanese volcano erupted today for the second time in nine days, and scientists warned that a new and far more dangerous blast was in prospect.
The second eruption of Mount Unzen, near Shimabara in southwestern Japan, smashed windows and roof tiles but was not reported to have caused any injuries.
But scientists said their instruments had detected a swelling of the volcano, indicating a buildup of pressure within the 4,450-foot peak, and counted 18 tremors near the mountain today.


The Chance of a Half-Millennium
For want of private support and public enterprise, the U.S. risks an embarrassing pratfall when the gates open next spring for Expo '92 in Seville, Spain -- the 500th birthday party for the Columbian voyages.
America lags in building even a bargain-basement pavilion at this global festival.
One reason is that Spain also happens to be the host for the 1992 Olympics, meaning that two major events are competing for corporate patrons.
And a limp U.S. economy and the Persian Gulf war have eroded public and private funding.


Steinbrenner to Appeal
Lawyers for GEORGE STEINBRENNER yesterday appealed a Federal judge's decision to dismiss a lawsuit against the stenographic firm that transcribed key interviews in baseball's investigation of the Yankee owner.
The appeal was filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
The case was thrown out June 3 by Judge ROBERT SWEET of United States District Court in Manhattan.
Sweet said Steinbrenner had been unable to prove that the transcripts were tampered with illegally or that the changes made in the transcripts had affected Commissioner FAY VINCENT's findings, which resulted in Steinbrenner's giving up control of the Yankees. . . .
Cincinnati Reds outfielder ERIC DAVIS will be out for 7 to 10 days with a hip flexor strain, the team said yesterday.
Davis sustained the injury in the first inning of Cincinnati's 6-1 victory Tuesday over Montreal while running out a ground ball to third. (AP)


The Dresden Scene: Sex Shops and Neo-Nazis
The Klax nightclub, out along Leipziger Strasse, has a black smudge where a gasoline bomb was thrown the other night by neo-Nazis vowing to avenge the killing of their leader.
On June 1, Rainer Sonntag, a 36-year-old neo-Nazi leader from Langen in western Germany, was shot down in front of the Faun-Palast, a boarded-up movie theater, after he had declared his intention to clean out the sex shops and clubs that have sprung up in Dresden since the fall of Communism in 1989.The next night, his gang made good on its word.
Now the entrance of the Sex Shopping Center, on nearby Moritzburger Strasse, is bricked up, its windows and sign smashed.
Under the Faun-Palast's delapidated marquee, mounds of flowers surmounted by a steel helmet and imperial German war flags of World War I vintage mark the spot where Mr.
Sonntag was slain.


IRAN SAYS IT FEARS 'MASSACRE' IN IRAQ
President Hashemi Rafsanjani said today that Iran could not remain indifferent to a "massive" deployment of Iraqi troops near its southern border and that it would seek the help of the United Nations to prevent "the massacre of innocent Iraqi Shiite civilians."
In a joint news conference with the Austrian President, Kurt Waldheim, the first Western European head of state to visit Iran since the 1979 revolution, Mr.
Rafsanjani said that Iran was trying to avoid a recurrence of tragedy "through legal and diplomatic channels," the Teheran radio said.


P.L.O. Refuses to Withdraw From Bases in Southern Lebanon
The Palestine Liberation Organization has refused to give up its bases in southern Lebanon to allow the Lebanese Army to deploy there, adding another complication to Government plans to disarm all factions after 16 years of civil war, security officials and published reports said today.
Concern also deepened here over a reported message from the Bush Administration criticizing what the Beirut daily As Safir today called "Lebanese Government procrastination" in disarming about 11,000 P.L.O. guerrillas in various parts of the country.


Report on Fed Sees Optimism
Some officials of the Federal Reserve Board think the economy could bounce back more strongly than generally expected, according to a confidential report by a respected consulting firm in Washington.
"Senior officials make clear the 'increasing possibility' that the next three quarters could show quite strong U.S. production," said the report, prepared by Johnson Smick International.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in some copies on Monday about Lieut.
Jeffrey N. Zaun, a Navy pilot who was a prisoner of war in Iraq, characterized his remarks in a Nevada newspaper interview incorrectly.
Although he said he would not want to kill again, he did not say he had second thoughts about war.
On Tuesday, because of an editing error, a more extensive article about Lieutenant Zaun represented his views incompletely.
It should have noted that Lieutenant Zaun said he could not rule out having to kill again in combat.


N.C.A.A. to Tape Inquiries
The National Collegiate Athletic Association, over objections from its top enforcement officers, has changed a long-standing policy and directed that all investigators move to tape their interviews.
Witnesses will be given access to the tapes but are not allowed to make their own recordings.
They can decline to be taped.


Running Faster Than Ever At Age 38
Thirtysomething joggers wondering whether they have any hopes of achieving a personal best might take encouragement from Francie Larrieu-Smith, the Nolan Ryan of distance running.
In April, four months after her 38th birthday, Larrieu-Smith broke Mary Slaney's nine-year-old American record for 10,000 meters.
Later that month she finished second to Rosa Mota, the world's best marathoner, in the London Marathon.
And last month, even while still feeling the marathon in her legs, she broke the American record at 12 kilometers on the very hilly course of the Bay to Breakers race in San Francisco.
The Kenyan star she passed in the final stretch -- Delillah Asiago, winner of the Advil Mini-Marathon in New York -- was exactly half her age.


Gorbachev Sees Summit Talks in Late July
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said after voting in the Russian republic presidential elections today that his summit meeting with President Bush in Moscow would probably not take place until July.
American officials in Washington have said the most likely date would be after the London meeting of industrial democracies July 15 to 17.


Savings Seen by Using Millions to Study Aging
Spending $312 million more each year for medical research on aging could save the nation billions of dollars and significantly improve the quality of life for America's elderly, a new Institute of Medicine report says.
The report, issued today, said the United States spends about $600 million on research into relieving the ailments of aging each year, while the cost of treating health problems of the elderly is more than $162 billion annually.
The nation needs to increase research on the elderly to at least $913 million, the report said.


F.C.C. IS INCREASING LOCAL REGULATION OF CABLE TV RATES
In an attempt to curb soaring rates for cable television, the Federal Communications Commission today adopted rules that give more local governments the power to roll back prices for basic service.
But many urban areas, including New York, would remain unregulated, and consumer groups and local governments denounced the changes as virtually worthless.
The new rules, which take effect in about 90 days, expand the definition of when a local cable system faces no "effective competition." Only then can local governments regulate cable rates.


People
*
William D. Wells, executive vice president and director of marketing at DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago, said yesterday that he would retire as of July 1.
The agency said Mr.
Wells's responsibilities to direct research would be assumed by two executives there: Jim Crimmins, director of strategic planning and research, and Jeri Moore, director of the Delta Group, which combines the agency's media research department and the marketing decision systems unit. *
Leonard Goldenberg has been named senior vice president and managing director of worldwide communications at Ayer Inc., New York.


Art in Review
'The Library' Josh Baer Gallery 476 Broome Street Through June 29
For those with a penchant for a Romantic, somewhat illustrational realism, the exhibitions that Douglas Blau organizes are a welcome event.
Even for those lacking such enthusiasm, Mr.
Blau's persistence in isolating this particular strain of contemporary art is always illuminating.
His latest effort, "The Library," brings together nine artists whose work often pays special attention to the human capacity for organization and order.


SEOUL SAYS NORTH IS MOVING FORWARD
President Roh Tae Woo said today that after four decades of violence and bitter division, "North Korea has come to its senses" and is sending the first signals that it is preparing to "step forward into the open world."
Mr.
Roh's assessment of a series of surprising announcements in recent weeks from the North Korean capital, Pyongyang, came in a wide-ranging interview today at Blue House, the presidential palace on a hillside above Seoul.


A Kansas Bank Is Insolvent
The Kansas Bank Commissioner today declared the Bank of Horton, once one of the largest originators of student loans in the nation, insolvent and announced that a bank in a nearby town had bought it to operate it as a branch.
The Horton bank had loan losses that exceeded its capital, Commissioner Frank D. Dunnick's office said.


2 F.B.I. Agents Quit Over Royalties for Mafia Book
Two F.B.I. agents who expect to share $1 million in royalties from their book about a former New York Mafia boss have resigned amid a furor over whether they improperly published secret information on the sex life of the mobster and on bureau surveillance tactics.
The book, "Boss of Bosses," about the late Paul Castellano by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins, purports to give an inside look at the life of a mob leader.
Not only does it describe the intrigues of the Gambino crime family, but it also gives details of Mr.
Castellano's personal life -- including his affair with his maid and the surgery he had to restore his sexual potency.


Vehicle Sales Rose 9.4% In Early June
An especially strong performance by the General Motors Corporation helped raise sales of domestically built cars and light trucks 9.4 percent in early June.
Although sales are still relatively weak and analysts predict that auto makers may be forced to trim their third-quarter production schedules, the latest numbers suggest that the United States automotive market continues slowly to gain strength.


Bill Is Passed To Extend Regulations For Rents
Resisting a strong push from landlord groups to revise the laws that limit rent increases on one million apartments in New York City and some surrounding counties, lawmakers approved a bill today that simply extends the current regulations for two years.
In what has become something of a spring ritual here every two years, the extension of the rent-stabilization law remained in limbo until the 11th hour.
Officials said there were never any serious questions about the protections remaining in force for the vast majority of rent-stabilized apartments.


N.L. Expansion: Patience, Patience
Major league owners finished their quarterly meetings today on a quiet note, following two days dominated by expansion talk.
Officials maintained that nothing would block final approval of Denver and Miami as the National League's two new franchises, but they said the formal vote might not come for as long as a month.
Commissioner Fay Vincent admitted that the final part of the expansion process had not gone smoothly.
After announcing last week that its recommendations would be delayed, the National League's expansion committee reversed itself and revealed its choices to the major league teams.


Grain and Soybeans Lower; Livestock and Meat Mixed
Most grain and soybean futures prices fell yesterday as traders discounted a Soviet food aid package and focused instead on favorable Midwestern crop weather and a mixed bag of planting estimates.
On other commodity markets, oil futures retreated; precious metals were mixed, and livestock and meat futures were mixed.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11
Boris Yeltsin swept to victory in the presidential election in the Russian republic, becoming the first popularly elected leader in Russian history.
And in another rebuff to Communism, voters in Leningrad called for restoration of the city's original name, St.
Petersburg.
Page A1


On the Day After Winning the Title, Air Chicago Soars in Stratosphere
The Chicago Bulls were on an emotional high today, looking down at the rest of the basketball world.
By defeating the Los Angeles Lakers, 108-101, in Game 5 here Wednesday night and winning the first championship in the club's 25-year history, the Bulls conquered the National Basketball Association in unusual fashion.
They are the first champion since Milwaukee in 1971 that had the league's regular-season scoring champion in its lineup (Kareem Abdul-Jabbar then, Michael Jordan now).
And they are the first champion since Washington in 1978 whose starting center averaged fewer than 10 points per game in the regular season (Wes Unseld then, Bill Cartwright now).


In a Year of Adversity, Good Turns on Campus
This has been a tough year for higher education, but standing up to adversity has brought a surprising benefit to many colleges and universities: altruism seems to have broken out on campuses around the country.
Instead of storming administration buildings, some students have eliminated concerts and donated the money to the institutions, and in one case students voluntarily increased their fees.
Top administrators have cut their own pay.
Some professors have taught extra courses, without pay, to help their employers through their dark hours.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.57
5.67
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.59
5.56
7.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.81
5.80
7.57
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.20
8.21
8.38
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.50
8.54
8.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.54
9.58
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.32
7.31
7.49
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


They'll Take Manhattan, or a Reasonable Likeness


Silvan Tomkins, 80, Psychologist Who Cited Power of Emotion, Dies
Silvan Samuel Tomkins, a psycholgist who specialized in the study of human emotions, died on Monday at Shore Memorial Hospital in Somers Point, N.J.
He was 80 years old and lived in Strathmere, N.J.
Dr.
Tomkins, who suffered from lymphoma, died of kidney failure, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Pedaling Into the Sunset, With Help
FOR the first 25 miles, it was a great day.
Birds cooed as they nestled in the arches of a graceful steel bridge across the Connecticut River.
A light rain rippled the river's surface.
For two hours, my bicycle glided past New Hampshire farms and meadows.
Suddenly, the refreshing drizzle turned into a downpour.
Visibility vanished and, before long, my sneakers were gushy.
My plastic windbreaker, the one I always carry just in case, was no help; the soggy nylon felt like a Hefty bag.
But it was too chilly to stop, and my hotel was still 25 miles away.
As the rain beat down, there was nothing to do but pedal on.


In Quaint Nyack, Not-So-Quaint Condos and G-Strings
When this antiquing center on the Hudson courted a developer years ago to build waterfront housing, residents envisioned some tasteful condominiums in keeping with the village's Victorian character.
What they have instead are pink and blue monoliths at the foot of Main Street that seem to scream modern-day Miami Beach more than whisper mid-19th century New England.
"It cuts us off from the waterfront and it's visually intrusive," said Nyack's Mayor, Kieran Quinn.
"This has just been a disaster."


YELTSIN IS HANDILY ELECTED LEADER OF RUSSIAN REPUBLIC IN SETBACK FOR COMMUNISTS
Boris N. Yeltsin, the Soviet Union's leading political and economic reformer, swept to victory today in a presidential election in the Russian republic, becoming the first popularly elected leader in Russian history.
In another direct rebuff to Communism, voters in Leningrad called for restoration of the city's original name, St.
Petersburg.


Stanford, Not Yale, Gets A $25-Million Bass Gift
For the fifth time in just over a year, a member of the Bass family of Fort Worth has made a huge contribution from the family's oil fortune to an institution of higher education.
But this time it was Stanford, not Yale, that received the gift.
Robert M. Bass, a graduate of the Yale Class of '71 and the Stanford Graduate School of Business, Class of '74, announced yesterday that he and his wife, Anne, were giving $25 million to Stanford in recognition of the university's century of academic advances.


Needless Bankruptcy in Bridgeport
When a city like Bridgeport, Conn., goes bankrupt, the failure is as much political as financial.
Like many cities, Bridgeport is in deep trouble.
Some of the causes are local, some not.
But Bridgeport's petition for court protection is extreme.
Public officials are elected to solve problems, not walk away from them.
Federal law lets municipalities file for bankruptcy when state law allows that.
Congress did not intend this as an easy way out but as a last resort.
Unlike corporate bankruptcy, municipal bankruptcy leaves a city government largely in control.
But for populous cities, this is uncharted territory.


O'Brien Is Headed for Where It Counts After Record-Setting Effort in Decathlon
In an event that is supposed to pose a series of wrenching athletic adjustments, Dan O'Brien was out there yesterday at Randalls Island treating the pole vault as if it were just another high hurdle.
Vault 16 feet?
Hurdle 110 meters?
It didn't matter to the new decathlon champion and emergent track god at the Mobil national track and field championships.
O'Brien came to New York an unproven bundle of potential.
He left with more points, 8,844, than any other United States decathlete in the history of this two-day event -- a higher score than Bruce Jenner ever managed, and just 3 points short of Daley Thompson's world mark.


Freddie Mac Issue
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, known as Freddie Mac, priced $500 million in 10-year debentures yesterday through its 24-member selling group made up of various securities dealers.
Freddie Mac said the issue, due June 21, 2001, is callable on or after June 21, 1994, and was priced at par, to yield 9 percent.
Interest on the debentures are paid semi-annually on June 21 and Dec. 21, beginning Dec. 21, 1991.
Proceeds from the issue will be used to finance the purchase of mortgages, the corporation said.


Spurs' Brown Stays Put
San Antonio Spurs coach LARRY BROWN said yesterday he would remain with the National Basketball Association club, ending speculation he was headed to the University of South Carolina.
"I fully realized I have not fulfilled my commitment with the San Antonio Spurs," said Brown, who is 50 and is entering his fourth season with the Spurs.
He said he had decided to talk with South Carolina officials after mistakenly believing that Spurs owner RED McCOMBS did not care whether he left.
"I kind of got wrong vibes about it," Brown said.
McCombs who did not appear with Brown at a news conference, said in a statement that he was delighted Brown was committed to staying with the Spurs. (AP)


Sounds Around Town
Brazilian Percussion
Olodum, Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street, Manhattan (212) 864-5400.
Olodum, a 20-member percussion band from Salvador, Brazil, accompanied Paul Simon in "The Obvious Child" on the album "Rhythm of the Saints." In recent years, the group's exuberant post-samba rhythms have permeated Bahian carnival music.
Olodum is appearing with Bongologic, a Latin-jazz group from Los Angeles whose music explores charanga, a popular Cuban dance form, and with Lights in a Fat City, a London-based funk duo whose music combines percussion, electronics and the didgeridoo, an Australian aboriginal instrument.
Showtime is 7 P.M. tonight.
Tickets are $20 and $25.


Sports of The Times; Baseball Stocking Its Pound
YOU can never have too many baseball teams.
There may not be enough major league players to go around, but that's a different story.
We're talking teams.
Cities.
Regions.
Fans.
Instant legends.
Expansion teams are fun.
Take it from somebody who walked up Eighth Avenue in Manhattan on a raw April morning in 1962, seeing the tumbledown Polo Grounds bustling once again, knowing the Mets were about to play their first home game.
Actually, it was more than fun.
It was falling in love.


War of '71 Crowned Bangladesh Struggle
To the Editor:
In "A History of Violence," a table accompanying your May 22 report on Rajiv Gandhi's assassination, you summarize the events of 1971 as follows: "India fights another war with Pakistan and invades Pakistan's eastern province. Pakistani troops surrender and an independent country, Bangladesh, is proclaimed."


Review/Dance; Cynthia Gregory in 'Swan Lake': Is It Farewell?
Cynthia Gregory's performance in the excerpted second act from "Swan Lake" with Fernando Bujones at American Ballet Theater on Wednesday night had all the earmarks of a farewell.
And yet . . .
The 44-year-old ballerina, who joined Ballet Theater in 1965 and was the center of a 20th-anniversary gala in 1985, announced in a press release that she would "leave the company after 26 years."


A Modest Start for After-Hours Sessions
In the New York Stock Exchange's first sessions of after-hours trading yesterday, about 2.24 million shares changed hands in what exchange officials described as a small step toward 24-hour trading.
The two sessions saw both institutional and retail participation, with most of the shares traded during a session set up for program traders.
Indeed, the reason the Big Board began the late sessions was to recapture business it was losing overseas, particularly program-trading business done on the London International Stock Exchange after the close in New York.


Review/Film; A Lifetime of Fighting For What One Believes
In "Forever Activists," which was nominated for an Oscar this year as the best documentary feature of 1990, Judith Montell interviews seven veterans of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, who fought for the Loyalist cause in the Spanish Civil War from 1936 until they were disbanded in 1938.
The film's point, and one not often emphasized in films about the brigade, is that for many of these men and women, the Spanish Civil War was just one of a series of continuing social struggles that gave their lives meaning.
"Forever Activists" opens today at the Bleecker Street Cinema.


Ethiopians Have New Rulers, But Famine's Specter Lingers
"A good mother feeds her children milk and meat," said Amina Abdi Ali, a 22-year-old mother of two children, as a tear rolled down her cheek.
"I wish I could be a good mother."
Mrs.
Amina wrapped her bony arms around her 4-year-old daughter Ferdowsa, who is so weak she needs to be fed by a refugee camp nurse by a tube through her nose and into her stomach.
Then Mrs.
Amina lovingly brushed the flies off her daughter's legs.


Nagle Won't Follow Bo's Lead, for Now
The fact that BROWNING NAGLE, the quarterback out of Louisville drafted in the second round by the Jets this spring, also was selected as a pitcher by the California Angels in the 51st round of the baseball draft earlier in the week will probably have little impact on his negotiations with the Jets.
General Manager DICK STEINBERG did not return calls to his office seeking comment on the matter yesterday, but he has been quoted as saying that the Jets would not be thrilled if Nagle attempted to play two sports as a pro.
LEIGH STEINBERG, Nagle's attorney and agent, said there was no problem.
"BO JACKSON doesn't have a thing to worry about from Browning," said the attorney, speaking by phone from his office in California.
"It's an intriguing situation. I think he could be a ferocious pitcher, but right now his focus is on football."


What Potential Presidential TV Debates Have!
To the Editor:
I strongly disagree with Tom Wicker's assertion in "High Noon, Low Hype" (column, May 22) that Presidential debates have little or no value to the American voter.


Marjorie Hahn Marries David Bernstein on L.I.
Marjorie A. Hahn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Hahn of Smithtown, L.I., was married in Huntington, L.I., last evening to David Bernstein, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Louis Bernstein of Bayside, Queens.
Rabbi Bernstein performed the ceremony at the Huntington Towne House.
The bride, 31 years old, owns the Tapyoka giftware company in New York.
Her mother, Adele Hahn, and father are retired teachers.
The bridegroom, 31, is the general manager of the Milburn Hotel in New York.
He graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton and received a master's degree in hotel administration from Cornell University.
His father is the rabbi at Young Israel of Windsor Park in Bayside and a professor of Jewish history at Yeshiva University.


Mets Follow the Wrong Sign to Another Defeat
Vince Coleman could not believe it when he saw the hit-and-run sign being flashed in the eighth inning last night.
A hit-and-run?
Why would the Mets hit and run on the first pitch, with Coleman on first, no outs, Dave Magadan up and the team trailing by one run?
After Magadan had flailed at the pitch and missed it and Coleman had been thrown out at second base by Atlanta's Greg Olson, Coleman returned to the dugout and discovered the problem.
Third base coach Mike Cubbage had bungled the sign relayed to him by Manager Bud Harrelson.
Harrelson had simply wanted to reinforce the steal sign to Coleman, who has the freedom to run at any time.
Cubbage had flashed the hit-and-run instead.


Bias, Not Justice, Won In Abortion Decision
To the Editor:
Is there not a principle in law that universal law predicated upon a single issue is bad law?
The Supreme Court decision on abortion clinics (front page, May 24) may well answer the ideology of the Court's majority on abortion, but the consequences of the decision go to many more matters than abortion.


A Fatal Storm Transforms The Scene
The fatal storm that interrupted the opening round of the 91st United States Open clearly subdued the mood at the championship.
Several of the leaders said their frame of mind became less consumed by competition after they learned that six people were injured, one fatally, when they were struck by lightning during a thunderstorm. .


8 Ex-Hostages Ask Inquiry on '80 Campaign
Eight of the 52 Americans who were held hostage at the United States Embassy in Iran asked Congress today to investigate assertions that Ronald Reagan's Presidential campaign worked to delay their release until after the 1980 election.
"I believe there was a good possibility" that political machinations kept the hostages in captivity longer than necessary," said Barry Rosen, one of the hostages who appeared at a news conference today.


Secretary Gets Prison Sentence In 8-Year Theft
In 1989, a senior partner of a major Manhattan law firm who has been legally blind since 1981 found himself, to his surprise, in serious financial trouble, although his income had steadily risen through the decade.
About the same time, an employee of the law firm, Proskauer, Rose, Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, spotted the lawyer's secretary playing for $100 a hand at an Atlantic City blackjack table reserved for high rollers.


Economic Scene; Predicting When Upturn Will Start
ECONOMISTS once thought that by using computers and large-scale econometric models, they could develop tools for more accurate forecasting.
But such hopes have given way to the more humble belief that the best they can do is to state what they think are the odds on various possible developments ("scenarios" in the current economic jargon).
The problem of macroeconomic forecasting has been made even more difficult by the complex interactions between national economies and the world economy.
Prof.
Rudiger Dornbusch of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology says the world economy is now in the midst of a "significant slowdown," with outright recession in the Anglo-Saxon countries and minimal growth in Europe, except Germany.
Only Asia is keeping up the momentum of world growth, but even there Japan's growth rate is slipping below 4 percent.


Trial to Proceed On Free Agents
A Federal appeals court declined today to hear an appeal by the National Football League in a dispute over restrictions on veteran free-agent players.
The decision allows a lawsuit brought by Freeman McNeil of the Jets, Don Majkowski of the Green Bay Packers and six other players, in which they asked for free agency, to proceed to a trial that is scheduled for next Feb. 17.


Art in Review
'Steppin' Out: New York Nightlife, 1900-1945' Whitney Museum of American Art at Equitable Center 787 Seventh Avenue (at 52d Street) Through Aug. 17
This pleasant exhibition is a bit of social history told through the paintings of artists like John Sloan, Guy Pene du Bois, Reginald Marsh and Mabel Dwight.
They depict New York in the heyday of vaudeville theaters and Tin Pan Alley, of dances like the turkey trot, bunny hug and lame duck.
They also, as in Ernest Fiene's Depression-era rendition of 34th Street at night, hint at a city down at the heels.


Regulators Admit Role in Bank's Fall
Federal bank regulators told Congress today that they shared responsibility for the costly collapse of the Bank of New England Corporation because of their lax supervision.
The acknowledgment came in testimony before the House Banking Committee, which is examining the failure of the $20 billion Boston-based banking company and was the most explicit statement so far by top officials of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston that they could have done more.


The Rescue Of a River: Pete Seeger Is Still at It
Twenty-five years ago, the folksinger Pete Seeger and some friends put on an afternoon of music called the Hudson Valley Folk Picnic and raised all of $167 toward a quixotic project.
They were going to build a 106-foot Hudson River sloop, a century-old design, and work toward cleaning up the polluted river.
"The scientists, when they heard we were building a sailboat to save the Hudson, said, 'You need a research boat,' " Mr.
Seeger recalled.
"And other people said, 'There's a war going on. Why are you building a boat?' All I could say was, lamely, 'It's a beautiful boat.' "
The sloop, named the Clearwater, was launched in 1969, and it's still sailing.
While other groups, like Scenic Hudson, were already working to clean up the river, the Clearwater quickly became a symbol and a center for environmental activism through Hudson River Sloop Clearwater Inc., a nonprofit organization in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
"Once upon a time activists concentrated on trying to help the meek inherit the Earth," Mr.
Seeger said.
"But we realized that if the Earth wasn't safe, it wouldn't be more than a garbage dump for the meek to inherit."


Blood Bank Loses AIDS Case
A jury in a Dallas County court has ordered the Wadley Blood Bank here to pay $800,000 to the family of a man who died of AIDS-related pneumonia after receiving a transfusion eight years ago.
The man's wife, who contracted AIDS from him, will receive more than half the award.
The woman, who requested anonymity, is expected to die within four years, according to a doctor's testimony.
The jury found that the blood bank had been negligent in not adequately screening donors.


Fires of Ambition Feeding A Political Feud in Virginia
Senator Charles S. Robb and Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder agreed today to meet face to face next Tuesday afternoon in an effort to end the feud that has left both of them battered and raised doubts about their futures on the national political scene.
If the past is prologue for these two combative Virginia Democrats, both huge of ego, ambition and hunger to be on a national ticket, an afternoon of talking may not suffice.


Barnet Naiman, 91, A Chemistry Professor
Barnet Naiman, a professor emeritus of chemistry at the City College of the City University of New York, died on June 4 at Forest Hill Manor, a retirement home in Pacific Grove, Calif.
He was 91 years old.
He died of complications stemming from an infection, his daughter said.


KLM Posts Loss for Year
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines today posted a big loss for the year as operating costs rose faster than revenues and the airline took on an expensive restructuring program.
The Netherlands' 32 percent state-owned flag carrier said it lost 630 million guilders, or $312 million, in the fiscal year ending March 31, compared with last year's net profit of 340 million guilders, or $168 million.


Sununu Details Travel and Gifts In Official Report on His Finances
In a report on his financial holdings made public today, John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, formally accounted for his frequent travels on Government aircraft and disclosed some gifts for the first time, like a crate of dates and a leather trunk worth $195 that he got from the President of Tunisia.
Mr.
Sununu was one of three White House officials whose financial disclosure reports for 1990 were made public today at the request of news organizations.
The White House also made public the financial statements of Marlin Fitzwater, the Presidential spokesman, and Robert M. Gates, the deputy national security adviser, who is President Bush's nominee to head the Central Intelligence Agency.
An Embarrassing Rebuke
Mr.
Sununu's financial statement shed little new light on the travels that caused a furor over his use of military aircraft for travel including trips to a Colorado ski resort and to Boston to visit his dentist.
In response to the reports about Mr.
Sununu's travel the White House in May ordered him to clear all his future flights with White House legal officials.
The order was seen as an embarrassing rebuke to the imperious chief of staff.
The documents released today, as well as those disclosed previously, show that Mr.
Sununu reimbursed the Government for a number of the personal trips by drawing on the Sununu Committee, a political fund that he has maintained since his campaigns for governor in New Hampshire.
The committee paid for $5,144 worth of travel in 1990.
An additional $2,114 was shared, in undisclosed proportions, by the Sununu Committee and the Republican National Committee, according to Mr.
Sununu's report.
A review in April and May by C. Boyden Gray, the White House counsel, found that Mr.
Sununu had "essentially" complied with a White House policy that permitted him to use military aircraft on all trips for security reasons.
But when such trips are made for non-official business, Mr.
Sununu was required to reimburse the Government for the price of a coach-class ticket on a commercial flight plus $1.
In a few cases, Mr.
Gray's review found that Mr.
Sununu had improperly listed personal trips as official business.
Mr.
Sununu agreed to reimburse the Government several thousand dollars for those trips.
Mr.
Sununu's report provides only an outline of his personal finances, but a review of the statement, along with a similar report made last year and a review of real estate records suggest that his family's holdings are worth more than $1 million.
Mr.
Gates's report showed relatively minor holdings, including two individual retirement accounts and Government savings bonds.
Each of the bank accounts and his bond holdings is worth between $15,000 and $50,000, the report said.
Mr.
Fitzwater reported that he owns three certificates of deposit valued at between $1,000 and $5,000 each.
He also owns two individual retirement accounts, each worth between $1,000 and $5,000.
Mr.
Sununu reported that he had received gifts including the trunk and dates from the President of Tunisia.


Penguins Invited To White House
The Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins have been invited to meet President Bush at the White House on June 24.
No other National Hockey League team has ever had the honor of a White House invitation.


U.S. to Delete Almost All Names From Political Blacklist of Aliens
Ending a 40-year practice that has its roots in the McCarthy era, the Bush Administration has agreed to remove almost all the 250,000 names on a secret list of aliens it has considered ideologically unacceptable to enter this country.
The action is largely symbolic because a revision of the immigration law last year barred the State Department from excluding a person because of beliefs, statements or political associations that would be protected under the Constitution for American citizens.
Burden on the State Dept.
Under last year's law, people on the list would have had to apply to have their names removed.
But the measure approved 18 to 0 on Wednesday by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee would require the State Department to take the initiative in purging the list.
The action came on a bill that authorizes the department's policies and spending for the next fiscal year.
The House of Representatives approved a similar measure last month.
Over the years, the ideological exclusion in the McCarran-Walter immigration act had been used to bar individuals like the Nobel laureates Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Pablo Neruda, the novelist Graham Greene, the actor Yves Montand and the naturalist Farley Mowat.
Political leaders who were barred included Ian D. Smith, the former Prime Minister of Rhodesia; Daniel Ortega Saavedra, former president of Nicaragua, and Yasir Arafat, head of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The law also barred thousands of other people who did not know of the existence of the list or that their names were on the list or why.
The list was compiled by State Department officials in Washington and in embassies and consulates around the world, based on information provided by other governments as well as their own observations.
In addition to the 250,000 "political undesirables," the list also includes the names of about 100,000 people cited for national security and foreign policy reasons, said Arthur C. Helton, the director of the Lawyers' Committee's Refugee Project, a public interest group committed to the removal of the names.
These people will continue to be listed because they may still be excluded under the immigration law.
Interviewed by telephone from Geneva, Mr.
Helton said the list had grown rapidly in the 1980's, to 367,000 names from 100,000, because the Reagan Administration was especially hostile to people with left-wing political views.
Of the 367,000 names, 69 percent were included for ideological reasons, he said.
Mr.
Helton said another list included the names of more than three million criminals, immigration violators, drug traffickers, prostitutes and those with certain health problems.
Those names will also remain on the list.
Compromise on One Aspect
The State Department agreed to support the bill after the Senate committee accepted a proviso that would enable the Secretary of State to retain an alien's name on the list by certifying that there was a compelling reason to do so, including the individual's statements, beliefs and political associations.
The compromise was worked out by the American Civil Liberties Union and Senator Daniel P. Moynihan, Democrat of New York and chief sponsor of the Senate measure.
A State Department official, who spoke on condition on anonymity, said, "We've been in agreement pretty much all along," but added, "We can't announce anything until the bill is passed."
Jeanne M. Woods, the A.C.L.U.'s legislative counsel, said: "We negotiated a compromise that everybody can live with. It allows them to maintain certain names on the list of people not excludable under the new law."
She said the State Department wanted to retain a small list of aliens whose activities should be monitored if they entered the United States or even just applied for a visa.
The Immigration and Nationality Act, known as the McCarran-Walter Act, was passed in 1952 over the veto of President Harry S. Truman.
In that period, conservatives said it was needed to protect American citizens from subversive ideas, mainly communism.
The ideological restrictions in the law were modified in 1977 to give the Secretary of State discretion.
But the law still barred the entry of many people for ideological reasons.
The restrictions were temporarily lifted in both 1987 and 1988, and permanently repealed last year.
A Grab Bag of Names
The A.C.L.U. contends that the alien list is a grab bag of names, similar to raw files compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
For instance, Ms.
Woods said, the list includes Jim Hunter, a Canadian trade unionist, "whose crime was that as a teen-ager he belonged to a Little League team organized by the Communist Party."
The State Department said it would take up to three years to purge the list of those cited for ideological reasons.
Under the House-passed bill, the agency would have six months, while the Senate bill would give the State Department the three years it sought.
A Senate aide, who spoke on condition of anonymity, suggested why the measure enjoyed broad bipartisan support.
The list cut all ways, the aide said, and discomfitted everyone.
"Jesse Helms doesn't like the list because they used it to keep out Roberto d'Aubuisson" the aide said, referring to the right-wing Salvadoran leader.
"Moynihan doesn't like it because they used it to keep out Farley Mowat."


The Spoken Word
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
"Eugene Delacroix" by Gail Stavitsky, today at 11 A.M.; "Washington Crossing the Delaware by Emmanuel Leutze," discussed by Hazel Rodriguez, today at 11:30 A.M.; "Graph of the Cosmos: Sacred Mountains in Chinese Art" by Noelle King O'Connor, today at 3 P.M.; "Work and Leisure in 19th-Century French Painting" by Ellen Handy, today at 3:30 P.M.; "Gods and Kings in Ancient Egypt" by Patricia Murphy, today at 6 P.M.
Unless otherwise noted, all lectures are free with $6 museum admission ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3764.


In Track and Field, Time for Naked Truth
THREE years ago, at the Olympics in Seoul, I devised a drug test so elegantly simple, so inexpensive yet foolproof, that it was totally disregarded.
This is how the Lipsyte Instant Visual Identification for Discrepancies (Livid) would have worked:
One hour before their first competition, athletes would appear at the Livid booth completely naked except for a one-year-old, full-length color photograph of themselves completely naked.
Any athlete who looked suspiciously better in the flesh than in the photo, who had muscles in places where the picture had no places, would be given the opportunity to get dressed and go home, quietly disqualified from the competition.


What Potential Presidential TV Debates Have!; Rewards of Glibness
To the Editor:
Tom Wicker's recommendation not to extend, but to terminate the banal Presidential television debates is commendable (column, May 22).
And the logic of his recommendation will surely be proven when Congress rejects it.
However, the debates seem but an extension of America's way of doing things in the television era: whether designing automobiles or selecting Presidents, appearance is primary; substance, secondary.


County Borrowing
Los Angeles County priced a short-term borrowing totaling $1.3 billion yesterday through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The tax and revenue anticipation notes, which are due on July 1, 1992, were initially priced to yield 4.55 percent.
Many municipalities issue these types of note as a temporary form of borrowing in anticipation of the collection of taxes or other expected revenues.


What Potential Presidential TV Debates Have!; Let's Do It Better
To the Editor:
Tom Wicker (column, May 22) argues against requiring debates of Presidential candidates because past debates have been contests of image, rather than substance.
While I agree with his assessment of those debates, we should try to do better, rather than abandon our desire for a public televised debate between those who aspire to lead the nation.


Mozart in New Jersey
The June Opera Festival of New Jersey is to open its eighth season with Mozart's "Abduction From the Seraglio," performed in English, tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Lawrenceville School, Route 206, Lawrenceville, N.J.
Michael Pratt, the festival's artistic director, will conduct.
The cast includes Karen Smith Emerson, Christopher Hux, Karen Holvik, Joseph Myerling, Derrick Lawrence and Gregory Stapp.
Edward Berkeley is the director.
Tickets are $15 to $42.
Information: (609) 936-1500.


Russian Revolution
Boris Yeltsin has not merely won the first competitive election in Russia's thousand-year history.
The popular ex-Communist is headed for a convincing first-ballot majority over his Communist opponents, and that would give him, beyond the new presidency of the republic, a mandate for radical reform.
The victory was expected; its magnitude constitutes a new Russian Revolution.
As Russians bravely lead their Soviet compatriots toward pluralism and markets, they deserve the West's applause, and support.


Treasury Issues Climb in Price
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher yesterday, as analysts and traders reassessed a set of figures that on the surface suggested the recession had clearly ended and that inflation was at worrisome levels.
Initially, market participants reacted to a further drop in weekly unemployment claims, a healthy 1 percent rise in retail sales and a surprisingly sharp six-tenths of a percentage point increase in the May Producer Price Index by selling securities and pushing long-term bond yields above 8.60 percent.


Review/Art; The Dog Days and Years Of William Wegman
William Wegman has always excelled at the esthetics of nonchalance: casualness and humor are the hallmarks of his style.
His tossed-off cartoon drawings of the early 1970's specialized in the non sequitur joke.
His more recent paintings -- which might be called Color Field narratives -- marshal expanses of thin cloudy paint and tiny endearing images into tongue-in-cheek epics about agriculture, architecture, air travel and the like.
As is well known, his most famous subject, a Weimaraner named Man Ray, began to be featured in videotapes and photographs, in the early 1970's, simply because he kept bothering Mr.
Wegman while he tried to work.
Man Ray was by far the most malleable component of the artist's laid-back approach, the later fruits of which are on display at the Neuberger Museum at the State University College at Purchase.
To please his master, the dog tolerated clothing, makeup, embarrassing postures and sundry props and situations (from fins to flippers to being dusted with flour).
But the large-format color Polaroids that recorded these bothersome transformations are among the most inventive, touching and dignified images of animals ever made.


Baker Urges Shamir to Be Flexible on Peace
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d met today with Foreign Minister David Levy of Israel and gave him a message to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir that urged the Israelis to show flexibility in American peacemaking efforts in the Middle East, officials said.
After the meeting at the State Department, which occurred during a private visit here by Mr.
Levy, the Foreign Minister told reporters that despite the apparent stall in the American effort, "the process is not stuck."


'Look Who's Talking' Suit On Plagiarism Is Settled
A $20 million lawsuit charging that Tri-Star Pictures and the director and writer Amy Heckerling stole the basic premise and large chunks of her 1989 hit, "Look Who's Talking," from a student project given to her three years before the film's release has been quietly settled.
Under a court order from Judge William Matthew Byrne Jr. of Federal District Court here on May 13, the terms of the settlement between Tri-Star and the independent writers and producers Jeanne Meyers and Rita Stern are confidential.
Thus the final chapter of this copyright-infringement case could be titled "Look Who's Not Talking About 'Look Who's Talking.' "


Soviet Muslims Riot, Seeking Trips to Mecca
Soviet Muslims angry at the high cost and limited number of pilgrimages to Mecca rioted today and tried to occupy the government headquarters in the capital of the autonomous republic of Dagestan, the ass news agency reported.
Tass said the authorities had used tear gas and fired warning shots in the air to hold off the demonstrators, some of whom reportedly returned the fire.
There were no serious injuries, according to Tass.


Qantas Bid Reported
Northwest Airlines declined to comment today on a report that it might take a stake in Qantas, the Australian international carrier.
The Financial Times of London reported, however, that the chairman of Qantas, William Dix, had confirmed the report.
The Australian Government wants to sell 49 percent of Qantas and all of its domestic carrier, Australia Airlines, in a move toward privatization.


Test of Clout: Dinkins and the School Board Presidency
In naming H. Carl McCall as his choice for president of the Board of Education, Mayor David N. Dinkins is trying to restore something like the golden days when Mayor Edward I. Koch was able to work comfortably with a board controlled by a loyal but self-reliant surrogate like Robert F. Wagner Jr.
The problem Mr.
Dinkins faces is that the emotional and political convulsions created by his previous appointee, Dr.
Gwendolyn C. Baker, make that restoration far from certain, and will test all of Mr.
Dinkins's canniness as a statesman and his pluck as a political street fighter.


Champions' Kind of Town
The Chicago Bulls returned home victorious today, sharing the credit for their first National Basketball Association championship with their city and their fans.
"We did it for the fans of Chicago and for the city of Chicago and for ourselves," Michael Jordan told hundreds of people awaiting the team at O'Hare International Airport.
Official celebrations are scheduled to begin Friday with a large rally in Grant Park.
After the Bulls eliminated the Los Angeles Lakers, post-game celebrating continued overnight on Wednesday.
A police spokeswoman, Tina Vicini, said more than 100 people had been arrested on charges ranging from mob action to firing a gun in public.
Two teens -- 15 and 16 years old -- were injured, apparently by stray bullets fired in the post-game victory rallies, the police said.
The 15-year-old girl was in good condition today at Mount Sinai Hospital while the 16-year-old was in fair condition at Children's Memorial Hospital, spokeswomen at the hospitals said.


Tenakee Springs Journal; Pure Air, Clean Water, And a Garbage Problem
Visitors to this remote fishing village often witness a strange local ritual.
About once a week, residents wander down the beach at low tide and start smashing bottles on the exposed rocks and burning their garbage.
The tide washes the remains out.
"We have a bottle-breaking rock and a burning rock," said Mayor Sheila Zagars.
Her husband, Dick, a retired structural engineer, added, "Everyone has his own special spot, but the principle is much the same."


McDonald's Ads Remove the 'Fun'
There is still not much "fun" in advertising for McDonald's, though it might return.
Amid great fanfare, McDonald's introduced in May 1990 a theme called "Food, folks and fun." It replaced a two-year-old theme, "Good time, great taste," as the slogan in almost all company advertising.


Court Expands Use of Chapter 11
The Supreme Court ruled today that the provision of Federal bankruptcy law that permits corporations to reorganize while continuing to operate was also available for use by individuals.
Voting 8 to 1, the Court overturned a decision by a Federal appeals court in St.
Louis that Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code could not be used by an individual who was not "engaged in an ongoing business."


Berlin City Official Is Killed By Letter Bomb at His Home
A government planning official was killed by a letter bomb late Wednesday in what the police said they believed was a politically motivated attack.
No one claimed responsibility for the killing, in which the 48-year-old city official, Hanno Klein, was found dead in his apartment.
It was the second bomb attack in two days and came a week before the legislature in Bonn is to vote on whether to return the seat of government to Berlin.
Mr.
Klein worked for the privatizing agency.
On Wednesday, the Revolutionary Cells, a leftist splinter group, put a firebomb in the Reichstag, the old seat of Parliament, but it failed to ignite.
A message asserting responsibility said it was a warning not to shift the Government to Berlin.


Czechs Plan Big Sale of State Companies
The Czechoslovak Republic announced plans today to sell foreign investors all or part of more than 50 state-owned enterprises that have market values ranging from $50 million to $500 million and employ about 50,000 people.
The hope is that the sale of these large state-owned concerns will generate more than $1 billion in foreign investment in Czechoslovak industry.


Census Revisions Would Widen Political Gains of 3 Big States
California, Texas and Florida, the big winners in the original census, will be even bigger winners if the Census Bureau uses statistical techniques to modify its 1990 head count, according to figures released by the bureau today.
The industrial states of the Midwest and Northeast that had hoped an adjustment would bolster their anemic growth rates would end up after an adjustment with a smaller share of population and political power than they had at the end of the census.


Review/Theater; Tadeusz Kantor's Troupe Carries On
In the theater of Tadeusz Kantor, the dead return to life in order to evoke a tragic vision of the past.
It is a theater dense with symbolism, shadowing the audience with dreams that emerged from the director's psyche.
These are autobiographical and historical memories about the lifeline that brought him through the 20th century.
Kantor's early opus, "The Dead Class," returned this week to La Mama to reintroduce theatergoers to the work of this icon of experimentalist drama.
The director died in December and his company, Cricot 2, is carrying on his work.
In the company's previous visits to the United States, all of them at La Mama, Kantor was himself integral to the performance.
A brooding totemic figure, he appeared onstage with his actors, serving as conductor, stagehand and silent watchman.
His presence added an immeasurable dimension to the theatrical experience.
It was almost as if we were looking at "Guernica" while Picasso was painting it.


Bally Debt Is Down
The Bally Manufacturing Corporation has eliminated almost a third of its debt since October, "without having to sell something that affected the cash flow," Arthur M. Goldberg, the chairman and chief executive, told stockholders.
The Chicago-based company has agreements to sell Life Fitness Inc. for $62.5 million and Scientific Games Inc. for an undisclosed amount.
Mr.
Goldberg predicted that the deals would be closed by late summer.
The company, which owns hotel-casinos in Las Vegas, Reno and Atlantic City, since October has missed $85.6 million in payments on its $1.1 billion debt.


Queens Museum: From 2 World Fairs to a New Look and Name
The Queens Museum has been having a bit of a tough time ever since it opened 18 years ago in an old World's Fair building featuring a 150-foot-long scale model of New York City.
Never mind the international variety of its exhibitions -- from British painting to contemporary German sculpture -- or its efforts to become a showcase for contemporary New York artists.


Amoco Given Job by Soviets
The Amoco Corporation beat several Western rivals for the right to develop the large Azeri oilfield in the Caspian Sea, the official Soviet press agency Tass reported today.
Officials from the Soviet Oil and Gas Ministry, and the republic of Azerbaijan chose Amoco over proposals from the Unocal Corporation, British Petroleum and Statoil of Norway.


Bargain Pitched to the West: $100 Billion for Soviet Reform
If the West really wants the Soviet Union to plunge into democratic capitalism, a team of Soviet and American scholars says, it should be prepared to cushion the shock with at least $100 billion in aid over five years.
The team's proposal for a "grand bargain" -- large-scale aid tied to a radical transformation of the Soviet Government and economy -- is to be delivered to the White House and the Kremlin this weekend.


Milli Vanilli Appears Again
Can the former members of the pop duo Milli Vanilli sing and sell gum at the same time?
Apparently not, according to the latest Care Free Sugarless Bubble Gum commercial.
The spot has Robert Pilatus and Fabrice Morvan delivering a heartfelt rendition of an Italian opera duet, until the record skips and reveals that they are only moving their lips.
When the commercial asks how long the gum's flavor will last, the voice-over responds, "Till these guys sing for themselves."


Art in Review
Jackie Brookner Pamela Auchincloss Gallery 558 Broadway (near Prince Street) Through June 23
Jackie Brookner's new sculptures are bigger, loopier and more organic than those she has exhibited before.
The five objects in this show are made not of bronze, but of materials like wax, hay and burlap, modeled around copper tubes.
Four of the objects, all between four and five feet tall, are like arches rising out of mucky, earthy bases.
All the objects are sexual; all suggest the legs of a human or a horse.


F.C.C. Seeks to Strengthen Rules On Negative Political Advertising
The Federal Communications Commission today proposed tightening the rules that govern political candidates and their supporters who run advertisements attacking other candidates.
Under the proposal, which commissioners said they hoped to act on before the 1992 campaign season begins, the sponsors of "attack ads" would have to identify themselves more prominently in the commercial than they must under current rules.


Carl E. Ring, 89, Dies; Lawyer and Engineer
Carl E. Ring, a lawyer and electrical engineer, died on Tuesday at St.
Mary Hospital in Hoboken, N.J.
He was 89 years old and lived in Union City, N.J.
He died of heart failure, his son, Carl Jr., said.


Some Signs Of Rebound In Economy
Consumers came back to the malls in May, and fewer people filed unemployment claims in the third week of the month, according to Government reports released yesterday.
Many economists reacted by declaring that the recession had ended and that the economy had begun to recover.
"Consumers led the economy into recession," said James E. Annable, chief economist at First National Bank of Chicago.
"They almost certainly led us out this spring,"


Turkey Rejects Iraqi Request To Reopen Vital Oil Pipeline
Turkey has rebuffed a direct Iraqi appeal that it reopen a vital oil pipeline that before the Persian Gulf crisis was the source of half of Baghdad's hard currency.
The twin pipeline, running 616 miles from the northern Iraqi city of Kirkuk to the Mediterranean, can carry 1.6 million barrels of oil a day.
Foreign Minister Ahmet Kurtcebe Alptemocin told the visiting Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, that the pipeline would stay shut until the United Nations lifted economic sanctions imposed after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August.


Kuwait Issues a Death Order
A martial-law court sentenced a Lebanese woman to death on Tuesday for informing on her Kuwaiti husband, who was killed by Iraq's occupation army.
Fatima Tafla was found guilty of collaboration.
It was the second death sentence in three weeks of trials, in which more than 200 people are accused of aiding Iraq during its seven-month occupation.


Conflict of Interest Is Charged In Inquiry on Research Paper
A member of a panel that found that data had been faked in a 1986 research paper has been asked to resign by Federal officials on the ground that she has a conflict of interest.
The Office of Scientific Integrity at the National Institutes of Health sent a letter two weeks ago to the panel member, Dr.
Ursula Storb of the University of Chicago, saying she had failed to disclose her relationship with the researcher she was investigating, Dr.
Thereza Imanishi-Kari.


Shuttle Crew Struggles With Faulty Freezers
The weary astronauts aboard the space shuttle Columbia worked on troublesome freezers today to save blood and urine samples collected during their nine-day flight.
They interrupted their sleep and last full day of orbital research to repair one overheating freezer and then another, and to shuffle the frozen specimens.
The shuttle commander, Col.
Bryan O'Connor of the Marine Corps, called it "playing musical refrigerators."


Review/Film; A Polite Robin Hood In a Legend Recast
IF you let a bunch of unskilled carpenters loose in Sherwood Forest, don't be surprised if you wind up with a load of kindling.
That's about the only coherent response to Kevin Reynolds's "Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves," starring Kevin Costner as that once merry man Robin of Locksley, a k a Robin Hood.


Theater to Be Built Adjacent to Utah Park
The Town Council has given final approval to plans for a giant-screen theater adjacent to Zion National Park.
The Council's action, taken by unanimous vote on Wednesday night, grants a permit for World Odyssey to build a 300-seat theater, a 12,000-square-foot retail complex and a parking lot.


INSIDE
Personal Bankruptcy Eased
The Supreme Court ruled that the law that lets companies reorganize while continuing to operate is also available for use by individuals.
Page D1.


On Stage, and Off
A Musical Starring Tommy Tune
So much news, so little space.
Where to begin?
Perhaps in 1938, guv'nah, wi' a lit'l song an' a lit'l dance on the sidewalks of London.
Oh no, you're thinking, another rilly big English musical import is coming to Broadway.
But no-o-o-o-o-o: it's a big American musical about England, and it'll star Tommy Tune.
The show's called "Busker Alley," a two-acter about buskers -- strolling entertainers.
And guv'nah, that Mr.
Tune, 'e's got 'opes tha' the lit'l show'll brike yer 'art.


Hughes May Build Thai Satellites
The Hughes Aircraft Company said it planned to build two spacecraft for Thailand's first domestic communications satellite system.
Hughes said it had a memorandum of understanding to begin formal negotation on a contract that the company said would be worth about $100 million.
Delivery of the first of two Hughes HS 376 satellites would be due in 1993.


Burglars Smash Tractor Into Store
Burglars used a stolen tractor equipped with a front payload bucket to smash through the wall of a jewelry store in Queens yesterday and escaped with a 4,000-pound safe containing cut diamonds worth $1 million, the police said.
The payloader was stolen from a construction site at 127th Street and Powell Cove Boulevard in Little Neck, Queens, about 4 P.M.
Wednesday and driven to the shopping mall where the Little Neck Jewelers is.
Witnesses told the police that the large, lumbering tractor arrived at the mall at 254th Street and Horace Harding Boulevard about 5 A.M.
The police said thieves broke into the same store in March, stealing about $1 million in gems.  (AP)


Court Postpones Trial Of Los Angeles Officers
The assault trial of four white police officers charged in the widely publicized beating of a black motorist three months ago has been indefinitely postponed while an appeals court ponders whether an impartial jury can be chosen in Los Angeles County.
The trial was to begin next week in Superior Court here.
But late Wednesday the Second District Court of Appeal stayed it and gave prosecutors and the trial judge until June 24 to give their assessment as to whether extensive publicity surrounding the case could interfere with a fair trial.
The lawyers for the four defendants will then have until July 12 to file a response.


William J. Patlow, Judge, 61
William J. Patlow, a New York State Supreme Court justice, died on June 2 at St.
John's Home, a nursing home in Rochester.
He was 61 years old and lived in Rochester.
Justice Patlow died of cancer, his wife, Janet, said.


Restaurants
Le Cygne
These are tough times for restaurants like Le Cygne.
It is not a hip inexpensive bistro, a cool jet-set roost, a cultish hangout or a splashy media darling.
Le Cygne has been simply a fine -- and expensive -- French restaurant that attempts to fly the flag high in this economic tempest.


The Kidnapper and his Dream
Not many Americans remember China's Young Marshal, who 60 years ago startled the world by kidnapping Chiang Kai-shek in a bold move that brought about a united front of Nationalists and Communists to fight Japan.
Even fewer may be aware that the Young Marshal, Zhang Xueliang, is alive and well and in New York City.
Having just celebrated his 90th birthday, he has embarked on a new crusade -- to bring Beijing and Taiwan into a unified China.


With Huck and Will on the Mississippi
To the Editor:
In "We Are What We Say" (Op-Ed, June 2), Justin Kaplan writes about deciding what is familiar for a new version of Bartlett's "Familiar Quotations." He remarks, "The one-horse townspeople in 'Huckleberry Finn,' ready to pelt the King and Duke with dead cats and sickly eggs, needed less brushing-up on their Shakespeare than most college-educated audiences today."
In fact, that audience, depicted in chapter 23 of the American classic, was attending the last of three nightly performances of "The King's Cameleopard, or The Royal Nonesuch," definitely not among the works of William Shakespeare.


Deborah E. Murciano Has Wedding on L.I.
Deborah Esther Murciano, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Asher Murciano of Forest Hills, Queens, was married last evening to Jack L. Ades, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Ades of West Long Branch, N.J.
The bride's father officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Ades, 23 years old, graduated from Queens College and received a master's degree in elementary education from New York University.
Her father is the rabbi at the Sephardic Jewish Center of Forest Hills.
The bridegroom, 27 years old, is the technical director for Vision Computer Systems in New York.
He graduated from George Washington University.
His father is an owner of chain stores in New York and New Jersey, including the S. &amp; A. Stores.


J. C. Penney Fires Ayer After 8 Years and Hires Bozell
THE J. C. Penney Company yesterday abruptly dismissed Ayer Inc., its agency for eight years, and hired Bozell Inc.
Executives of the nation's fourth-largest retailer said the change, effective Oct. 1, was unrelated to the quality of Ayer's award-winning work.
Instead, they said, they were drawn to the abilities of Bozell/Southwest, as Bozell's Dallas office is known.


For Children
Dinosaur Exhibition  Children's Museum of Manhattan  212 West 83d Street  (212) 721-1223  Recommended for all ages  Through October
At long last the Children's Museum of Manhattan, smarting from an after-hours fire in February and having undergone extensive renovations, is reopening, tomorrow at 10 A.M.
One of the new exhibitions, "Discover Dinosaurs," is indeed a welcome sight.
With a painterly mural as a backdrop, the show offers a closeup view of the apatosaurus, the maiasura and the protoceratops dinosaurs.
The protoceratops -- hooded, life-size dinosaurs about as tall as wolfhounds -- are a protective mother and father watching over their babies and eggs (Some of the latter are real, having been borrowed from the American Museum of Natural History.) The apatosaurus, formerly called brontosaurus, brings to mind the old Sinclair gas-station symbol, with its zaftig bottom and swan neck.
The maiasaura, a species discovered in 1978, also looks after its cute, budding offspring.
The most amazing feature, however, is that the dinosaurs move.
The apatosaurus, for example, sways its neck back and forth like a trombone, and its gaping mouth seems ready to chomp off the head of an alligator as it swims indolently in the mural behind.
Meanwhile, the dinosaur eggs hatch as the world continuously evolves.
The rest of the exhibition includes challenging, instructive activities mostly for older children -- rubbings, puzzles, archeological-style dig tables and dinosaur games.
A terrarium of hissing roaches -- a species that has existed for 120 million years -- are not dinosaur-size but instill fear and loathing anyway.
Stopping by the dinosaurs could very well take all afternoon.
The museum is open from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tuesday through Sunday.
Admission is $4 for children and adults.
Strollers are checked at the front door.


Twins' Streak at 12 After Sweep of Yanks
A curse?
It must feel like one to the Yankees, who have fallen suddenly and helplessly less than a week after they declared themselves contenders.
The moment they left the Bronx, things happened.
Their winning streak ended Monday, their momentum left them Tuesday, and tonight, in the final game of a three-game series against the Minnesota Twins, they were simply swept.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Allen Group Inc., Melville, L.I., an electronic products company, will sell its Allen Automated Systems division to Lucas Industries, a United States subsidiary of Lucas Industries P.L.C., Birmingham, England, an automotive and aerospace equipment company.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Dresser-Rand Co., a 50-50 joint venture between Dresser Industries, Dallas, a maker of products for the energy industry, and Ingersoll-Rand Co., Woodcliff Lake, N.J., a maker of industrial machinery, has received a $120 million order from Maravan S.A., an affiliate of the Venezuelan oil company Petroleos de Venezuela S.A., to supply three gas compression plants.


TV Weekend; James Brady's Battle, Political and Personal
Everyone knows the main plot of "Without Warning: The James Brady Story," at 9 P.M.
Sunday on HBO.
It begins with the bullet to the brain of President Ronald Reagan's press secretary in the 1981 assassination attempt and ends with his emergence months later, in a wheelchair, campaigning for gun control.
The accomplishment of Robert Bolt, the writer, and Beau Bridges, who plays Mr.
Brady, is in making the man so real and his ordeal so convincing.
Basing the teleplay on "Thumbs Up," the inanely titled book written by Mollie Dickenson with the cooperation of the Bradys, Mr.
Bolt avoids idealization.
He shapes Mr.
Brady as a plain-speaking, sometimes dirty-talking good old boy, a quick-witted flack who knows how to jolly along smart-aleck White House reporters and how to handle a boss whose grasp of facts tends toward the dim side.


Shirley E. Naaman, Insurance Executive, 59
Shirley E. Naaman, a vice president of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, died on Wednesday at Elmhurst General Hospital in Queens.
She was 59 years old and lived in Jackson Heights, Queens.
She died of cancer, her daughter, Sheri Naaman-Mujica, said.


S.E.C. Accuses Ernst of Improper Dealings
The Securities and Exchange Commission filed a lawsuit yesterday accusing Ernst &amp; Young, one of the nation's largest accounting firms, of having improper business dealings with two of its clients that caused those clients to violate Federal securities laws.
The complaint, filed in Federal District Court in Washington, contends that the firm lacked independence when it audited the Republicbank Corporation and the Cullum Companies.
At the time of the audits, dozens of Ernst &amp; Young partners had private business ties with the two clients, including bank loans from Republicbank to finance shopping centers where Cullum operated supermarkets.


The Numbers May Scream, But Justice Speaks Softly
The numbers practically scream.
Dave Justice of the Atlanta Braves was leading the National League, or was second, or tied for second, in five offensive categories going into yesterday's games.
He was among the top five hitters in nine departments.
He has taken his rookie-of-the-year credentials and pointed upward.
The numbers carry the promise of many large paychecks.
The outlook says something else.
"I'm not even close to where I'd like to be," Justice said.


2 Picassos Are Stolen at Zurich Gallery
Two pictures by Pablo Picasso have been stolen from a Zurich art gallery, the police said today.
The missing works are a drawing from Picasso's blue period titled "The Sitting Woman" and dated 1903 and a gouache, "El Christo de Montmartre," dated 1904.


Money Fund Assets Fall
The assets of the nation's 548 money market mutual funds decreased by $1.23 billion, to $461.34 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 196 institutional funds decreased by $1.44 billion, to $131.66 billion.
The assets of the 260 general-purpose funds were up by $301.0 million, to $178.47 billion.
The 92 broker-dealer funds decreased by $93.3 million, to $151.21 billion, the institute said.


Airbus to Plan A Larger Plane
Airbus Industrie, the European aircraft consortium, will open talks with six airlines later this year about developing a new large-capacity, long-range airliner, Airbus officials said today.
Stuart Iddles, Airbus's senior vice president, said at a news conference at the Paris Air Show that the airlines include the Chicago-based UAL Corporation's United and four Asia-Pacific carriers.
They have expressed interest in an aircraft with 600 or more seats, he said.


Cable Concern Bows to Suits
Tele-Communications Inc. agreed today to drop its plan to charge cable-television customers for a new channel unless they cancel it.
Under the original "negative option" billing plan, all Tele- Communications customers were to receive the channel and be billed $1 to $4.95 a month for it unless they canceled the service.


Kodak in Joint Venture
The Eastman Kodak Company and Broadcast Television Systems of Darmstadt, Germany, will jointly develop and market a scanning device to transfer motion picture film images to high-definition television.
The new HDTV "telecine" will be available in 1992.
It will allow producers to convert 35-millimeter or 16-millimeter motion picture film into a digital format compatible with all HDTV's, Paul Allen, Kodak spokesman, said today.


Review/Film; Montana Outcasts via Richard Ford
Richard Ford's lean prose is much more cinematic on the page than it is in "Bright Angel," an elliptical, slow-moving film adapted by Mr.
Ford from stories in his "Rock Springs" collection.
The laconic reflectiveness of Mr.
Ford's characters and the arid precision of his observations are not easily translated into visual imagery.
The decaying Western scenery is here, as are some of Mr.
Ford's muscular, hard-bitten characters, but what goes on beneath their opaque surfaces remains a mystery.
And Mr.
Ford has difficulty cobbling a coherent narrative out of what, in his original material, were essentially vignettes.
"Bright Angel," which opens today, was directed by Michael Fields, who has directed for television's "American Playhouse" series and becalms the film with a respectful, literary air.
But he has also assembled the kind of varied, offbeat cast that remains surprising even when the material seems shapeless and vague.
Though the story's central figure, a young man named George (Dermot Mulroney) is presented as little more than a cipher, the figures who surround him are sharply drawn.


Senate Moves to Set Up Federal Road Network
The Senate, working toward passage of a major transportation package, approved an amendment this evening that would establish a 180,000-mile network of Interstate highways and feeder routes that would be designated for direct Federal aid.
The amendment, approved by voice vote, was drafted in closed-door negotiations involving Senators and Administration officials.
It would require states to spend at least 15.5 percent of their share of Federal surface transportation funds for roads that are part of this national highway system.


Editors' Note
An article in Business Day yesterday noted changes that have occurred in the last decade in corporate responses to high-level office romance, with a shift toward penalizing the more senior executive, typically the man.
The article began by recalling "rampant" speculation a decade ago that William Agee, then chairman and chief executive of the Bendix Corporation, was having an affair with Mary Cunningham, a Bendix vice president who had risen rapidly to be his close aide.
It was Ms.
Cunningham who resigned under pressure, and the couple later married.
Mr.
Agee and Ms.
Cunningham have repeatedly denied that they had a romantic relationship before her departure, and the denial was a central point of a book she wrote soon afterward.
The article should have cited the denials.
It should have mentioned the episode only as an example of a company's response to public perceptions and rumors about executives' private lives.


Summit Meeting Is Not Expected Before the Fall
President Bush's summit meeting with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, originally scheduled for June, is now unlikely to take place until fall, a senior White House official said today.
The talks, which would be held in Moscow, are contingent upon a strategic arms agreement, and the official said that was not yet in sight.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The Chase Manhattan Corporation yesterday priced $1 billion in certificates backed by credit card payments through underwriters led by Chase Securities.
Chase Manhattan Credit Card Master Trust 1991-1, the vehicle through which the certificates are being sold, is offering the securities with an 8 3/4 percent coupon at a price of 99.915, to yield 8.846 percent, or about 85 basis points more than five-year Treasury notes.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Bloomsday: James Joyce Is Celebrated
This is a weekend for catching up on James Joyce at his most monumental, and without flipping a single page.
Large chunks of "Ulysses" will be read uptown and downtown on Sunday: Bloomsday.
The events commemorate June 16, 1904, the day Joyce chose for his protagonists Bloom and Dedalus to roam Dublin.
The uptown celebration, "Bloomsday on Broadway X," happens at Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street, from 6 P.M. to midnight, directed by Isaiah Sheffer.


Stocks Up in Tokyo
Stock prices finished the day up on the Tokyo Stock Exchange today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues gained 285.72 points, or 1.15 percent, to 25,093.89.


For Indians, Casino Gambling Represents a Self-Help Program
To the Editor:


Summit Seems Farther Off
President Bush's meeting with President Gorbachev, planned for June, is likely to be held in the fall, an American official said.
Page A8.


Melina K. Wyler Weds Marc Wein
Melina Karen Wyler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Wyler of White Plains, was married last evening in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Marc Stephen Wein, a son of Dr.
Sidney F. Wein of Passaic, N.J., and the late Muriel Wein.
Rabbi Shira Milgrom officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill.
The bride, 29 years old, is a program director for Physicians World Communications, a medical special projects company in Secaucus, N.J.
She is a Skidmore College graduate.
Her father is the president of the Victor Wyler Time Corporation, a watch company in White Plains.
Mr.
Wein, 45, is the president of Video Planning-Carob Video, a production and editing company in New York.
He graduated from New York University.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.
His father is a surgeon in in Passaic.


Saul Jeffee, 80, Dies; Film Society Founder
Saul Jeffee, retired chairman and president of Movielab Inc., a New York concern, now defunct, that developed and printed motion-picture and video films, died Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old.
Mr. Jeffee died of congestive heart failure, his wife, Beatrice, said.


Bob Strauss, the Consummate Outsider
President Bush announced last week that he knew no one more qualified or talented to be U.S. ambassador to Moscow than Robert S. Strauss.
Mr.
Strauss, a man of legendary talents in certain fields, modestly distanced himself from such praise: If anyone had told him a week earlier about his appointment, he would have thought him crazy.
The Senate is bound to approve this appointment, and the Soviets have expressed delight.
In brief, the issue is settled, except perhaps for the philosophical question of what ambassadors are good for these days.
Mr.
Strauss will be an excellent adviser to Soviet leaders, telling them what they can, and cannot, realistically expect from Washington.
He will have unparalleled access to the White House and Congress.
But access for what?
At this point, alas, certain questions arise: isn't something basically flawed with a system in which an individual is picked because he has "access"?
Why does the President not give such access as a matter of course to his envoy to a country of critical importance?


Washington at Work; Storm-Tossed Admiral Rides Scandal at Agency
For James D. Watkins, 1991 was to have been the year of resolution.
It has not unfolded the way the Energy Secretary had hoped.
A scandal involving illegal spending has been uncovered at the Energy Department's nuclear weapons plants.
Influential lawmakers are taking a fresh look at the department's ability to manage its $18 billion annual budget.
Some are openly questioning Mr.
Watkins's control of his agency.
And nearly every week since January, fresh rumors, quickly denied by his aides, have Mr.
Watkins's resignation waiting on President Bush's desk.


S.E.C. Seeks Comment on Proxy Plans
The Securities and Exchange Commission voted yesterday to seek public comment on two proposals intended to make it easier for shareholders to communicate with each other about proxy votes.
The proposals are the first step in a series of changes the commission will be considering this year that could give dissident shareholders greater access to the proxy process as they challenge corporate managements.


Reynolds Runs 7th, But Calls It A Victory
A conflict placing the national governing body for track and field between international rules and United States law continued yesterday when Butch Reynolds, who was suspended for two years after failing a drug test last year, participated in the 400-meter heats of the Mobil national track and field championships on Randalls Island.
While he finished seventh among the eight runners in his heat and did not qualify for the semifinal round today, officials of the International Amateur Athletic Federation indicated that his participation could lead to sanctions against both the athletes who competed with him and the national federation, The Athletics Congress.
The officials also reaffirmed their belief that I.A.A.F. rules should be obeyed -- even though an arbitrator in Columbus, Ohio, Reynolds's hometown, temporarily lifted the suspension earlier this week, citing the inconclusive nature of the evidence against him.


Sounds Around Town
Tenor Saxophone Duo


Pension Fund Industry Worried by U.S. Moves
Insurers and corporate pension-fund managers said yesterday that they were concerned that the Government's new effort to encourage company retirement plans to buy annuities only from the most financially secure insurers could unfairly drive some insurers from the market and expose some companies to a tangle of additional litigation.
The insurers and pension managers expressed their concerns a day after the Labor Department sued two companies whose pension funds are in trouble because they bought annuities from the Executive Life Insurance Company.
Executive Life, which had invested heavily in high-risk "junk bonds," was seized by California insurance regulators in April and is paying annuity holders, including many company pension funds, only 70 percent of their normal payments.


Dinkins's Retort to Stein: Critic, Restructure Thyself
The New York City Council President, Andrew J. Stein, who has threatened to run for Mayor David N. Dinkins's job, held a hearing yesterday to suggest ways the Mayor might restructure government to save money.
The Mayor responded that Mr. Stein could start by eliminating his own office.


Unfinished Sullivan
The Gilbert and Sullivan Society of New York will perform Sir Arthur Sullivan's "Emerald Isle" at CAMI Hall, 165 West 57th Street, tomorrow at 8 P.M.
The work, with libretto by Basil Hood, was completed after Sullivan's death by Edward German.
The performance is to be accompanied by Andi Stryker-Rodda, a pianist.
Admission is free.
Information: (718) 259-6431.


Resolution Trust 'Junk Bond' Sales
The Resolution Trust Corporation plans to sell about $50 million of "junk bonds" a week from the holdings of failed savings and loan associations, an official of the agency said yesterday.
"Our internal goal is to sell only $50 million a week," Elizabeth Spector, director of the corporation's capital markets division, told a meeting of securities analysts in New York


Davis Cup Draw Set
When the United States begins the second round of its defense of the Davis Cup on the grass in Newport, R.I., today, BRAD GILBERT will face EMILIO SANCHEZ, the mainstay of the Spanish squad.
Following that match, as determined by yesterday's draw, JOHN McENROE, 39-8 in Davis Cup singles play, will provide THOMAS CARBONELL with an introduction to the international competition.
JIM PUGH and RICK LEACH, 5-0 in career doubles duty for the United States squad, will meet the highly regarded Spanish tandem of Sanchez and SERGIO CASAL tomorrow afternoon, and on Sunday, the singles pairings will be reversed. . . .
JIMMY CONNORS, a two-time champion now ranked 218th in the world, will play at Wimbledon one more time.
The 38-year-old Connors accepted a wild-card invitation yesterday to compete in the event he won in 1974 and 1982.
The tournament begins on June 24.


Court Narrows Arbitration Precedent
In a significant ruling on Federal labor law, the Supreme Court today relieved employers of a continuing obligation to take many disputes to arbitration after a labor contract has expired.
The Court ruled 5 to 4 in favor of a California printing company that dismissed 10 senior employees after a contract with the printers' union expired 12 years ago and then refused to submit the layoffs to arbitration as provided under the old contract.


At Home Abroad; Mrs. Banquo's Ghost
The current preoccupation of British politics is neatly summarized on the cover of the satirical magazine Private Eye.
Margaret Thatcher is shown saying, "It would be very wrong for me to comment on Mr. Major's abysmal performance."
John Major has been Prime Minister for six months, and his biggest problem now is his predecessor.
She has not openly criticized his performance.
But she and her friends have increasingly conveyed the impression that they are disappointed.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a page in SportsThursday was omitted from some copies yesterday.
It contained a continuation of an article about the United States track and field championships, two other articles about the championships and an article about a tennis tournament in London.
Readers wishing a copy of the page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


The Long and Lonely Journey of Ramsey Clark
Three portraits of his late father, the former Attorney General and Supreme Court Justice, look down at Ramsey Clark from the walls of his disordered law office on East 12th Street in Manhattan.
Those who knew Tom C. Clark think that if he could, he would be frowning over what he saw.
They think the elder Clark, a conventional and conservative Democrat, would disapprove of his son's clients, who include the political extremist Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
They think he would loathe his son's world view, which has led him to denounce American power and policies from Hanoi to Tripoli, Grenada to Panama, and most recently, Iraq.


More Assets Shielded By Bankruptcy Ruling
The Supreme Court's decision yesterday will enable many individuals to emerge from bankruptcy proceedings with assets like investment real estate and stocks intact.
"Instead of having a fire sale, you may now have the chance to keep some of the things that you value," said Malcolm A. Makin, president of the Personal Planning Group, a financial adviser in Westerly, R.I.


Rocking or Relaxed, It's Still the Blues
Manny's Car Wash
1558 Third Avenue, at 87th Street, Manhattan, (212) 369-2583
.
Exterior: Manny's looks extremely promising from the outside; its weather-beaten front and Southern-style roadhouse sign mounted as a marquee have the look of a pleasantly run-down juke joint.
Hung on the wall are 45-rpm singles by blues greats like Elmore James, B. B. King and Little Milton.


T.W.A. Extends Debt Buyback Bid
Trans World Airlines Inc. has extended an offer to buy back $1.2 billion in debt for a fraction of its face value, part of the troubled carrier's efforts to avoid bankruptcy court.
T.W.A. hopes to back the bonds with the $445 million it received from selling three prized London routes to American Airlines Inc.
The original deadline for T.W.A.'s offer had been today, but T.W.A. said it had been extended until next Friday.


Newly Profitable, Post Plans To Share With Its Unions
Peter S. Kalikow, the owner of The New York Post, said yesterday that the paper would turn a profit this year, for the first time in decades.
As a result, he said, the paper is returning to its unions up to $8 million of the $21 million in concessions they granted in September to keep the newspaper alive.
"If I eat, everybody should eat; if I don't eat, that's another story," Mr.
Kalikow said, adding that he expected to see some improvements in productivity in exchange for the "partial givebacks."


3 Die in Police Helicopter Crash in Los Angeles


Robert F. Brozman, Entrepreneur, 70
Robert F. Brozman, a business executive whose companies included La Petite Academy, a chain of child-care centers, died Monday at St Luke's Hospital.
He was 70 years old and lived in Mission Hills, Kan.
Mr.
Brozman founded the Century Acceptance Corporation in 1948.
The company eventually grew into three businesses: Cen-Cor, Concorde Career Colleges and La Petite Academy.
They deal in child care, postsecondary training, consumer finance, temporary employment and equipment leasing.


Man in the News: Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin; Communists' Big Rival
In winning a clear victory as Russia's first democratically elected President, Boris N. Yeltsin has taken the ultimate revenge on the entrenched Communist Party bureacuracy here that first elevated him through its ranks, then banished him for daring to defy it.
From his textbook rise to power within the party, it would have been impossible to predict that he would one day emerge as its greatest and perhaps most powerful rival.


Courts of Shame
Paint curls off grimy walls; graffiti cover restrooms like garish tattoos; cardboard and tape repair a shattered door; hand-lettered signs ("NO PENS Don't even ask") bespeak official rudeness.
Meanwhile, the people -- angry, exhausted, stressed-out -- form sullen lines and wait, as the wheels of justice continue their monotonous grind.
Such are the Dickensian conditions in New York City's lower courts, documented in a new study of racism and the judiciary.
The city's neglect, during one of its wealthier decades, gives New Yorkers of all races ample reason for outrage.


CHRONICLE
MADONNA and STEVEN J. ROSS have held meetings about the singer forming her own company.
She met with Mr.
Ross, the chairman of Time Warner , three weeks ago to discuss a multimedia company "that would cover many aspects of her career," said Liz Rosenberg, Madonna's spokeswoman.
The company would encompass Madonna's acting and video ventures.
She has been under contract with Sire/Warner Brothers Records, a subsidiary of Time Warner, since 1983.


At the Movies
A New Look at 'the Babe'
He's a famous athlete.
He makes more money than anyone else in his sport.


Spectator Dies and 5 Are Injured as Lightning Strikes U.S. Open


2 Arrested in Killing Of Correction Officer
A tip through a special police telephone line has led to the arrest of two men in the killing of an off-duty Correction Department captain who was shot early Monday when he tried to break up a robbery, the police said yesterday.
The captain, Stanley Rhem, 47 years old, of 700 Lenox Avenue in Manhattan, exchanged shots with two gunmen about 2:10 A.M.
Monday at West 144th Street and Frederick Douglass Boulevard.
He had identified himself as a police officer as he intervened in the attempted robbery of a friend, said Lieut.
Kevin Perham, commander of the 32d Precinct detective squad.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc., a bottler that is 49 percent owned by the Coca-Cola Co., is offering $250 million in 6.8 percent notes due 1992 at 99.957 to yield 6.85 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's Investor Serviceand AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


U.S. Open Becomes News Story
The death of one spectator and injuries to five others during a torrential thunderstorm yesterday at the United States Open in Chaska, Minn., transformed coverage of one of the major golf championships from a sports event into a news story.
But it was a story that ABC could only cover passively because the United States Golf Association had emptied the Hazeltine National Golf Course of the network's commentators and crews.
All information about the aftermath of the fatal lightning strike was relayed by radio from the marshals on the course.


Two Officers Injured While Interrupting Gypsy-Cab Robbery
A police officer was shot and another was struck by a car last night when they interrupted a gypsy-cab robbery at a busy intersection in the Tremont section of the Bronx, the police said.
The incident began at 6 P.M. when the driver of the gypsy cab began yelling that he was being robbed at 163d Street and Third Avenue.


Sri Lankans Accuse Army of Massacre
Government troops angered by the death of three of their comrades "ran berserk" today and shot, hacked or beat to death more than 150 Tamil villagers, survivors said.
Accounts from local residents and members of the clergy, which have been reliable in the past, indicated that the troops ransacked two villages southwest of Batticaloa in eastern Sri Lanka to avenge the deaths of three soldiers on Wednesday.


Art in Review
Paul Lincoln Christine Burgin Gallery 130 Prince Street Through June 29
The English artist Paul Lincoln spent much of the early 1980's putting together a dazzlingly insane mechanical meditation on Mme. de Pompadour and the court of Louis XV.
Mr.
Lincoln gathered live snails and bees and employed them in a contraption meant to represent the court and its workings.
The machine produces both honey and a perfume purportedly like the kind that Mme. de Pompadour wore.
Twice, in 1984 and 1985, the artist put the gadget to work after staging a performance in which, among other things, he wore a headdress similar to those worn at Versailles in 1745 at the extravagent "Ball of the Clipped Yew Trees." What is on view documents Mr.
Lincoln's performances and their results.


Producer Prices Rose 0.6% in May
Inflation at the wholesale level rose a sharp six-tenths of 1 percent in May, the steepest rise since October, the Labor Department said today.
A 2.4 percent spurt in energy costs, after five months of falling prices, accounted for much of the gain.


Progress Reported in Talks On an I.B.M.-Apple Venture
Apple Computer and I.B.M. are making progress toward forming an alliance after a high-level meeting between the two companies on Monday at I.B.M.'s headquarters in Armonk, N.Y.
Officials of the companies agreed on the very broad outlines of a technology exchange accord, industry executives said.
Work is proceeding at lower levels within the companies toward more specific terms.


Who Altered Letter From Gandhi's Widow?
The biggest news in New Delhi is not the national political campaign or the withering heat or even the new weekly television comedy series with an Woody Allen-type character who has become an overnight star.
The biggest news is Sonia Gandhi's letter and the "correction" of a single word to make the Italian-born widow of Rajiv Gandhi appear "more Indian."
Front-page cartoons and articles appeared today in the English-language and Hindi newspapers as well as regional-language press around the country.
Not only has the "correction" embarrassed some senior officials in the dominant Congress Party and annoyed Mrs.
Gandhi, it has also emerged as a last-minute issue in a national political campaign that ends on Saturday.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Belmac Corp., Tampa, Fla., a pharmaceutical company, appointed Jean-Pierre Hermet vice president for marketing and general manager of a soon-to-be-opened subsidiary, Belmac Europe S.A. *
Chesapeake Corp., Richmond, a maker of wood pulp and other wood and paper products, named Paul A. Dresser Jr. chief operating officer and Andrew J. Kohut chief financial officer and vice president for finance.


Apple Suit With Hewlett
A Federal District judge today heard several motions from Apple Computer Inc. and the Hewlett-Packard Company in the long-running copyright infringment suit brought by Apple against Hewlett-Packard and the Microsoft Corporation.
Apple sued in 1988, claiming that visual elements in Microsoft's Windows and Hewlett's New Wave programs infringe its copyrights on the Macintosh user interface.


Enzon-Genex Deal
Enzon Inc. agreed to acquire the Genex Corporation in an exchange of stock and warrants valued at $18 a share.
Enzon, a biotechnology company, said the acquisition would reduce its reliance on outside suppliers of the proteins needed for therapeutic products.
Enzon enhances protein-based drugs that are used to treat life-threatening diseases.
The companies said the deal should be completed by September.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The F.C.C. adopted rules that give more local governments the power to roll back prices for basic cable service.
But many urban areas, including New York, will remain unregulated.  [ Page A1. ]
Consumers returned to the malls in May, and fewer people filed unemployment claims, according to Government reports.
Preliminary data on May retail sales show a 1 percent gain.  [ D1. ]  Inflation at the wholesale level rose six-tenths of 1 percent in May.  [ D4. ]


Rocking or Relaxed, It's Still the Blues
BLUES clubs in New York City are a strange breed, many generations removed from the music's ancestral home in the plantations and juke joints of the rural South.
Back in the 1930's and 40's, blues was an expression of social, political and economic disenfranchisement; it was music primarily about sadness and anger and pain, and it was structured, worded and performed as an explicit antidote to those emotions.
Like many American traditions, blues has since been adopted and reshaped by and for mass culture; it has been modernized and technologized and commercialized into something that's perhaps more about style than about feeling.
While some blues musicians of the 1940's and 50's still tour today, performing the music much as they did decades ago, young bar bands play a kind of blues that's hopped up with rock-and-roll rhythms, good to dance to and fun to listen to -- the archetypal music to hear live on a Saturday night on the town.


South Africa Update
South Africa moved a step closer yesterday to being readmitted to the Olympics.
At a meeting in Birmingham, England, the International Olympic Committee agreed to allow its executive board and president to reinstate South Africa before the I.O.C. meets again next year, if events in that country warrant it.
South Africa last participated in the Olympics in Rome in 1960; it was formally expelled from the I.O.C. 10 years later.
The I.O.C. invoked a rule in the Olympic Charter that allows it to delegate powers to its executive board after hearing a lengthy report from Justice KEBA MBAYE, chairman of the I.O.C.'s Olympism and Apartheid Commission.


Dow Up 3.13 as Blue-Chip Stocks Meander
Blue-chip stocks meandered most of day yesterday as many traders moved to the sidelines.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange shrank to 147.2 million shares, from 166.2 million the day before.
While the Dow Jones industrial average closed with a gain of 3.13 points, at 2,965.12, it moved higher only in the final minute or two of trading.
Another indicator of the market's lack of direction was the near balance between Big Board gainers and decliners, at 793 and 726.


Books of The Times; Among Other Fiction, Life on the Lam With Rushdie
Bet They'll Miss Us When We're Gone By Marianne Wiggins 180 pages.
HarperCollins. $19.95.
In one of the stories in her new collection, Marianne Wiggins, the estranged wife of Salman Rushdie, describes a situation that pointedly recalls their own experiences in the days after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini called on Muslims to kill Mr.
Rushdie, the author of "The Satanic Verses."


LONG CLOSING SEEN AT PHILIPPINE BASE
American officials warned today that an erupting volcano may shut down Clark Air Base in the Philippines for months, if not years, and will alter negotiations with the Philippine Government over a new lease for the sprawling and now largely deserted base.
Volcano scientists say 4,800-foot Mount Pinatubo could easily continue to erupt beyond September, when the current American lease expires both for Clark and for the United States Navy base at Subic Bay.


Critic's Choice/Theater A Mambo Mouth With Salsa Feet
Fresh off the "arroz con pollo circuit," Agamemnon is a coolly confident talk show host with a hyperactive libido.
He is one of seven pungent personalities that populate "Mambo Mouth," John Leguizamo's wry passage through the aspirations and frustrations of Hispanic America.
In his one-man show, he quickchanges from druggie to dealer, from a transvestite prostitute to a homeless wanderer on the streets of Nueva Jork.
After playing at the American Place Theater, "Mambo Mouth" reopened this week at the Orpheum Theater.
This is a route also followed by Eric Bogosian and Mr.
Leguizamo begins his show by joking that his predecessor is still in his dressing room.
Mr.
Leguizamo needs no prompting, though he might benefit from guidance in structuring his monologues to greater comic effect.
The material runs thin in the middle of his 90-minute show.
But as an actor, he remains high in attitude and satiric humor.


Declaration of Independence Sells for $2.4 Million
A first printing of the Declaration of Independence, said to have been found in a picture frame bought at a flea market two summers ago, was auctioned for $2,420,000 yesterday at Sotheby's.
"This was a record for any printed Americana," said David Redden, the auctioneer, who is a senior vice president at Sotheby's in Manhattan.
"It was far and away the highest price for historical Americana ever."


Handle With Care!


Seized S.&amp; L.'s Post Losses
Federal officials said today that the 204 savings associations under Government control posted operating losses of $726 million in the first three months of this year, compared with operating losses of $905 million for the last three months of 1990.
On Wednesday, regulators reported that those institutions not under Government control posted their first profit in four years.
The Office of Thrift Supervision said that those institutions had a profit of $626.8 million for the recent quarter.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 14


Quotation of the Day
"Our corn has already failed, even if we get rain. Our sorghum crop has been eaten by the monkeys. We'll survive as long as CARE brings us seeds. Without CARE, all we have is God." -- Abdi Yuyu, an Ethiopian farmer.  [ A10:4. ]


Dodgers Edge Pirates in 9th With Some Help From Umpire
Lenny Harris reached base when home plate umpire Ed Rapuano changed his call and ruled he had been hit by a pitch, then scored the winning run on Alfredo Griffin's single in the ninth inning today as the Los Angeles Dodgers beat the Pirates, 3-2.
The Dodgers' bullpen pitched three scoreless innings in relief of Tim Belcher, with Jay Howell working the ninth for his 11th save.


Air War in the Credit Card Battle
In its latest counterattack against growing challenges from Visa and Mastercard, the American Express Company said yesterday that it would sharply expand the ways travelers could accumulate frequent-flier credits.
As do competing bank "affinity cards" with ties to airlines, American Express will give its card holders one frequent-flier mile for every dollar they charge on their Green, Gold, Platinum, Optima and Corporate cards.
Any purchase, whether it be flowers, sweaters, college tuition or vacations, earns the miles, which are redeemable for free airline tickets or ticket upgrades to first class.


Robert S. Rau, Importer, 84
Robert S. Rau, an import-export executive and a civic leader in Manhattan, died on Thursday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications following back surgery, the family said.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Cash to Face Edberg Former Wimbledon champion Pat Cash whipped fellow Australian Todd Woodbridge, 6-2, 6-1, yesterday in London to set up a quarterfinal showdown at the Stella Artois Queens Club tournament with Stefan Edberg.
Edberg, the reigning Wimbledon champion and the world's top-ranked player, beat Jason Stoltenberg of Australia, 6-4, 6-4.
Michael Chang, the fourth seeded player, eased into the quarterfinal with a 7-5, 6-2 victory over Frenchman Guillaume Raoux. (AP)


CHRONICLE
DIAHANN CARROLL and RICHARD KILEY will team up again as hosts of "Give My Regards to Broadway: A Salute to 125 Years of Musical Theater," on Monday night at Carnegie Hall.
They last worked together in the musical "No Strings" in 1962.
The show will benefit the theater collection of the Museum of the City of New York, on Fifth Avenue between 103d and 104th Streets.
Numerous Broadway notables are to perform, including HAROLD PRINCE, PATTI LUPONE, CAROL CHANNING and BEN VEREEN.
The director GEORGE ABBOTT, who will be 104 years old on June 25, is to be onstage, too.


Vice President Quits Shearson
Melvin B. Taub will join Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company as executive vice president of operations and systems groups at the end of the month, the Wall Street investment house announced yesterday.
Mr.
Taub, who has worked on Wall Street for 27 years, is currently executive vice president and director of securities and commodities operations at Shearson Lehman Brothers, a unit of the American Express Company.


Auctions
Animation Cels
The first celluloid images of Charlie Brown and the Simpsons ever to be auctioned are in next week's collectibles sales at Sotheby's and Christie's in New York.


A Bishop's Body Is Looted
A gold ring and a gold cross were stolen from the body of Bishop George H. Guilfoyle, retired head of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Camden, as his body lay in state, officials said today.
"It just shattered us to pieces when we discovered it," said Msgr.
Paul Gallagher, noting that the objects were discovered missing about 4 A.M.
"Who would ever think to desecrate something sacred?"


Corrections
An article in Science Times on May 14 about radar-evading planes misstated Dr.
John F. Cashen's role in designing the Northrop Corporation's B-2 stealth bomber.
While he designed the radar-evading features of the plane, the overall design was the responsibility of Irving T. Waaland.
The article also referred incorrectly to a Soviet physicist whose book, "Physical Theory of Diffraction," contributed to stealth design.
He is Pyotr Y. Ufimtsev.


New Boeing Orders Total $2.74 Billion
The Boeing Company announced that it had received new-plane orders totaling $2.74 billion from four companies.
The orders include 11 767-300ER's and 16 757-200's for American Airlines; seven options on 737-400's for Lufthansa A.G.; two 767-300ERs and four 757's for Delta Air Lines Inc., and one 737-300 and the conversion of 24 options to firm orders for the Irish leasing company GPA Group P.L.C.


John W. Wheeler, 75, A Former Law Partner
John W. Wheeler, a Manhattan lawyer who was a retired senior partner in Thacher Proffitt &amp; Wood, died on Tuesday at St.
Francis Hospital in Port Washington, L.I.
He was 75 years old and lived in Port Washington and in Boca Raton, Fla.
He died of heart failure, a family spokesman said.


Italy Pledges $50 Million in Aid for Albania
Italy has pledged about $50 million in emergency food, medical and economic aid to Albania to help ease the effects of this country's economic collapse on its three million people and to cut the number of Albanians fleeing to Italy, the Italian Foreign Minister said here today.
"We surely hope this aid will discourage the pressure of immigration," Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis said at a news conference.
He said he was not certain how effective the measure would be, "but surely it's a first important step."


William Berta Memorial
A memorial service for William Berta, former senior vice president and sales promotion director for Saks Fifth Avenue, is to be held at 10 A.M. on Tuesday at the Katie Murphy Amphitheater at the Fashion Institute of Technology, Seventh Avenue at West 27th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Berta died on June 6 at the age of 56.


NCR Revamping A.T.&amp; T. Computer Unit
The dismantling of A.T.&amp; T.'s computer business began yesterday, as Gilbert P. Williamson, the president of NCR, told the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's computer systems sales force that the companies' combined computer business would be based on NCR computers introduced last fall.
Mr.
Williamson said no decisions had been made on how many jobs would be cut because of the merger of the companies.
Last month, after a five-month takeover battle, NCR agreed to be acquired by the phone company for $7.48 billion in stock.


A Guide to Bike Tours
Here is a sampling of companies that run weekend bicycle tours in the Northeast, with some of their offerings this weekend and next:


Diner's Journal
Summer Closings
These Manhattan restaurants have scheduled closings during the summer:
Aureole, 34 East 61st Street, Aug. 18 to Sept. 3.
Bouley, 165 Duane Street, July 1 to 10.
Chanterelle, 2 Harrison Street, Aug. 20 to Sept. 2.
Gotham Bar and Grill, 12 East 12th Street, July 4 and Sept. 1 and 2.
La Caravelle, 33 West 55th Street, Aug. 19 to Sept. 3.
La Colombe d'Or, 134 East 26th Street, Sept. 1 to 9.
Lafayette, 65 East 56th Street, June 30 to July 29.
La Reserve, 4 West 49th Street, June 30 to July 8.
Le Bernardin, 155 West 51st Street, July 4 and Sept. 2.
Le Cygne, 55 East 54th Street, Aug. 2 to Sept. 4.
Lutece, 249 East 50th Street, July 26 to Sept. 3.
March, 405 East 58th Street, Aug. 18 to Sept. 2.
Montrachet, 239 West Broadway, at White Street, June 30 to July 10.
Park Bistro, 414 Park Avenue South, near 28th Street, July 1 to July 15.
Periyali, 35 West 20th Street, Aug. 30 to Sept. 9; open for dinner only on Sept. 10.
The Quilted Giraffe, 15 East 55th Street, June 30 to July 29.


Census Adjustment Means More for New York
While New York, New Jersey and Connecticut would all gain people if the Census Bureau uses an additional population survey to adjust its official 1990 tally, the impact on the states' Congressional delegations would not change.
New Jersey would still lose one seat and New York State would lose three seats; no Connecticut seats are in jeopardy.


Research Venture For Cell Genesys
Cell Genesys Inc., a privately held biotechnology company based in Foster City, Calif., and J T Immunotech U.S.A., a subsidiary of Japan Tobacco Inc., entered an agreement under which J T will pay Cell Genesys up to $30 million for a minority stake and to finance research and development.


Higher Property Tax Is Ordered by Panel
The state panel oversee ing Bridgeport's finances ordered the city yesterday to raise property taxes by 18 percent -- the action the city has filed for bankruptcy protection to avoid.
Mayor Mary C. Moran, who earlier in the day testified in Washington on the city's plight, said she would consult with the city's lawyers to determine what action Bridgeport should take.
The state's largest city filed for protection under Chapter 9 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code on June 6.
The state is fighting the bankruptcy filing.  (AP)


Review/Art; Sculptor Who Was a Star Of the Art Deco Years
In the Art Deco years of the 1920's and 30's, Paul Manship was a star.
His slick, seamless, streamlined figures, with depersonalized faces reminiscent of Archaic Greek sculpture, brought him wealth and power.
They were coveted internationally and seen in powerful American institutional quarters as an effective response to the artistic convulsions of Europe.
After World War II, Manship's star did not so much fall as crash.
He had never cared much about the artistic pressures of his age, and when American art became abstract, heroic and international, his relaxed, genteel, "never let 'em see you sweat" art became facile and irrelevant.
When Manship died in 1966, at the age of 80, his stature in the academic art world was assured, but outside that world his work seemed duller than unpatinated bronze.


Market Place; Bank Stocks' Outlook Debated
THE market for bank stocks has been a world of extremes recently, shifting from deep gloom in the year ended in October 1990, when prices fell more than 50 percent, to euphoria in the last seven months as prices have increased more than 70 percent.
But because bank losses on commercial real estate loans continue to rise, and problems with delinquent borrowers are spreading to consumer and business loans, some analysts are questioning whether the market's optimism is justified.
Securities dealers, who have already sold nearly $5 billion of new preferred and common bank stocks this year, hope the positive mood lasts long enough for them to complete several more large financings.


Fallon Does Well in Clio Awards
Fallon McElligott took top honors last night when the Clio Awards were presented in New York for creative advertising in print, radio and specialty categories.
The Minneapolis-based agency won five of the 25 Clios for print advertising appearing in the United States.
Its winners included campaigns for Hush Puppies footwear and Timex watches.
Fallon McElligott also won in the national trade promotions category in specialty advertising.


Travelers Cutback
The Travelers Corporation will eliminate 93 jobs and create 39 new ones over the next few months in a realignment of field offices, the company said.
The reorganization affects commercial-lines operations, which sell property-casualty insurance and services to businesses.
None of the job cuts will be in Connecticut, and some of the people whose jobs are eliminated will be given the new field positions, Travelers said.


Drug Chain Makes Offer For Revco
The Jack Eckerd Corporation, a Florida-based drugstore chain, announced yesterday that it was offering to buy Revco D.S., the large drugstore chain that filed for bankruptcy after a failed leveraged buyout.
Revco said it had rejected the Eckerd bid, submitted on May 16, at a board meeting on June 6 because the offer was "insufficient in value for further consideration." Revco, based in Twinsburgh, Ohio, said the Eckerd bid was unsolicited.
Eckerd offered to buy the company and bring it out of its bankruptcy reorganization effort; Revco filed a plan for reorganization on June 7.


Dollar Continues to Gain While Gold Prices Tumble
The dollar continued its advance on world currency markets yesterday, posting additional gains against the mark after the release of some important data on the United States economy.
Gold prices were mostly lower worldwide.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery settled at $370.20 an ounce, unchanged from Wednesday.
The Republic National Bank said gold slipped 15 cents, to a late bid of $369.10.


Lightning Fatalities Are Rare
Because of its unpredictable suddenness and awesome power, lightning is one of the most dreaded natural phenomena.
But as statistics on injuries and fatalities indicate, being struck by lightning is a rare occurrence.
In the United States, moreover, it is becoming even rarer.
For although lightning strikes the earth an estimated 100 times a second, according to figures compiled by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, only about 85 Americans are killed by lightning each year and 275 are injured, numbers that have dropped substantially as the nation's farm population has declined.
As recently as the 1940's, for example, the average was 329 lightning deaths a year.
While the National Safety Council has estimated that as many as half the fatalities are golfers, the Government figures indicate that the number killed on golf courses is actually less than 5 percent of the total.
In 1989, for example, 2 of the 67 deaths occurred on golf courses; in 1988, the figure was 3 of 68.


A Change in Top Post For Marine Midland
Marine Midland Banks, hurt by losses from bad loans, announced yesterday that John R. H. Bond, a top executive of the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation would replace Geoffrey A. Thompson, who was resigning, as Marine's chief executive.
Marine Midland, which has been controlled by Hongkong and Shanghai since 1980 and is the largest foreign-owned bank in the United States, has long been a source of vexation for its parent company.
John M. Gray, deputy chairman of Hongkong and Shanghai, said recently that "we still believe that our strategy of buying an American bank is correct" but acknowledged that the execution "was very bad."


After-the-Budget Issues: Albany Presses On
Despite being both distracted and exhausted by their struggle with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo over a state spending plan, lawmakers here are facing the fact that there is life after the budget, and several major issues to deal with between now and the end of their session.
The Legislature acted today on one of its most pressing items -- a two-year extension of the rent-stabilization laws governing about one million apartments in New York City and Nassau, Westchester and Rockland Counties.
Without legislative action, the rules, which set ceilings on rent increases and protect tenants in other ways, would have expired this weekend.


Week in the Subway As Cultural Exchange
A hapless fare-beater was arrested yesterday in the Chambers Street subway station, and he was suddenly surrounded by six Moscow police officers.
This was not a scene out of a Cold War nightmare.
The Soviets were not taking over the United States.


Volcanoes, Nazis and Crime
In Japan, Mount Unzen blows skull-size rocks onto farms and villages.
In the Philippines, Mount Pinatubo blasts out tons of insidious ash, fine as talcum powder.
Some people are evacuated from imminent danger but what most clouds the lives of people in surrounding areas is uncertainty.
Should they go, too?
The question is not limited to volcanoes.
It arises regularly for people who live in flood plains and sporadically for those in the path of hurricanes.
Whenever big city life is darkened by senseless violence, as in the murder of a woman walking her dogs in Manhattan last weekend, devotees of urbanity again ponder the suburbs or the country.
Should they go, too?


Japan's Rising Trade Surplus Alarms Competitors
Despite years of pledges to open its markets to foreign goods and slow its powerful export machine, Japan's trade surplus is soaring to politically dangerous levels again after three years of decline.
Government officials have been struggling to play down the trend, particularly after new figures were released this week showing a big jump in sales of Japanese goods abroad, although exports to the United States were down slightly.


Review/Music; Previn Conducts And Plays
Music seasons hardly exist any more, given air-conditioning and summer festivals and 52-week union contracts.
In the case of the New York Philharmonic, the current final subscription concerts of the season have already been rendered anticlimactic by Zubin Mehta's ballyhooed farewell two weeks ago.
And the orchestra resumes its concertizing with hardly a break, with a series later this month at the Tilles Center on Long Island.
As planned, the final subscription program was at least to have offered a novelty, in the form of Andre Previn's Piano Concerto, with Andre Watts as soloist.
But with cancellations and late substitutions, things have often not worked out as planned this season at Avery Fisher Hall, and so it was on Wednesday.


Dow Chemical Program Wins a Silver Anvil
As the advertising award season continues, publicists and advertising executives gathered yesterday at two more ceremonies to receive additional honors.
At the Silver Anvil awards last night in New York, sponsored by the Public Relations Society of America, the Dow Chemical Company, Midland, Mich., won the Best of Silver Anvil Award for a program to promote recycling.
The campaign was created by Ketchum Public Relations, Washington.
Of the 40 awards presented, Ketchum took five.


Wisconsin Prices Operating Notes
Wisconsin yesterday priced $450 million in operating notes due June 15, 1992, through competitive bidding.
The First Boston Corporation was awarded the bulk of the notes.
The $200 million portion awarded to First Boston and reoffered to the public was priced with a 5 percent coupon, to yield 4.6 percent, as was the $100 million that went to Merrill Lynch, the $100 million awarded to Smith Barney, Harris Upham, the $25 million to Dillon, Read, and the $20 million to First Wisconsin.


Taub Returns to Nets
JOE TAUB, the Nets' majority stockholder from 1978 through 1985, and his brother, HENRY, have reached an agreement to purchase an undisclosed number of shares of stock, but not a majority, from BERNIE MANN, one of the club's three majority owners.
Mann will continue as one of the team's vice chairmen of the board, along with DAVID GERSTEIN.
They and ALAN AUFZIEN, the board chairman, and JERRY COHEN, the president, were part of a group that bought the Nets from Joe Taub six years ago.
There will be no change of titles as a result of the purchase, which requires approval by the N.B.A.'s Board of Governors.


Tax Fraud Indictment
The founder of the Kinder- Care Inc. child-care chain, Perry Mendel of Montgomery, Ala., was charged yesterday with Federal tax evasion.
The indictment in Federal District Court in Manhattan was related to financial dealings with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. by Mr.
Mendel and another former Kinder- Care executive, Richard J. Grassgreen.
Mr.
Grassgreen pleaded guilty last month to two counts of criminal securities fraud.


Rome Journal; Taxes Flow to the Church; Its Cup Runneth Over
Churches are about as empty as ever most Sundays across Italy, and Roman Catholic priests complain that sometimes their search for the pious is as rewarding as casting a net in fished-out waters.
But by one nonecclesiastical standard, tax collections, the church seems to be doing better than ever in this dyed-in-the-wool Catholic land, where religion is not so much a beacon of faith as an inescapable way of life.


UAL's Denver Plan
The UAL Corporation's United Airlines unit said it intended to move its Denver operations to the new Denver International Airport, set to open in 1993, where United would occupy up to 45 gates.
United also said it would locate a 2,000-employee regional reservations center at a new business development site at the current Denver airport, Stapleton International.


New Tandy Stores To Sell Discount PC's
The Tandy Corporation said today that it planned to enter the discount computer retailing market by opening six superstores this year and as many as 15 annually for the next few years.
The new chain, which Tandy is calling Computer City, will be the first computer discounter to sell models made by the largest American manufacturers in the personal computer industry: I.B.M., Apple and Compaq, as well as Tandy's own line.


Our Towns
"It is with sadness and reluctance that we the Board of Directors announce the retirement of Robert Hall, our Doorman Extraordinaire." -- Bulletin Board Announcement, Wedgewood Apts.
Tomorrow is the day.


On My Mind; Buddy to Buddy
President Bush's decision to make Robert S. Strauss the new Ambassador to the Soviet Union is a pretty clear message: I am sending my good old buddy to make the deals with my good new buddy.
That does not strike me as an inspired message to send when the Soviet Union is at a moment of change that will affect history -- ours as well as the Kremlin's.


At the Bar; Does 'polite' really mean 'wimpy'? Or, what has happened to civility in a once-noble profession?
The committee on civility of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago spent 60 pages describing the degraded state to which lawyerly manners have slipped in recent years.
They could have just paraphrased Thomas Hobbes and said that lawyers are increasingly making the practice of law nasty, brutish and long.
Far more than they were a generation ago, the committee found, lawyers are rude, belligerent, manipulative and downright deceitful to one another.
Briefs and oral arguments are more vituperative.
And all the unpleasantness drags on and on, as lawyers grind down their opponents.
Even judges have gotten into the act, using opinions to take potshots at subordinates and each other.


'People Were Screaming and Running to Get Help'
In a violent thunderstorm during the first round of the United States Open golf championship today, one spectator was killed and five others were hurt when they were struck by lightning near the 11th tee of the Hazeltine National Golf Club.
The death of the spectator, believed to be the first ever caused by lightning at a championship golf tournament in the country, was attributed to cardiac arrest, said Dr.
Dale Bohlke, the director of emergency medical services at St.
Francis Hospital in this Minneapolis suburb.
The victim was William Fadell, 27 years old, of Spring Park, Minn.


Sears's Office Centers
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said it would open home-office supply departments in 50 stores this year, adding to 10 it has operated for two years on an experimental basis.
The expansion of the office centers positions Sears to serve the growing number of people who work at home, Sears said on Wednesday.
The company estimated that the number of people working at home in the United States would grow to 60 million by 1993 from 45 million.


CHRONICLE
The 1991 Praemium Imperiale Awards for lifetime achievement in the arts were distributed on Tuesday in Paris.
The awards, $100,000 each, are sponsored by the Japan Art Association, which was founded in 1887 by the imperial family to help support Japanese artists.
The recipients were INGMAR BERGMAN, the director; EDUARDO CHILLIDA, the sculptor; GAE AULENTI, the designer and architect; GYORGY LIGETI, the composer, and BALTHUS, the painter.
The prize was established in 1989 because the association decided it was time for Japan to participate in international cultural life, a spokesman for the awards panel said.


Old Russian Traditions In 'Gulyane' at St. John's
The Republic of Russia, fresh from its first presidential election, will be represented locally and colorfully when 95 of its folk musicians and dancers perform a program called "Gulyane," a festive parade at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine tonight and tomorrow night at 8.
Dressed in costumes that have been handed down for generations, some of the villagers among the six distinct groups of performers -- from Siberia to Kursk in the Russian heartland -- good-naturedly ended an interview the other day by showing off the crafts they will display at a fair sponsored by the cathedral (Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street) tomorrow and Sunday from 1 to 4 P.M.


Corrections
The Market Place column of Business Day on Wednesday, about the price rise in Daimler-Benz shares, referred incompletely to the ways American investors can invest in the company.
In addition to shares traded in Germany, the company has American depository receipts that can be purchased through several banks and brokerage houses in the United States.


Sports of The Times; Air Jordan And Just Plain Folks
Not just in America, or Chicago, where with grateful tears in his eyes he carried home the gleaming gold championship trophy, but in places one might never expect, Michael Jordan is a hero.
Ted Ewanchiw of ProServ, the management group that handles Jordan's endorsements, said he had been receiving calls from Japan.
"They want him for commercials," he said.


Profits Drop at Maxwell
Maxwell Communication Corporation P.L.C. said today that its profit fell 9.2 percent in its latest fiscal year.
Robert Maxwell, chairman, who owns The Daily News in New York separately, said the company's core publishing and information services interests continued to do well, particularly in North America, despite the difficult economic climate.


Tax Repeal Bill Introduced
Democratic lawmakers said today that they want to repeal the controversial sales tax on disposable paper products, which last year turned toilet paper into a symbol of New Jersey's anti-tax movement.
Senate Democrats quietly introduced a bill yesterday to remove the sales tax on paper products, which was part of the $2.8 billion in tax increases that drew voter wrath in 1990.


Doctors and Nurses Support AIDS Testing, Survey Shows
A majority of doctors and nurses favor mandatory testing of health care workers for the AIDS virus, according to a federally financed study.
The findings are in marked contrast to the position of most public health agencies and health professionals societies, which oppose such mandatory testing.


SWEDEN TO APPLY TO JOIN EUROPEANS
Following up on a promise made last fall, Sweden's Social Democratic Government announced today that it would apply for membership in the 12-nation European Community on July 1 but stressed that Sweden intended to remain neutral.
The decision was motivated by a fear of being left outside the single market that the community is trying to create by the end of 1992.
The community is Sweden's major export market.


Schering-Plough
The Schering-Plough Corporation said that an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration had determined that its non-sedating antihistamine called Claritin (loratadine) does not pose any human carcinogenic potential.
Schering-Plough's drug has been pending approval with United States regulators since 1986.
It is approved and marketed in 36 countries outside the United States and had more than $70 million in 1990 sales abroad.


Worthy and Lakers Reach New Terms
JAMES WORTHY, who averaged a career-high 21.4 points per game this season, will remain a Los Angeles Laker.
The All-Star forward signed a multiyear contract extension this week, the team announced Thursday in Inglewood, Calif.
No terms were revealed, but Worthy said recently that he and the Lakers were near agreement on a contract that would run through the 1995-96 season, picking up the option year on his current contract and adding another year.
He received $1.6 million this season.


Patents; Cracking The Shell, but Not the Nut
Consider the familiar nutcracker, which has been around for centuries.
It comes in different shapes and sizes, but usually employs the most elementary of levers: two sticks joined at a single point, which bring irresistible force against the nutshell squeezed between them.
The problem is that most nutcrackers often crack the nut as well as the shell.
Why?
Because all the pressure has to be applied at only two places.
Now Jerry Hambright of Hawkins, Tex., has invented a nutcracker that applies pressure more evenly and gently.
The result: whole walnuts almost every time.


Dr. Dennis Kelly, 52, Science Academy Head
Dr.
Dennis D. Kelly, a physiological psychologist serving a one-year term as president of the New York Academy of Sciences, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 52 years old.
He died of cancer of the bile duct, said his wife, Dr. Ann-Judith Silverman.


Britain Ends Insurer Inquiry
The Serious Fraud Office said today that it had dropped its investigation of the Lloyd's of London insurance market.
The Government prosecuting agency decided that no further investigation of Lloyd's was warranted, said a spokeswoman, speaking on condition of anonymity.


Friends Say Woman in Assault Had Nightmares
The St.
John's University student who prosecutors say was sexually assaulted by a group of male students later had nightmares about the incident in which she would "scream the names" of two of the men, friends of the 22-year-old woman said yesterday.
Shy to begin with, she became even more withdrawn after the reported attack 15 months ago, spending entire days in bed in which she would "cuddle up like a little baby," the friends said.
At the same time, she also became obsessed with news reports of sexual assaults on other women, including the Central Park jogger, and prayed that God would help both of them, the friends recalled.


Trump Makes One Payment
Donald Trump made an important interest payment yesterday but was still in talks to rework $351.8 million in bonds on his Trump Castle casino.
Mr.
Trump has until Monday to show state regulators that he is financially able to run his three casinos.


Campeau Loss Is Reported
The Campeau Corporation, the financially pressed Canadian builder that owns substantial retailing assets in the United States, reported in Toronto that its loss from continuing operations in the year ended Jan. 31 was equal to $10.07 a share in United States dollars compared with a loss from continuing operations of $37.86 a share a year before.
The company said the operating profit in the year fell to $115.5 million from $121.6 million in the prior year.
Campeau said that the decline reflected a decrease equal to $14 million because of the sale of rental properties.
But these were mostly offset by increases from a full year's operations of the London Galleria Shopping Centre and improved operating profits from rental increases in other properties, the company said.


News Transmission Halted as Cable Is Cut
United Press International's news delivery to the United States and Canada and parts of The Associated Press's broadcast service, A.P.
Network News, were knocked out today when a contractor severed two fiber-optic telephone cables in suburban Virginia.
Some telephone service at the Pentagon and at hundreds of residences and businesses in the Washington area was also disrupted, said Ellen Fitzgerald, a spokeswoman for the Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company, a Bell Atlantic subsidiary.
Ms.
Fitzgerald said the cables involved were cut at 9:30 A.M. in Annandale, Va.
She said Chesapeake and Potomac had not yet determined the identity of the contractor, whether the contractor had been working for the company or how the cables had been severed.


Eckerd May Add To Revco Offer
A Florida-based retailing company said today that it might be willing to sweeten a takeover offer for the 1,100-store Revco D.S.
Inc. drug chain.
A spokesman at the Jack Eckerd Corporation said Eckerd was reviewing Revco's bankruptcy reorganization plan and "we may modify the offer and that modification may be more appealing to Revco."
Revco's board and creditors reviewed the original offer and decided it "provided insufficient value to warrant further discussions at this time." The terms of the proposal were not disclosed.
In a recent court hearing, a Revco lawyer estimated the value of the company at about $835 million.
Based in Clearwater, Fla., Eckerd is a major retailer that operates 1,680 drugstores in 13 states.
A merger with Revco, based in Twinsburg, Ohio, would create the nation's largest drug chain, with nearly 2,800 stores, eclipsing the 2,378-store Rite Aid Corporation.


Music in Review
Contemporary Music Ensemble of RAI Turin  Merkin Concert Hall
Having gotten off to a slow start with a populist program of orchestral works by three rock composers, the New York International Festival of the Arts attempted an abrupt gear shift on Monday evening.
In place of the innocent tonality of the novice symphonists, the festival presented the Contemporary Music Ensemble of R.A.I. (Italian Radio and Television) Turin in rigorously reasoned, jaggedly atonal works by six living Italian composers.
The concert was conducted by Gianpiero Taverna, and a sequel was presented on Tuesday.


2 STUDENTS ENTER PLEAS IN DRUG RAID
A University of Virginia student pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal District Court in Charlottesville to a drug trafficking charge resulting from a much-disputed raid at the prestigious school founded by Thomas Jefferson.
A second student pleaded not guilty to charges arising from the March 22 raid and then unsuccessfully urged the judge to dismiss his case on the ground that he had been unfairly lured into drug trafficking by undercover agents.


New Safety Rule for Automatic Doors
The Consumer Product Safety Commission issued regulations this week to make automatic garage doors safer, especially for young children.
Children have been seriously injured and, in some cases, killed when they ran under closing doors or were playing where doors closed on them.
The rules require all new automatic garage doors to meet an Underwriters Laboratory safety standard that says an electronic garage door opener must contain a safety system that stops the descent of the door and reverses it when the door hits an object in its path.


How's a Child to Get Around When a Car Seat's Outgrown?
Most parents now put their infants and small children into protective car seats when they travel by auto.
But what about children between the ages of 4 and 7?
They are usually too big for car seats but too small to wear seat belts comfortably or safely.
There is no easy answer.
As a rule, children should stay in car seats as long as possible, the experts say, and they should always ride in a back seat.
But as they grow up they generally want to sit in a car the same way adults do, with a lap belt or, in a new car, with a combination lap and shoulder belt.


For Political Justice, Adjust the Census
The latest census figures measure national injustice, the record-setting undercount of millions of Americans and its glaringly uneven distribution.
The census takers missed more than five million, and missed black and Hispanic men at well over twice the national rate.
That's just one indicator of how large cities, where the uncounted live, are being shortchanged.
Those numbers also show that Secretary of Commerce Robert Mosbacher can correct the injustice with relatively little political and social pain -- by adjusting the count, using known techniques to correct the April 1990 headcount.


9.90 - Burrell Blazes to World Record in the 100
Leroy Burrell, the world's fastest human for the last two years, stamped his title in gold plate yesterday by setting a world record in the men's 100-meter dash at the Mobil national track and field championships on Randalls Island.
Burrell's time, built on a blazing start that gave him a lead within the first 10 meters, was 9.90 seconds.
It lowered the mark of 9.92 set by Carl Lewis in the final of the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, South Korea.


Democrats Meet To Plot Strategy For '92 Election
Several of the Democratic Party's most likely Presidential hopefuls retreated to an estate in the exclusive hunt country here today to begin plotting how they might wrest the White House from the Republicans in 1992.
Although the overnight meeting included 21 of the party's most reliable contributors, and although some promises were made, Democratic party officials said afterward that it was less a fund-raising event than a strategy meeting intended to give Democrats an "early start."


As Philippine Volcano Erupts, Experts Warn of Mud Flow
Mount Pinatubo rumbled today with explosions that hurled ash and gas more than 12 miles high, and a typhoon brought heavy rain that experts said could unleash tons of debris down the jagged slopes.
Seven explosions were recorded early today from the 4,800-foot tropical volcano in the Philippines, and scientists said more were expected.


Inventories Fell in April
Business sales rebounded and inventories shrank in April, the Government said today.
The 1.2 percent surge in sales, to a seasonally adjusted $529.6 billion, was the strongest since August, the Commerce Department said.
Sales had declined nine-tenths of 1 percent in March.


Offer by T.W.A. to Buy Its Debt Blocked
A Federal judge today blocked an offer by Trans World Airlines Inc. to buy a vast portion of its estimated $1.37 billion debt at a discount, a move that could push the troubled airline closer to bankruptcy.
The effort by T.W.A. to buy its way out of debt at a fraction of the debt's value is a crucial element of its strategy to stay in business without landing in bankruptcy court.


'I Pledge Allegiance,' Say 6,000 Voices


Bishop's Stolen Ring Found
A sacred gold cross and ring stolen from the body of a Roman Catholic bishop as he lay in state were recovered today, authorities said.
A homeless man, David Taylor, 25 years old, and a 13-year-old boy were charged with burglary and theft.
The ring and the chain that held the cross were found at a pawnshop, where they had been sold for $400.
Police did not have details on where the cross was found.
The theft, discovered early Thursday, saddened the Camden diocese as officials prepared to celebrate funeral Masses for the retired Bishop George H. Guilfoyle.
The boy, whose name was not released, has been released, said Lieut.
Al Handy of the Camden police.


Edgy Outpost: Life in the Falklands; Unease Tempers Prosperity In Falklands' Postwar Years
Miles of barbed-wire fence and signs warning of live minefields still surround this tiny port city.
Rolls of rusting concertina wire line beaches.
Military vehicles rumble through the streets, and 30 miles to the southwest, British Phantom jets take off from a state-of-the-art air base.
These are all reminders that there is still no negotiated peace, nine years after Argentina invaded and occupied these remote islands it calls the Malvinas for two and a half months, only to surrender on June 14, 1982, to a British counterinvasion.


City College Awards 1,900 Degrees, Belatedly
The City College of New York awarded more than 1,900 bachelor's and graduate degrees yesterday at its 145th commencement exercises.
The commencement was held later than usual because of a student protest in April over tuition increases in which students took over buildings and obstructed classes.


U.S. Output Climbed 0.5% Last Month
Factories in May increased production of autos, furniture, appliances and other consumer goods, the Government reported today.
Production at factories, mines and utilities increased a seasonally adjusted five-tenths of 1 percent in May, the strongest gain in 11 months.


Bank Robber Commits Suicide in Prison Cell
A convict who gained notoriety for bombing police stations as a diversion while he and accomplices robbed banks hanged himself in his prison cell today, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said.
The 45-year-old convict, James Peter Pardue, had been sent back to the Federal penitentiary here this week to continue a 25-year bank robbery sentence after he violated terms of his March 19 parole by failing to report to a probation office in Denver.


Cutbacks Kill New Jersey School District's Dreams
Classes end next Wednesday at the Columbian Elementary School, not with any year-end jubilation but with budget crisis and retrenchment here and in the system's 15 other schools.
When schools open next year, jobs will have been eliminated districtwide because the state has taken away $11 million in aid that it had once promised.
The cutback will force Saunja Butler, the only guidance counselor for Columbian's 714 students, back to the classroom.


The Science of Lightning Can't Escape Old Facts
The science of lightning has advanced rapidly in recent years.
But for all the new knowledge about when, where and under what precise conditions it is likely to strike, to Fred Gadomski, a Penn State meteorologist, the most important scientific fact about lighting is one of the oldest.
"In a thunderstorm," he said yesterday, "the first place you don't want to go is under a tree."


Sports Leisure; More Than One Way to Enjoy a Canoe
At this annual celebration of the canoe as one of mankind's more noble instruments, the poet of paddle, Harry Roberts, gave his audience assurance.
"There's nothing
wrong
," he said, "with spending $1,000 on a canoe."
Several models were beached nearby waiting to be tried out, a few valued under $1,000 and most over that.
This event was more than a boat show, however, this sixth North American Canoe Symposium open to all comers.
It was a testament to the canoe revolution that has so extended the versatility of this humble craft.


Pressed Lawmakers Report Sharp Declines in Speaking Fees
Under attack for their ties to special interests, members of the House and Senate reported significant declines in the speaking fees they accepted last year from corporations and other groups affected by legislation.
The annual disclosure reports made public today showed that in 1990, the last year that House members legally permitted themselves to take speaking fees, they collected a total of $5.6 million, a computer-aided analysis by The New York Times shows.
That is a decline of close to $1 million, or nearly 13 percent, from the previous year.


V.A. Mortgage Rise
The maximum rate on mortgages guaranteed by the Department of Veterans Affairs will rise by half a percentage point, to 9.5 percent, effective Monday, the department said today.
The increase in the V.A. rate is the first change since last February, when the rate dropped from 9.5 percent to 9 percent, and the first rise since February 1990, when it climbed from 9.5 percent to 10 percent.
The increase came as the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation reported that conventional fixed-rate mortgages, not backed by the Government, averaged 9.66 percent this week, up from 9.48 percent a week ago.


Isn't It Odd to Learn Only About White Males?; Bush on Campus
To the Editor:
Those of us whose livelihoods depend on the exercise of free speech take little comfort in President Bush's denunciation of "political correctness" on college campuses (front page, May 5).
Although we may welcome the President's new-found opposition to "censorship," which we hope he will continue to manifest in future battles over funds for the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities, we are troubled by signs that his conversion to the First Amendment is still incomplete.


Cubatao Journal; Signs of Life in Brazil's Industrial Valley of Death
After school let out one recent afternoon here, Cleiton Celio Silva Araujo grabbed hooks, line and a bamboo pole and scrambled down a bank of the Cubatao River.
Within an hour, the gangly 13-year-old was filling a plastic bag with fish.
Out of place in this tableau was the background: metal chimneys and ducts of a riverside styrene plant.
Even more out of place was a label that Brazilian environmentalists long ago gave to this industrial city: the Valley of Death.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Navratilova Advances  Martina Navratilova and Zina Garrison stayed on course for a repeat of the 1990 Wimbledon final when they won their quarterfinal matches in straight sets yesterday at the Edgbaston grass-court tournament in Birmingham, England.
Navratilova defeated fellow American Lori McNeil, seeded fifth, 6-3, 6-2, and Garrison won, 6-3, 6-4, against Mariaan De Swardt of South Africa. (AP) Chang Loses in Quarterfinals: Michael Chang, seeded fifth, joined the big-name casualties at the Queens Club grass-court tournament when he lost to sixth-seeded David Wheaton, 6-3, 6-3, in the quarterfinals in London.
Stefan Edberg, the only one of the top five seeded players left, beat Pat Cash, 6-3, 6-4. (Reuters) BOXING Mexican Wins 3d Title Daniel Zaragoza of Mexico captured his third world title yesterday when he won a split decision and took Kiyoshi Hatanaka's World Boxing Council super-bantamweight crown in Nagoya, Japan. (AP) GOLF 2 Share Keystone Lead Janet Anderson and Sandra Palmer shared the lead at five under par yesterday after the first round of the L.P.G.A.'s Lady Keystone Open in Hershey, Pa.
Anderson and Palmer finished with 67's on the 6,348-yard West Course of the Hershey Country Club.
Beth Daniel, last year's leading money-winner, was tied for third at 68.(AP)  Senior Golfer Sizzles: Rocky Thompson started with five consecutive birdies on his way to a Lafayette Country Club course record 10-under-par 62 and a four-stroke lead in the opening round of the MONY Syracuse Senior Classic.
Thompson, a third-year tour veteran, eclipsed Al Geiberger's 1989 course record of 63. (AP)


Bruce W. Munn, Correspondent, 79
Bruce W. Munn, a veteran United Press International correspondent and former chief of its United Nations bureau, died on Wednesday at the Hackensack Medical Center.
He was 79 years old and lived in Teaneck, N.J.
Mr.
Munn had recently undergone surgery for heart trouble, but the cause of death was not disclosed.


Andre Previn Featured At Caramoor Festival
An Andre Previn mini-series, a Broadway Fourth of July tribute to Leonard Bernstein and the festival debuts of the conductor Hugh Wolff and the jazz pianist Dave Brubeck are to be highlights of the 46th annual Caramoor Music Festival, which opens June 22 in Katonah, N.Y.
The eight-week festival is to begin with Mr.
Wolff conducting the Orchestra of St.
Luke's, the resident orchestra, in a program of Beethoven, Haydn and Kodaly, with the pianist Andre Watts as soloist.


Isn't It Odd to Learn Only About White Males?; Good and Great Books
To the Editor:
I think Henry Louis Gates in "Whose Culture Is It, Anyway?" (Op-Ed, May 4) mischaracterized a comment made to me by Mortimer Adler, editor of the Great Books series.
Mr.
Gates states that "Mortimer Adler has ventured that blacks 'wrote no good books.' " In an article I wrote for The Nation magazine on the Great Books, Mr.
Adler told me he thought that no black had yet written a "great book." This was in response to my question why no black authors were included in the series.
He meant the word "great" only to refer to the criteria of the Great Books series.


Senate Delays Highway Bill Vote
The Senate today postponed until next week further work on a five-year $110 billion highway and mass transit bill.
The postponement came after a meeting of the Republican caucus failed to reach a consensus on how it would prefer to divide an $8.2 billion surplus in the highway trust fund.


In Tight Times (Shh!) Haggling Can Be A Status Symbol
Bargaining.
People are doing it everywhere.
But it's not something they're talking about much.
If you catch someone at it and know the person well enough to ask why they're trying to get a pair of tennis shoes for $2 less than the tagged price, they'll have a host of ready excuses at hand.
Mostly they add up to the fact that tennis shoes have got to be pretty expensive, that there is a recession and that most sellers will give a little to get a little.
But lots of people won't admit they enjoy the give and take.


Editorial Notebook; New York, the Movie
New York gives itself to the movie business more fully than any other city that isn't Hollywood.
Filming permits are one index.
The mayor's film office last year issued more than 8,000, licensing lights, cameras and action in the streets for as briefly as a day or as long as a month.
Commercials and television shows account for much of this.
But 139 big-deal pictures came here, too.
Arc lights turn night into day, cars blow up and caravans clog the streets.
New Yorkers grumble.
The moviecrats say, be a sport; think of jobs and dollars now, and the valentine to the city in theaters next year.


S.I. Toddler Dies And Her Mother Faces Charges
A 32-year-old Staten Island woman was arrested yesterday after her severely bruised daughter was found dead in her apartment, the police said.
When paramedics arrived at the apartment early yesterday morning, in response to a call from the mother, Selena Walker, they discovered the child, Chardasia, 16 months old, lying on a couch, without a pulse.
The girl had a fractured skull, a broken left ankle, burns on the left hand and right foot and multiple bruises on the head, the police said.


Music in Review
American Festival of Microtonal Music St. Paul's Chapel at Columbia University
The idea of writing music that moves beyond the 12-pitch scale of Western tonality has fascinated composers for decades, but mainstream performers and audiences have been resistant.
One champion of the notion is Johnny Reinhard, who started the American Festival of Microtonal Music in 1988.
This year's festival ends tonight with a concert of keyboard music at Greenwich House, 27 Barrow Street.


2 Robbers Invade a Church, Stealing Donations to Needy
Two masked men forced their way into the rectory of a Manhattan church yesterday, held the pastor at gunpoint and made off with more than $75,000, the police said.
The money was collected the day before, at a celebration for the Feast of St.
Anthony, to feed the homeless and care for people with AIDS.
The loss devastated the friars and parishioners at the Roman Catholic church of St.
Francis of Assisi, at 135 West 31st Street, which has for more than 60 years run a soup kitchen that now feeds 500 people a day.


Keeping Eye on the Ball, Henke Surprises Henke
When most golfers in contention at the United States Open are asked if they think they can win, they take a cliche out of their bag of quotes and grip it with overlapping cautious optimism.
Such as: "I just want to hit one shot at a time."


Religion Notes
Peripatetic Churchgoers
Nearly all surveys of American churchgoing habits show that roughly 40 percent of Americans attend church once a week.
Despite slight blips at times of crises, like the Persian Gulf war, when church attendance rose, the number has hovered at 40 percent for decades.


Storm Is Declared a Tornado
The National Weather Service confirmed today that the fierce wind in Westchester County that ripped trees from their roots on Wednesday was a tornado.
The Weather Service said the tornado touched down in several neighborhoods in Briarcliff Manor about 4:15 P.M.


Half a Medical Plan Is Better . . .
President Bush spoke on domestic policy this week without even mentioning the crisis in health care.
But at least the Senate took notice, with hearings on a Democratic plan to provide medical insurance for all Americans.
Well, make that half a plan; it would achieve universal coverage, but only waves at spiraling costs.
Senator Mitchell, the majority leader, and the other sponsors thus duck a stark truth: Effective reform will require sacrifice by doctors and patients.
But even half a plan beats no plan, which is what the Bush Administration offers.


Walesa Threatens to Dissolve Assembly if Vote Is Not Set
President Lech Walesa today threatened to dissolve Parliament if it refused to pass the electoral law he wanted and hold free elections within four months.
Struggling to replace a Parliament still dominated by Communists, President Walesa said he would use all his powers to make it keep a deadline of October.
"I made such a promise publicly to the nation, and I will fulfill it using all constitutional means," he wrote in a letter to the Speaker of Parliament, Mikolaj Kozakiewicz.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.79
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.59
5.59
7.71
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.78
5.81
7.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.13
8.20
8.49
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.45
8.50
8.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.50
9.54
9.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.30
7.32
7.50
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Rise in Loan Delinquency
The percentage of consumer loans 30 days or more past due rose to 2.67 in the first three months of this year, a sign that the recession was hurting borrowers, the American Bankers Association said today.
The first-quarter delinquency rate for seven types of installment loans compares with a 2.57 percent rate during the last three months of 1990 and a 2.46 percent rate in the first quarter of 1990, the association said.


Historians Dig Up New York's Most Hideous Slum
It is emerging slowly, shaking off dirt with the help of a backhoe and a dozen archeologists, and offering quiet testament to the long, tortured history of New York City and its poor.
Along Pearl Street in lower Manhattan, on the site of a former parking lot where a new Federal Court House will be built, archeologists have exposed a part of the infamous Five Points slum of the 19th century.
In the last three weeks, the foundations of at least four structures have been unearthed.


Canadian Inflation Rate
Canada's consumer price index climbed slightly in May, mainly because of tax increases, the Government said today.
The index rose a seasonally adjusted two-tenths of 1 percent after rising one-tenth in April.


Axa Backtracks on Equitable Life Stake
Groupe Axa, one of France's largest insurance companies, announced today that it had reached an agreement with the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States to obtain a major stake in the troubled New York-based insurer.
But later in the day the company backed off from the remarks saying that a definitive agreement had not been worked out.


Why Landlord Resale of Electricity Should Remain Unchanged
To the Editor:
"Electricity Markup Penalizes Small Businesses" (letter, June 1) by William Squadron, New York City Commissioner of Telecommunications and Energy, shows ignorance of the history and structure of the purchase and redistribution of electricity by owners of about 1,000 New York City commercial buildings to their office and manufacturing tenants, mostly in Manhattan.
If Mr.
Squadron persuades the State Legislature, those owners and in turn their tenants, will suffer extraordinary and unnecessary economic damage.


Savings Bailout Official Shifted
A savings and loan bailout official who spent $26,000 in taxpayer money for art to adorn Government offices was removed today as director of the Resolution Trust Corporation's Midwestern regional office.
Mike Martinelli, who had been director of the agency's 23-state regional office in Overland Park, Kan., has been reassigned to Washington, a spokesman, Stephen Katsanos, said.


Extension for Pippen
SCOTTIE PIPPEN, star forward of the champion Bulls, has signed an $18 million multiyear contract extension with his team, a Chicago newspaper reported yesterday.
The deal was signed in Chicago last week after Game 2 of the finals, The Chicago Tribune said.
Bulls officials and Pippen declined to comment, but the pact had to be signed before midnight of the day of the last game of the finals for the team to use money available under their salary cap for the 1990-91 season.
The $18 million will be spread out over this last season; the next two seasons, for which Pippen is already under contract, and the five seasons after that, The Tribune reported.


Batted but Not Beaten By Vicissitudes of Life
Age, disease and mishap were no impediments for those who ran in the sunshine yesterday at Downing Stadium in the Mobil national track and field championships.
Renaldo Nehemiah, at the advanced age of 32, finished third in the men's 110-meter hurdles behind winner Greg Foster, a man several months his senior.
Both qualified, amicably and maturely, for the world championships.


Citizenship For 6,000 In Ceremony In Queens
In the largest naturalization ceremony in New York City since 1954, more than 6,000 people from 100 different countries crammed a Queens auditorium yesterday and pledged allegiance to the United States.
The pipes and drums of the New York City Police Department Emerald Society band brought roars of approval from the crowd.
And when the keynote singer did not arrive to sing the national anthem, half a dozen immigration lawyers improvised a chorus and asked the 6,050 new American citizens to sing along.


Long-Term Interest Rates Decline
A late burst of buying yesterday lifted prices of Treasury bonds to their best levels of the day in what dealers described as unusually active Friday trading.
As a result long-term interest rates fell, contributing to the late rally in the stock market.
The market in long-term debt issues opened strongly following the release of Government reports showing a modest rise of three-tenths of 1 percent in the Consumer Price Index for May, and a five-tenths increase in industrial production last month.


Bernard Miles, 83, an Actor, Peer And Founder of London Theater
Bernard Miles, the actor and founder of the Mermaid Theater in London, who was made a life peer, died today.
He was 83 years old.
He died in his sleep at a nursing home in Knaresborough, north Yorkshire, 150 miles north of London, his son, John, said.
He had recently suffered fractures in both legs, according to the Press Association, the domestic news agency.


Observer; The Tush-Tush Boys
President Bush twitted the Congress this week.
Advance rumor had it that he would blast the Congress, but this proved false, and he confined himself to twitting it.
Even this was probably more than Congress is worth in the public view.
It is demonstrable fact that in the public view Congress is worth, at most, a tush-tush from the President.
Surely not a mighty blast, nor even the twitting the President gave it.
Not that the Congress is dispensable, of course.
Heaven forfend!


Florida Capitol Is Taken Over
A college student broke into the State Capitol before dawn this morning, barricaded himself inside an office there for five hours.
Asked why he had seized the office, Michael Ledbetter Jr., a 22-year-old junior at Florida State University here, told reporters: "I needed a soapbox. That's all I want." No shots were fired and no hostages taken.
Mr.
Ledbetter will face burglary and other charges in the incident.


In the Nation; The Enemy Within
Some years ago I attended a dinner of the New York Emergency Civil Liberties Committee, honoring teachers who had lost their jobs in the McCarthy era.
They had refused to sign oaths declaring their loyalty to the United States.
Near the end of the evening, the master of ceremonies called upon these former teachers to receive applause.
I expected to see perhaps a dozen people stand.
To my surprise, 100 or more men and women rose in proud testimony to their decisions, even at the price of their livelihood, to defy the unreasoning fears of a bygone time.


News Summary
International 2-7
Iraq's nuclear weapon potential will be examined again by the United Nations.
U.N. officials said intelligence information indicated that Iraq has been trying to mislead the world about how much of its military power remains.
Page 1


Review/Theater; The Essential Shakespeare, as You Might Like It, in Two Hours
Thrift, thrift, Horatio! could be the motto of the R.S.C.
That's R.S.C., as in the Reduced Shakespeare Company, which should not be confused with that august English company with the same initials.
This iconoclastic American troupe does more with less.
Or is it less with more?
The title of the show (at Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street, through June 23) says it all: "The Complete Works of William Shakespeare (Abridged)." In other words, this is clearly a case of reductio ad absurdum.
In less than the announced two hours, the R.S.C. condenses all of Shakespeare's plays, the authenticated as well as the disputed, and throws in a postage stamp summary of the sonnets for good measure for measure.
Blink and you might miss the "interpretive dance, performance art version" of "Troilus and Cressida," or all the history plays compacted into a crown-passing football game ("The quarterback gives it to the hunchback"), which snubs Lear as a substitute because he is fictional.
That noise we hear is not Shakespeare's bones rattling, but the soup bone used in the Julia Child-style cooking class introduction to "Titus Androgynous."


Bechtel in Beirut
The Bechtel Group will carry out a $6.9 million study ordered by the Government of Lebanon to determine how to rebuild Beirut's downtown, wrecked by 16 years of civil war.
Al-Fadel Shalaq, head of Lebanon's Council for Development and Reconstruction, ordered the study from Bechtel and Lebanon's House of Engineering.
Mr.
Shalaq told Reuters the study would consist of a four-month phase for infrastructure planning, an eight-month phase for reconstruction planning and, finally, a 10-year economic plan.


Canadair-Boeing
Bombardier Inc.'s Canadair Group has signed a $100 million contract to make additional fuselage sections for Boeing, a Canadair executive announced.
Canadair will manufacture rear fuselage sections for the Boeing Commercial Aircraft Group's 767 passenger jet, Bob Brown, president of Canadair, said at Le Bourget Airport.
Bombardier is based in Montreal.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 14


Mitsubishi Executive Joins Chrysler Venture
A Mitsubishi executive, Tsuneo Ohinouye, has been chosen as president and chief executive of Diamond-Star Motors, the automobile production plant in Normal, Ill., that is jointly owned by the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation and the Chrysler Corporation.
The appointment comes at a time when the two companies are discussing a change in the ownership structure because of financial difficulties at Chrysler.
It was rumored in Japan earlier this year that Mitsubishi Motors, a unit of the vast Mitsubishi group, would increase its stake to as much as 80 percent.


O Say Can You See? Yes You Can, and From a Long Way Off


Quotation of the Day
"We don't want to bother him any more than we have to. And we are not in any hurry. He's been there 140 years." -- Dr.
Richard Greathouse, the coroner examining the remains of President Zachary Taylor.  [ 11:2. ]


Stricter Checks of U.S. Passports Produce Long Lines at Kennedy
As the peak summer season approaches, many international travelers passing through Kennedy International Airport at busy weekend arrival times are enduring long delays clearing immigration because of strict new inspection policies.
The waits stem from the immigration service's decision to reinstitute its screening of United States citizens.
Until January, they had been allowed to bypass immigration and move directly to customs.


Music in Review
'Don Giovanni' Metropolitan Opera
The Metropolitan Opera's 1991 season of free concerts in the parks -- and its first use of a new stage and sound system -- got off to a storm-tossed start this week.
First Luciano Pavarotti's Verdi concert on Tuesday night in Central Park was rained out after a few numbers.
Wednesday's first complete opera performance of Mozart's "Don Giovanni," again in Central Park, was postponed during a thunderstorm before it was even scheduled to begin.


A Soldier for Every Resident in Falklands
Nine years after the Falkland war with Argentina, Britain continues to maintain a garrison of about 2,000 troops on the remote, windswept islands -- nearly one soldier or sailor for each of the 2,121 year-round residents.
British officials say the presence of the troops is one measure of Britain's continuing commitment to keep the British flag flying over the Falklands, which are regarded as a British Dependent Territory.


Quakes Strike 3 Areas Within Half an Hour
Three earthquakes occurring in a span of 22 minutes shook three widely separated areas of the world yesterday in what scientists said was a coincidence but not a cause for alarm.
No deaths or damage were immediately reported.
The first struck the Caucasus mountains in Soviet Georgia, about 100 miles northwest of the city of Tbilisi, at 8:59 P.M.
Eastern standard time, or 6 A.M. local time, said John Minsch, a geophysicist with the National Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo.
It measured 6.3 on the Richter Scale and was an aftershock to an earthquake that caused massive damage and more than 80 deaths in that region on April 29, Mr.
Minsch said.


St. Petersburg Journal; No Hits, No Runs, One Error: The Dome
Like a base stealer who risked the game and got caught in a rundown between third and home, this city on Florida's Gulf Coast was picking itself up and dusting itself off this week.
It risked $139 million to build a domed baseball stadium, although it had no major league team to occupy it and pay to maintain it.


Press Seeks Full Access to Florida Rape Trial
Lawyers for news organizations and the American Civil Liberties Union joined a county prosecutor here today in urging the judge in the William K. Smith rape case not to restrict news coverage, as the defense has proposed.
In a Circuit Court hearing before Judge Mary E. Lupo, four lawyers for news organizations argued that highly publicized cases like Watergate and the Abscam political corruption trials had not been tainted by pretrial publicity.
Mr.
Smith's lawyers contend their client's right to a fair trial will be damaged unless news organizations are restricted before the scheduled Aug. 5 trial date.


Expert Suspects Saudi Deal With Terrorists
A prominent counterterrorism expert said today that King Fahd of Saudi Arabia met last March with a representative of the Abu Nidal organization, probably to compensate him for the Palestinian terrorist group's restraint during the Persian Gulf war.
The meeting with a member of Abu Nidal's political leadership was reported at the time in the Saudi press, said Vincent Cannistraro, who until last fall was the head of the C.I.A.'s counterterrorism operations and who now leads a private study group on terrorism.
Mr.
Cannistraro said "it appeared he was getting paid off."


Earlier Start for Trading Is Studied
The New York Stock Exchange is exploring beginning trading before the traditional opening at 9:30 A.M., although it is uncertain what time it would start, an exchange executive said yesterday.
Such an exploration was expected.
The Big Board on Thursday began its first after-hours trading in what was described as a first step toward 24-hour trading by early in the next century.


Relocating To Cut Pay Faces Curb
The National Labor Relations Board announced a decision yesterday that could make it harder for companies to relocate factories to low-wage areas.
The decision was the latest installment in a nearly 10-year battle between the Dubuque Packing Company of Omaha, and the United Food and Commercial Workers Union.
In 1981, the company refused to negotiate with the union when it closed a hog-slaughtering operation that employed more than 500 workers in Dubuque, Iowa, and opened a new plant in Rochelle, Ill., where wage rates were lower.


Despite the Life Style Marines Get Respect
To the Editor:
The problem with "Marines Fear Glory of War Will Give Way to Old Stigma" (front page, May 31) is that you have it backward.


MUBARAK STEPS UP ATTACK ON SHAMIR
With no visible progress in American-sponsored Middle East peace efforts, President Hosni Mubarak and other Egyptian policy makers have begun venting increasing frustration at Israel, criticizing Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and seeking to encourage political opposition to him among Israelis.
The differences between Israel and the only Arab nation formally at peace with it has brought relations between them to their most strained since Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon, Israeli newspaper commentators have said.
Increasingly, Mr.
Mubarak has said he is losing hope of a peace settlement.


GUILTY PLEA MADE IN PENTAGON CASE
In a significant development in a four-year investigation, a former senior Pentagon official pleaded guilty today to Federal conspiracy and bribery charges related to a conspiracy by a handful of officials, consultants and military contractors to rig the bidding on contracts and defraud the government.
The former official, Melvyn R. Paisley, an assistant Navy secretary from 1981 to 1987 in charge of procurement and development of military systems and engineering, entered his plea in Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va.
The plea included a statement that detailed how some of the nation's largest military contractors were eager to offer bribes for confidential information that would give them an advantage in bidding for lucrative contracts.
Sentencing Set for Fall
Mr.
Paisley, who had been identified by prosecutors as the highest-ranking official involved, faces up to 30 years in jail and up to $750,000 in fines.
He is scheduled to be sentenced before Judge Claude M. Hilton on Sept. 27.


For Lithuanians, Getting There Is Half the Drama
The State Theater of Lithuania finally made it to New York for the International Festival of the Arts, but it wasn't easy.
First there was the airline strike, and then there was the kielbasa.
Twenty-four members of the company took a train from Vilnius, their hometown, to Warsaw on Monday en route to the Joyce Theater.
But when they got to the Warsaw airport they discovered that workers at Lot, the Polish airline, had gone on strike.
From their hotel they frantically tried to make other plans, through Prague or Berlin, until a few hours later they found out -- oddly enough via a telephone call from New York -- that the strike had been settled.


Isn't It Odd to Learn Only About White Males?; Makes Test Easier
To the Editor:
Instead of decrying the Educational Testing Service for injecting political correctness into the Scholastic Aptitude Test, (Op-Ed, June 3), David Reich should thank the organization for making the test easier for him.


Digging in the Past to Find the Ultimate Slum


2 Boeing 777 Jets For French Airline
Euralair S.A., a French charter airline, said today that it had ordered two long-range versions of Boeing's new 777 twinjet.
Euralair's chairman, Alexandre Couvelaire, said at the Paris Air Show that the planes will be delivered starting in 1997.
Euralair becomes the third customer for the 777.
The Seattle-based Boeing Company has previously announced firm orders for 49 of the jets -- 34 by United Airlines and 15 by All Nippon Airways.


Peggy Ashcroft Dies


Thomas Jefferson Parks, Obstetrician, 87
Dr.
Thomas Jefferson Parks, a New York obstetrician and gynecologist, died on Tuesday at his home in Oyster Bay, L.I.
He was 87 years old.
He died of lung cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Yanks' Losses Pile Up As Taylor Is Battered
His night ended before the sun went down, but Wade Taylor did not leave.
He was sitting in the clubhouse late tonight, showered and changed and prepared to discuss his disaster in unemotional tones.
Taylor, the Yankees' rookie pitcher, could not get the last out of the first inning at Arlington Stadium.
By the time he walked off the mound, the Texas Rangers had a 7-0 lead that eventually became an 8-4 victory over the Yankees, who have now lost four in a row.


French Museum Chief vs. Art Thieves
For 10 months, nothing disappeared from the 35 national museums under the direct responsibility of Jacques Sallois.
Then on May 29 a small drawing by Georges Seurat was stolen from a major retrospective of his works at the Grand Palais.
Mr.
Sallois, France's director of museums, was understandably disturbed.
Since taking office last July, he had spent a good part of his time in setting up an entirely new security system to protect the country's museums.


I.B.M. Plans to Offer New Computer Chip
The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that the company believed it would be the first to produce the next generation of computer memory chips, which will make I.B.M. computers faster and smaller.
I.B.M. plans to use the chips in products by the middle of next year, which should give it a six-month lead over competitors, a company spokesman, Paul Bergevin, said.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article on June 4 about a fast by an Indian politician referred incorrectly to a regional party, the Telugu Desam.
It is not part of the Hindu revival movement.


Lionel Seeks Chapter 11 Protection
After more than a decade of unsuccessfully competing with Toys "R" Us, the Lionel Corporation filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code yesterday, its second such action since 1982.
Lionel operates so-called toy supermarkets under the names of Lionel Playworld, Lionel Kiddie City and Lionel Toy Warehouse.
It is the third-largest chain of toy supermarkets after Child World and the industry leader, Toys "R" Us.


Cable TV Lobbying Could Backfire
The cable television industry enhanced its reputation for effective lobbying on Thursday when the Federal Communications Commission adopted exceptionally tame rules on local regulation of cable prices.
But by persuading the commissioners to weaken the regulation originally proposed in December, the cable industry may have been too clever for its own good.
The measure is so weak that it is likely to strengthen the position of lawmakers determined to impose far tougher restraints on the industry.


U.N. AIDES SAY IRAQ MAY BE CONCEALING NUCLEAR MATERIAL
United Nations officials said today that they had intelligence information indicating that Iraq has tried to mislead the United Nations by understating its nuclear weapons program and the amount of weapons-grade nuclear material it possesses.
As a result, the special commission appointed by the Security Council to oversee the destruction or removal of Iraq's chemical and biological arms and its nuclear weapons materials has ordered its experts to make new inspections of undisclosed nuclear sites in Iraq next week.


U.S. Must Give Back Duties Imposed on Canadian Pork
Washington must give back more than $20 million of duties collected on imports of Canadian pork, the highest appeals tribunal under the United States-Canadian trade agreement decided today.
It was a victory for Canada over American pork producers and nearly 100 members of Congress.
While expressing disappointment, Bush Administration officials said the United States would abide by the panel's unanimous decision.
"We're a rules-based society," the United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, told reporters today.
The National Pork Producers Council, representing the industry in 45 states, spearheaded a lobbying campaign that finally led her to agree to the appeals procedure last March 29.


Dow Rises By 35.33 To Top 3,000
Stocks bounded ahead yesterday, egged on by favorable new data on the economy, with the Dow Jones industrial average again bobbing above 3,000.
With volume the heaviest it has been all week, 169.3 million shares, the Dow closed at 3,000.45, up 35.33 points for the day and 23.71 for the week.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index also reflected the buying strength, rising 4.66, to 382.29.


Allies and East Bloc Back Arms Accord
The United States' NATO allies and five Eastern European countries today formally approved a Soviet-American compromise to end a dispute over a treaty limiting conventional armies in Europe.
The Bush Administration will now send the treaty to the Senate for its approval.
It is not expected to meet much opposition, considering that it will require the Soviets to withdraw thousands of pieces of military equipment from Europe to bring their forces down to levels roughly equal to those of NATO's and will require the Soviets to destroy some 20,000 tanks, artillery and armored vehicles.


Saddam Hussein's Son Is Back in Official Favor
When a new newspaper edited by Uday Hussein hit the streets of Baghdad a few months ago, Iraqis knew for sure what they had sensed for a while -- that President Saddam Hussein had finally rehabilitated the errant son he once accused of killing his bodyguard and whom he threatened to bring to trial.
Yet now that the newspaper -- Babil, meaning Babylon -- has settled into its niche in the controlled press as a supposed independent, some have come to wonder what kind of impact the President's son is planning to make in the ambiguous world of Iraqi journalism.


Dame Peggy Ashcroft, Acclaimed British Actress, Is Dead at 83;
Dame Peggy Ashcroft, an actress who was in the forefront of British theater for more than half a century, died yesterday in London.
She was 83 years old.
She suffered a stroke on May 23 and was unconscious in the Royal Free Hospital since then, a spokeswoman for the hospital said.


CHRONICLE
JANE FONDA has put her California ranch on the market for $5.75 million.
She bought the 157-acre ranch near Santa Barbara in 1977.
Ms.
Fonda is engaged to TED TURNER the Atlanta cable television tycoon.
Ms.
Fonda has hired Lauren Temkin of Coldwell Banker's Santa Barbara office to sell the ranch.
It includes eight houses with a total of 27 bedrooms, a bunkhouse, a theater, a gymnasium, a dance pavilion, a swimming pool, a pond, a hot tub, a baseball diamond, riding trails, gardens, orchards and panoramic views, Ms.
Temkin said yesterday.


Confidence In a Rebel
Having swept to victory as the first popularly elected President of the Russian republic, Boris N. Yeltsin now has the huge task of pulling it out of its economic morass.
But since his republic includes more than half the Soviet Union's population and nearly three-fourths of its territory, Mr.
Yeltsin's job, in essence, is to help rescue the Soviet economy as a whole.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about films scheduled for release this summer by Hollywood studios misstated the number of films released last summer by 20th Century Fox.
It was four, not one.


Quarter of Newborns in U.S. Were Born to Single Women
Babies born to single women represent 26 percent of all American newborns -- the highest proportion ever -- and most of the mothers were 20 or older, researchers say.
The Federal Centers for Disease Control said Thursday that 1,005,299 babies were born to single women in 1988, the latest year for which such statistics are available.
In 1980, 665,747 babies were born to single women; that figure represented 18 percent of all births that year.


With Clam Restored, Stewart Stands Out at U.S. Open
The calm today after Thursday's deadly storm brought a rain-softened United States Open course vulnerable to low scoring and a stampede of contenders.
Payne Stewart led a charge through the morning drizzle at the Hazeltine National Golf Club with a two-under-par 70 for a 36-hole total of seven-under-par 137.
No one ever caught him.


CHRONICLE
In baseball as in life, SAM COHN is pitching.
The theatrical agent will pitch the first inning of New York Women in Film's annual softball game, which pits the Wheelers, headed by TYNE DALY, against the Dealers, headed by ALLY SHEEDY.
Mr.
Cohn would fit neatly into either category.
He'll be on the mound Monday at Heckscher Field in Central Park.
The game benefits the nonprofit women's group, which promotes equal opportunities for women in film and television.


New York Senators Disclose '90 Earnings and Charitable Donations
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato enhanced his Senate income last year by earning $15,000 teaching at Long Island University, while Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan made $365,000 from the sale of his Capitol Hill town house and $50,700 by exchanging an oil painting for a watercolor by the same artist.
The New York Senators disclosed their earnings in financial reports to the Senate that also revealed that Mr.
Moynihan, a Democrat, received $48,900 in fees for writing and speaking, compared with $37,650 received by Mr.
D'Amato, a Republican.


Phillies' Hayes Out for Season
Outfielder Von Hayes of the Philadelphia Phillies broke his right wrist tonight when he was hit by a pitch from Cincinnati's Tom Browning.
The Phillies said Hayes is out for the rest of the season.
Hayes, who in the last week has been rumored to be going to Cincinnati for infielder Mariano Duncan, was batting in the sixth inning when a Browning pitch broke the ulna in the wrist.


Five-Year Low for Platinum Following Overseas Selling
Platinum futures prices dropped to their lowest levels in more than five years yesterday, largely because of overseas selling.
Prices of other precious metals also retreated.


French Cash Plan Queried
The European Community's commissioner for competition, Sir Leon Brittan, said today that the community should look into a plan by France to pump cash into the state-owned computer maker Cie des Machines Bull and the electronics company Thomson S.A.
Commission officials said Wednesday that Sir Leon was set to challenge the plan to invest almost $1 billion of state money into the companies and would seek backing to open an official inquiry on the ground the payouts could be illegal.


Corrections
An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day on Thursday referred incorrectly to Henley International's agreement to buy some assets of Bristol-Myers Squibb's Argon Medical division.
Henley indeed disclosed a price -- about $12 million.


The Fastest Man Alive


Canada Bank Cuts Rate
The Bank of Montreal said today that it would cut its prime lending rate to 9 5/8 percent from 9 3/4 percent on Monday.
The prime rate at other major Canadian banks is 9 3/4 percent.


Samuel Weiss, Lawyer, 85
Samuel Weiss, a retired lawyer and certified public accountant, died on June 2 at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 85 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of congestive heart failure, his wife, Fran Lee, said.


At Home on Grass, U.S. Takes a 2-0 Lead
The sky was true blue, the grass was very green, and the results were picture perfect for the home team today as the United States Davis Cup squad, paced by straight-set victories from John McEnroe and Brad Gilbert, assumed a commanding 2-0 lead over Spain in the quarterfinal round of the Americans' defense of their 1990 championship.
Just as Emilio Sanchez of Spain had warily predicted, the Spaniards, overcome by doubts about shot placement and uncertainty about coming to the net, ran out of gas on grass.
The two Americans, just as McEnroe had said, literally held court at the Newport Casino, a staid seaside site that's home of tennis's Hall of Fame.
After Gilbert defeated Sanchez, 6-4, 6-4, 6-2, McEnroe dispatched an overmatched Tomas Carbonell, 6-3, 6-2, 6-1.


Press Seeks Full Access to Florida Rape Trial
Lawyers for news organizations and the American Civil Liberties Union joined a county prosecutor here today in urging the judge in the William K. Smith rape case not to restrict news coverage, as the defense has proposed.
In a Circuit Court hearing before Judge Mary E. Lupo, four lawyers for news organizations argued that highly publicized cases like Watergate and the Abscam political corruption trials had not been tainted by pretrial publicity.
Mr.
Smith's lawyers contend their client's right to a fair trial will be damaged unless news organizations are restricted before the scheduled Aug. 5 trial date.


Mr. Cuomo, Principled on Death
Gov.
Mario Cuomo routinely vetoes bills that would allow the death penalty in New York State.
He did so again this week.
Yet the public doesn't seem to mind much.
Why not?
The answers send a message to politicians everywhere.
America, after all, has become a place where politicians from the President on down rush to embrace the death penalty, apparently fearing the electorate's wrath if they don't.
Yet Mr.
Cuomo, who surely doesn't lack for critics on other issues these days, hears few complaints about his continuing opposition to capital punishment.
How does he get away with that?


For the Clios, a Night to Forget
Advertising's equivalent of the Academy Awards turned into something akin to a grade-school graduation run amok, anguished industry executives say.
One person there, Robert Waldner, a copywriter for the J. Walter Thompson agency in New York, said that although he had never attended a Clio Awards show before, he knew something was wrong when audience members stormed onstage Thursday night, snatched statuettes from unattended tables and walked out.


INSIDE
Lawmakers' Finances
Under attack for ties to special interests, members of Congress reported they accepted significantly less in speaking fees last year.
Page 8.


Barrett a Free Agent
Second baseman MARTY BARRETT, having cleared waivers after a 20-day rehabilitation period, has opted for free agency rather than accepting an assignment to the Padres' Class AAA farm team in Las Vegas, Nev., the San Diego club announced yesterday.
In parting, Barrett took a shot at GREG RIDDOCH, the Padres' manager.
"He tries to come off real friendly and have a family-type atmosphere, but in rehab I never got one call from him," Barrett said Thursday from Las Vegas.


Louisiana's Chief Vetoes Ban on Most Abortions
Gov.
Buddy Roemer today vetoed legislation that would have strictly limited abortions in Louisiana.
Sponsors of the bill said they would immediately begin an effort to override the veto.
In a statement issued this evening, Mr.
Roemer said that while he favored restricting abortions, he was obliged to veto the bill because it did not provide adequate exceptions for rape victims, cases of profoundly deformed fetuses and certain types of abortions necessary to safeguard the health of a woman.
The Governor vetoed two similarly restrictive measures last year.
Political Battle Looms
Mr.
Roemer, who switched political parties this year to become a Republican, faces a difficult campaign for re-election this fall.
Asked at a news conference to assess the potential political impact of the veto, he said: "This is not about votes. This is about unborn babies. This is about women who have been brutalized by rape. This is about a country that is trying to get it right. We still don't have it right."


Twins Win Their 13th Straight And Indians, Well, Don't Ask
The Minnesota Twins won their team-record 13th consecutive game tonight, beating the Cleveland Indians, 7-0, on Shane Mack's grand slam and five runs batted in.
The Indians were shut out for the third successive game, matching a club mark and one shy of the major league record.


About New York
Two weeks ago, the woman walked briskly to the stationery store when a man approached her.
"Hi, how are you?" he said.
"I'm raising money for AIDS babies."
The woman kept walking and listening.
She was sure this was the man she had heard about.
After long seconds, she stopped and stared at him.
"I'm looking for a cop right now because I know who you are," she declared.


Press Seeks Full Access to Florida Rape Trial
Lawyers for news organizations and the American Civil Liberties Union joined a county prosecutor here today in urging the judge in the William K. Smith rape case not to restrict news coverage, as the defense has proposed.
In a Circuit Court hearing before Judge Mary E. Lupo, four lawyers for news organizations argued that highly publicized cases like Watergate and the Abscam political corruption trials had not been tainted by pretrial publicity.
Mr.
Smith's lawyers contend their client's right to a fair trial will be damaged unless news organizations are restricted before the scheduled Aug. 5 trial date.


Tax Equation Still Stumps The Council And Dinkins
Just two weeks before the start of New York City's new fiscal year, Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council are still wrangling over almost every aspect of the Mayor's proposed $29 billion budget, but especially over what taxes they will use to balance it.
Both sides agree that there must be new tax revenue and lots of it: at least half a billion dollars' worth.
But they differ on which taxes to raise, and by how much, and political pressures and squabbling over the state budget are complicating the debate.


North's Judge Doubts Verdict Will Stand Up
In remarks suggesting he was deeply skeptical that the guilty verdicts against Oliver L. North could be salvaged, the Federal district judge who presided over Mr.
North's trial in the Iran-contra affair said today that prosecutors might have no alternative but to abandon the case.
The judge, Gerhard A. Gesell, said that if he found that any of the witnesses in the North trial had been influenced by the testimony that the former aide to the National Security Council gave to Congress under a grant of immunity, he would throw out the remaining criminal convictions against Mr.
North.
Mr.
North's conviction has stood as one of the main accomplishments of the special prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, in the four-and-a-half year inquiry into the Iran-contra affair.
Change in Judicial Tone
"You must realize that there is a very slight possibility that the ablest group of lawyers in the world could meet the standard of the court of appeals," Judge Gesell said at a hearing, referring to an appeals court decision that forced prosecutors to seek another hearing to prove that Mr.
North received a fair trial.
"I don't believe there's anyone I know of who could."


Scholar Says U.S. Shift Allows Him to Travel
A Japanese scholar who lives on Long Island said yesterday that he plans a visit to Japan for the first time in years because of an agreement this week by the State Department to remove almost all of the names on a secret list of aliens the Government considered idelogically unacceptable to enter this country.
The scholar, Choichiro Yatani, has been fighting the State Department in Federal courts for five years to get his name removed from the "lookout" list maintained under the McCarthy-era McCarran-Walter Immigration Act.


Corrections
An obituary on May 23 about Peter Buckley, a photographer, writer and editor, attributed a book to him incorrectly.
The 1958 book, "Bullfight," was written and illustrated by Peter Hays Buckley, also of Manhattan, a writer and photographer not related to the late Mr.
Buckley.


Pitchers' Duel Dissolves As Franco Fails Again
What had been a wonderfully pitched game for eight innings turned ugly for the Mets last night when John Franco took over in the ninth.
It was about as ugly as it can get for a closer as Franco faced seven batters, with the outcome in doubt, and six reached base.
He did not close, he did not last the inning and the Mets did not win as the Astros sailed to a 4-1 victory.


Mammography Coverage Is Part of Medicare's Expanded Preventive Care
Medicare is taking a new step in bolstering preventive care this year by adding mammography to its coverage.
This is one of a number of changes in the Federal insurance program for the elderly and the disabled included in the 1990 tax law.
Others include unlimited coverage for hospice care for the terminally ill and requiring prior approval for some expensive medical equipment, like motorized scooters.


Dr. Jerome Urban, 77, Surgeon Who Specialized in Breast Cancer
Dr.
Jerome A. Urban, an internationally renowned cancer surgeon and a specialist in the diagnosis and surgical treatment of breast cancer, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old and had homes in Hartsdale, N.Y., and St.
Croix, V.I.
He died of a stroke, a family spokeswoman said.
Dr.
Urban, who wrote more than 150 scientific articles dealing primarily with the early diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer, was a pioneer in the development of extended radical mastectomy for advanced breast cancer and in breast reconstruction.
Operated on Rockefeller
In October 1974, Dr.
Urban, who was acting chief of the breast service at Memorial-Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, performed a radical mastectomy on Margaretta (Happy) Rockefeller, the wife of Nelson A. Rockefeller, former governor of New York and the Vice President designate at the time.
Five weeks later later he operated on her again to remove her right breast.


Breakthrough Is Reported in Gandhi Murder
Government investigators said today that the arrest of a mother and son in Madras on Tuesday night in connection with the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi was a significant breakthrough and that they now believed the killing was a carefully planned conspiracy that may have involved at least a dozen people.
At the same time, officials said that a bespectacled man photographed at the scene of the assassination is the object of a nationwide search and believed to be the mastermind behind the killing of Mr.
Gandhi on May 21.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Action Industries, Cheswick, Pa., a maker of promotional housewares and giftwares, named R. Craig Kirsch, president and chief executive, to the additional post of chairman. *
Aloette Cosmetics Inc., Malvern, Pa., appointed Albert E. Edwards president and chief operating officer.


Lockheed Unit Sets 800 More Job Cuts
The Lockheed Missiles and Space Company will cut 800 more jobs this year than it had expected and warned that further reductions could occur.
The military contractor, hurt by cancellations and reductions of orders on several programs, said Thursday that cuts would probably include 470 layoffs.
The remainder would come as retirements and resignations.
Most cuts will occur in Silicon Valley, where the company is the largest employer, but operaions in other states would also be affected, a company spokesman said.
The Lockheed Corporation, based in the Los Angeles suburb of Calabasas, has nearly 21,000 employees in its Sunnyvale division, the largest within the company.


Review/Pop; Sounds Raw and Sweet By a Singer on the Move
Margareth Menezes was in nonstop motion on Thursday night as she opened her 11-night stand at the Ballroom.
Dressed in shiny silver from sequined jacket to silver-lame tights to gleaming shoes, she tossed her myriad braids, traced graceful arcs and acted out lyrics with her arms, shimmied her hips and double-timed the rhythms with her feet.
Every so often a percussionist from the band would stand by her and follow her motions with a gourd or a drum.
Amid the flurry of motion, she sang in a voice that would be remarkable even if she were stationary: a deep contralto, capable of raw cries and rockers' rasps and lilting phrases and sweet, girlish high notes.
Miss Menezes is part of the latest outpouring of music from Bahia, the state in northeastern Brazil that fostered the tropicalia movement of the 1970's.
Tropicalia composers like Caetano Veloso and Gilberto Gil mixed rock with Brazilian and especially Bahian traditions.


Isn't It Odd to Learn Only About White Males?
To the Editor:
That a white male high school student like David Reich should have been struck in taking the Scholastic Aptitude Test "by the too large number of questions that emphasized the achievements of minorities, women and third world countries" ("The S.A.T. Goes P.C.," Op-Ed, June 3) is disappointing, but not surprising.


President Zachary Taylor's Body To Be Tested for Signs of Arsenic
With tweezers and scissors in hand, the county coroner in Louisville, Ky., plans to peer into the crypt of Zachary Taylor, the 12th President of the United States, soon and comb the old general's remains for clues about his sudden illness and rapid death almost 141 years ago.
The cause of death, diagnosed at the time as cholera moribus, or gastroenteritis, may well have been arsenic poisoning, says Clara Rising, a Florida-based author who has been doing research for a book about Taylor.
A substantial portion of her work is examining whether President Taylor, not Abraham Lincoln, was the first American president to be assassinated.
Few Questions Asked Before
For months, Ms.
Rising has been pursuing answers to questions about President Taylor's death that almost no one was asking when he died on July 9, 1850.


Chimpanzee Case Tests Libel Jurisdiction
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis discusses the case of Immuno v.
Moor-Jankowski (column, May 10), a libel suit brought by Immuno A.G., a multinational corporation based in Austria, against a letter published in the Journal of Medical Primatology that criticized Immuno for using captured chimpanzees in Sierra Leone, West Africa, to do hepatitis research.


NEWS SUMMARY
The Economy
A former senior Pentagon official pleaded guilty to Federal conspiracy and bribery charges in the four-year-old investigation into a conspiracy to rig the bidding on military contracts and defraud the Government.
Melvyn R. Paisley, who was an assistant Navy secretary from 1981 to 1987, faces up to 30 years in jail and up to $750,000 in fines.  [ Page 1. ]


Valenzuela Awaits More Heart Tests
Tony DeMarco, the agent for Fernando Valenzuela, says his client was surprised to find out about a possible health problem after signing with the California Angels.
The 30-year-old left-hander was placed on the 15-day disabled list Thursday with plans announced for further testing to determine why abnormal blood flow was detected in the area of his heart.


Consumer Index Up Only 0.3%; Output Higher
In another batch of favorable data, the Government reported yesterday that the economy appeared to be growing again without pushing up the inflation rate.
Most economists consider that combination essential if the nation is to shake off the recession.
The Consumer Price Index rose in May by only three-tenths of 1 percent, the Labor Department said.
When combined with other modest increases this year, the May rise suggests an annual inflation rate below 3 percent, or less than half of last year's 6.1 percent.


Sub Accident Suit Is Settled
The Navy will pay $1.4 million to the family of a tugboat crewman killed when his craft was pulled underwater by a submarine two years ago.
The settlement, in which the Government does not admit fault, was first reported on Thursday by The Press-Telegram of Long Beach.
It involves the family of Brian Belanger, one of three crew members on the tug Barcona when its submerged tow cable was snagged by the submarine Houston about 10 miles off Santa Catalina Island.
The tug was swiftly pulled under, and Mr.
Belanger's body was not found.
The two other crew members survived.


Saberhagen Out
Kansas City Royals pitcher BRET SABERHAGEN was placed on the 15-day disabled list yesterday because of tendinitis in his right rotator cuff, the team announced.
Saberhagen's spot on the roster will be taken by left-handed pitcher MIKE MAGNANTE from Triple-A Omaha.
Saberhagen is 4-6 with 3.67 earned run average this season. (AP)


Giants Sign Perez
The Giants have signed another quarterback.
Actually, it's a re-signing -- of MIKE PEREZ, the team's seventh-round draft pick out of San Jose State in 1988, who has never played a regular-season game for the Giants.
The 6-foot-1-inch, 210-pound Perez just completed an impressive season for the Frankfurt Galaxy of the World League of American Football, completing 171 of 357 passes for 2,272 yards and 13 touchdowns.


New Tools for States Bolster Collection of Child Support
Aided by new laws and an infusion of Federal money, state child-support enforcement agencies around the country have become far more aggressive at collecting child support.
Since the enactment of the Family Support Act of 1988, states have become more aggressively involved in collecting court-ordered child support awards, taking in a record $6 billion in 1990.
And, according to one recent survey, the average amount of court-ordered child support has increased about 50 percent, to $60 a week.
New mechanisms are in place for garnisheeing the wages of parents who owe child-support payments, and most states have started issuing their own "Most Wanted" lists, or staging roundups to arrest parents who fail to pay.
Such tactics generate a wave of payments not only from the people singled out but also from others who wish to avoid negative publicity.


Fear and Learning in Vermont
Academic politics, so often a mess of razor cuts and rabbit punches, has become a tank trap lately.
For the last year, I'd been watching people flunk the litmus tests of political correctness with a bystander's detachment, being, I thought, a standard sort of liberal.
But at my 58th birthday party in December my insouciance dissolved.
A fellow English teacher with champagne glass in hand offered me his mordant congratulations "on being the first person ever fired from Bennington College for opposing sodomy."


British to Study Other I.C.I. Bids
British members of Parliament opposed to a potential takeover of Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C. by Hanson P.L.C. said they had forced the Conservative Government to do an about-face and agree to look into any possible bid.
Frank Cook, an opposition Labor Party member leading a political campaign against the possible hostile bid for I.C.I. -- Britain's biggest manufacturer -- said the Trade and Industry Secretary, Peter Lilley, had agreed to study any buyout attempt.


Memorial to Fallen Police Officers Is Dedicated


Wal-Mart Outlook
Sam M. Walton says he may develop a new version of the Wal-Mart store that is a combination of the Hypermart USA and the smaller Wal-Mart Supercenters.
Wal-Mart, a unit of Walton Enterprises, is the nation's largest retailer.
Wal-Mart operates four Hypermarts, but Mr.
Walton, the company's founder and chairman, has said the newest one in Kansas City may be the last.
The Kansas City Hypermart is the largest at just more than 260,000 square feet; the others begin at 180,000 square feet and range up to 260,000 square feet.


Your Taxes; I.R.S. Maps Out Big Leap Forward
Although grandiose plans often go awry, even partial success for the Internal Revenue Service's $8 billion modernization effort, disclosed this week, will bring visibly big improvements for the nation's 100 million-plus taxpayers.
Did you misplace the copy of the return you filed last year ago just when you need to document an application for college financial aid?
The I.R.S., which now has a 45-day target to respond to such requests but misses it in one case out of three, expects to be able to supply a copy within 24 hours.


Guidepost; Fees at Teller Machines
Fees are rising at the automatic teller machines many bank customers use to withdraw cash and deposit or transfer money.
The fees show up on your monthly bank statement, and unless you know which machines to avoid fees could cost as much as $120 a year.
Using your own bank's automatic teller machine instead of another's will cost you the least, since many banks charge their customers nothing for an A.T.M. transaction provided they maintain a minimum balance in their accounts.
Fees can increase to 50 cents or $1 at rival banks' machines that are part of regional networks like NYCE, MAC and Exchange.
The highest fees are charged by national networks like Cirrus or Plus.
Here's how your annual costs can vary.
Transactions
Your Bank's
Regional
National
per month
A.T.M.
A.T.M.
A.T.M.
2
$0
$18
$24
5
$0
$45
$60
10
$0
$90
$120
(Source: Bank Rate Monitor, North Palm Beach, Fla.)


Dollar Declines as Traders Cash In on Recent Advance
The dollar settled mostly lower on world currency markets yesterday as traders cashed in on the currency's recent run-up.
Traders spent the session selling dollars, but analysts said the action should be seen more as profit taking rather than a reaction to the latest economic statistics from the United States.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
BMW Rolls-Royce G.m.b.H., Paris, an aeroengine venture between Bayerische Motorenwerke A.G., Munich, a maker of cars and motorcycles, and Rolls-Royce Motors Inc., said they would begin construction of a new jet engine plant in eastern Germany in the next few months.  *
Farr Co., El Segundo, Calif., a maker of filtration products, said it would open two plants -- a $2.5 million filter production plant in Holly Springs, Miss., which will open in August, and a production-distribution center in Pryor, Okla., which should be fully operational by the end of the summer.


Review/Dance; On a Trip to Wonderland With Puppets and People
When the curtain rose on Philippe Genty's "Derives" ("Driftings"), a train crossed the stage and vanished into the night.
It soon became apparent that Mr.
Genty, a French director and puppeteer, had found places for the audience on another train: a train of thought en route to wonderland.
"Derives," which the Compagnie Philippe Genty presented on Thursday night at Gould Hall as part of the New York International Festival of the Arts, was one marvel after another.
The production, conceived and directed by Mr.
Genty and choreographed by Mary Underwood to a recorded score by Rene Aubry, abounded with illusions and metamorphoses.


CHRONICLE
JACK LaLANNE, an early fitness guru, was arrested on suspicion of drunken driving, the Highway Patrol in San Luis Obispo, Calif. said yesterday.
Mr.
LaLanne, 76 years old, helped create the fitness movement with a televised exercise show and health clubs.
The police said that he was stopped last Sunday when he crossed a center divider and that he then failed a sobriety test.


Democrats Meet To Plot Strategy For '92 Election
Several of the Democratic Party's most likely Presidential hopefuls retreated to an estate in the exclusive hunt country here today to begin plotting how they might wrest the White House from the Republicans in 1992.
Although the overnight meeting included 21 of the party's most reliable contributors, and although some promises were made, Democratic party officials said afterward that it was less a fund-raising event than a strategy meeting intended to give Democrats an "early start."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Dwight Evans, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Brady Anderson, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Scott Hatteberg and James Lentz, catchers; Sheridan Bush, Terry Horn, Chad Schoenvogel, and Cesar Martinez, pitchers; and Jermaine Johnson and Donny Jones, outfielders.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Traded Reggie Jefferson, first baseman, to the Cleveland Indians for Tim Costo, first baseman.
Assigned Costo to Chattanooga of the Southern League.
ST. LOUIS CARDINALS -- Placed Bernard Gilkey, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Basketball  Continental Basketball Association
C.B.A. -- Approved the move of the Cedar Rapid Silver Bullets to Tri-Cities, Wash.
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Don Davey, defensive lineman.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed David Bailey and Shawn Knight, defensive ends.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Waived Ernest Gibson, cornerback.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Mike Perez, quarterback. College
DEPAUL -- Named John Lancott sports information director and Scott Reed assistant sports information director.


CHRONICLE
JAIME ESCALANTE, the calculus teacher whose coaching of inner-city students inspired the movie "Stand and Deliver," has announced that he will leave Garfield High School when the school year ends next week.
Citing differences with his colleagues and a desire for "a change of scenery," Mr.
Escalante said he is resigning from Garfield High in East Los Angeles, where he has taught for 17 years, to take a similar position in Sacramento, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Crew Lands Columbia, and Passengers, Safely
After astronauts closed a cargo-bay door that they had feared might not seal properly, the space shuttle Columbia dropped out of a hazy blue sky over the California desert today and landed here without mishap.
Columbia, returning from a 10-day trip to space, carried a crew of seven astronauts and a full complement of small passengers used for research on the mission, including 2,478 tiny jellyfish and 29 rats.


Corrections
A music review on Tuesday about a concert by the Orchestra of St.
Luke's at Town Hall last Saturday misidentified one work.
It was "Freeform," a movement from Glenn Branca's Symphony No. 7, not the entire symphony.


Trustees Raise SUNY Tuition
The trustees of the State University of New York, facing sharp cuts in state aid because of New York's fiscal problems, voted today to raise tuition by $500 a year.
Students had demonstrated earlier in the year about plans for such an increase, but there was no protest today.
In December, university trustees voted an emergency tuition increase of $300 a year.
The two increases bring tuition for undergraduates from New York to $2,150 a year.


Indeed, Include Indian Chiefs
To the Editor:
Have there really been gay Indian chiefs?


Photographers Find New Ways To Put Lenses On Island Life


Sports of The Times; The Death That Should Save Lives
SOME spectators pass by the willow tree without noticing it.
Others stop and stare up at the pale scars where the brownish gray bark was burned off by lightning.
Somebody will say, "This must be the tree." Somebody else will say, "It must've hit right there." But soon they will be strolling up the macadam path alongside the meandering creek to the left of the 16th hole and below the 11th tee.
When the United States Open leaders stride today toward the 16th green that juts out into Lake Hazeltine as if it were on pontoons, they will be playing Hazeltine National's "signature" hole: a 384-yard par 4 that veers to the right past a grove of trees surrounded by tall marsh grass.


Business Diary/June 9-14
COMPANIES  Can Apple and I.B.M. Find Common Ground?


Travel Advisory; Swiss Scenes At Art Shows
Swiss landscapes and cityscapes and historic portraits by non-Swiss artists of the 18th and 19th centuries will be on display in Lugano from Aug. 1 to Oct. 31 and in Geneva from November to January 1992.
The 80 selected Swiss views -- the Matterhorn and other Alpine scenery, big and small lakes and quaint old towns -- will include oils and watercolors by Turner, Corot, Courbet and many others and there will be portraits of Rousseau, Madame de Stael and other celebrated Swiss personages.
In Lugano the show, "Magnificent Switzerland," will be held at the Villa Favorita, the seat of the Thyssen-Bornemisza Foundation, at 6976 Castagnola-Lugano (phone 091-51-61-52).
Admission: about $8.
In Geneva, the show will be in the Museum of Art and History, 2 Rue Charles-Galland; (022) 29-00-11.
Admission will probably be free.
In Lugano and Geneva hours will be from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tuesday to Sunday.


Sports People: PRO FOOTBALL; Testaverde Sounds Off
Tampa Bay Buccaneers quarterback VINNY TESTAVERDE says the team's offense under RAY PERKINS was a nightmare, calling his former coach a predictable, inflexible ruler with an "iron fist."
"We had the most conservative offense in the history of the league," Testaverde told The Florida Times-Union in Jacksonville last week.
"We set up a game plan, and whether it worked or not on Sunday, we stayed with it. It was almost like we were practicing plays in the game."


The Region; Cuomo Lobs 384 Balls Back to the Legislature
GOV.
MARIO M. CUOMO'S veto of 384 items from the state budget last week led many politicians in Albany to one of two conclusions.
Assemblyman William B. Hoyt, a Buffalo Democrat, said the Governor was trying to reassert himself as "the dominant muscular figure in Albany." Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a Westchester Democrat, saw the move less as a demonstration of power politics than as the latest volley in a grand "philosophical battle" over the role of state government.
Both interpretations ring true.


Tom Thumb Weddings: Only for the Very Young
"Do you promise to take Nakia to the movies?" the 10-year-old minister, Gregory Armond, asked the bridegroom, Lenox Mitchell.
"Do you promise to buy her popcorn and bonbons if she wants them?"
Then he turned to the bride, Nakia Ray: "Do you promise to let Lenox play Nintendo in peace? Do you promise to push him in the swing when you are in the park?"


Social Events
Broadway Goes to Carnegie
June 17 -- Excerpts from famous musicals will be performed by Broadway entertainers at Carnegie Hall at a benefit for the Theater Collection of the Museum of the City of New York.
Diahann Carroll and Richard Kiley will be the hosts.
The entertainers will include Lauren Bacall, Carol Channing, Nanette Fabray, Patti Lupone and Elaine Stritch.
The show starts at 8 P.M.
Tickets $50 to $1,000; the $1,000 ticket includes a reception after the show at the Russian Tea Room; (212) 534-1672, ext. 213.
New York City Opera


Gay Bias Or Information?
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's column, "Gay Bias Moves Off the Sidelines," (The Times, May 24) presents a very one-sided view of the issue.
It almost totally ignores the rights and concerns of the straight majority of players and parents.
Lipsyte failed to consider the straight high school player's -- and her parents' -- right to know if the team and coach she is considering are gay or straight.


Ideas &amp; Trends; An Invisible Spell Of Magnetic Weather From Hurricane Helios
SCIENTISTS call the stream of particles the sun constantly sends toward earth the solar wind, but for the last few days hurricane would have been a better description; in the emptiness of space, a huge storm is silently crashing to earth.
Nobody drowns in a geomagnetic storm, but transformers and generators at power plants can burst into flames; radio communications can fail and satellites stop working or even fall from the sky; airline passengers can pick up significant radiation doses, and the Aurora Borealis, or Northern Lights, can show up as far south as Florida.


Washington
To the Editor: Regarding Michael Frank's story about the Long Beach Peninsula in Washington State (Travel, May 5), the author didn't mention the rain enough.
He mentioned the long stretch of beach, but did he describe the wind?
Did he really tell you how much it rains there?
Yes, we need that rain to keep things green, but did he indicate how much?
And about the slugs?
Did he relate that all the leather gear that the Lewis and Clark expedition brought rotted during the winter they spent on the Long Beach Peninsula?
I'm stressing these drawbacks because the Northwest is so popularly renowned for its rainy weather, just as New York is famed for its fast pace and crime.
While I might be able to come to New York and not be mugged, I doubt anyone could come to the Northwest coast and not get rained on.
I have a vested interest in warning off all East Coast people: I want to retire there.
It is bad enough that I am going to have to compete for housing with California tax refugees without New Yorkers' adding to the crush.
A former New Yorker assures me that New Yorkers would never venture so far from their city, but I can't take the chance.
Did I mention the rain? A. K. PEDERSEN Portland, Ore.


State 'Watchdog' Agencies Worry About Cutbacks
LAST year, a Newark woman raising three foster children was asked by a state agency to take in four more temporarily.
The woman kept the four, who were siblings, for five months, until the agency could place them in a permanent foster home.
When she requested the standard expense reimbursement, which totaled $3,200 for the period that the children had stayed with her, she was denied payment for two of the children because, she was told, payment could be made only for up to five foster children a household.


Memorable Endings to a Chinese Meal
A DELECTABLE dessert at a Chinese restaurant is as rare as the Long Island Expressway without summertime construction.
Realists expect, and usually receive, cooling ice cream and a few laughs from the fortune cookies, but at Emperor's Court of China in Bay Shore, classic fried sesame bananas make the meal memorable.
Many restaurants offer ersatz versions of the delight, but soggy morsels sprinkled with pink sugar are pale substitutes for the real thing.
At Emperor's Court, the banana chunks are dipped in batter, deep fried and then rolled in sesame-flecked caramel before being dropped into ice water at tableside.
This Arctic plunge firms the coating, creating a sweet melt-in-the-mouth fruit encased in a crunchy, sticky shell.


Sticky Problems in Bringing Films to Soviet Screens
In 1989, Ismail Merchant and James Ivory, the New York film producer and director whose company's credits include "A Room with a View" and "Mr. and Mrs. Bridge," made a deal to sell their films in the Soviet Union.
Merchant Ivory Productions planned to license three movies to Paritet, a Moscow-based company.
The deal was in rubles, which Merchant planned to use to make a film in the Soviet Union.
But Merchant Ivory's foray into the new market ended badly.
Paritet sued Merchant for $26 million for the profits it said it lost because the first film, "Deceivers," was delivered late and incomplete and subsequent films were not delivered at all.
On May 19, the American Arbitration Association fined Merchant Ivory Productions 2.3 million rubles.
Though it is neither in dollars, as Paritet had sought, nor anywhere near the 15 million rubles that Paritet used to arrive at $26 million, the fine is substantial.


Streetscapes: 13 West 131st Street; 'Father of Harlem' Called It Home
THE recent proposal by New York City's Landmarks Preservation Commission to designate 25 Upper Manhattan buildings has provoked complaints from preservation groups that for many years have been pressing for protection of significant buildings in Harlem.
The groups say the commission is not doing enough -- even before it has done anything at all.
Hearings are planned next month, and action on the 25 nominations may not occur for a year.
Some buildings may, indeed, have been overlooked, and when the commissioners have the time, they should take a look at the forgotten, empty shell of a Victorian rowhouse at 13 West 131st Street.
This was the residence of Philip A. Payton Jr., the black real estate broker who rightfully earned the title of "the father of Harlem."


Remember Those Who Almost Changed China
To the Editor:
As a witness, with my wife, to the 1989 democracy movement in China, I wonder what act by China could trigger some indignation or anger in President Bush.
Teaching about 80 miles from Beijing in the city of Boading, we found the students of Hebei University unworldly and naive, yet even they were not sure what to make of Mr.
Bush.
They asked whether we thought he had been conned because he had spent much time with the "new emperors" (as they called Deng Xiaoping's crowd) and little time with the real people of China.
Notwithstanding, the students solemnly wrote their wills, leaving their meager possessions to parents and siblings, and courageously marched out of the campus gates into what Shen Tong's book called "almost a revolution."


Headliners; Air Superiority
There was a time when the Chicago Bulls were considered no more a real team than, say, Ray Charles and the Raylettes or Henry Ford and the autoworkers.
The Bulls, in many eyes, consisted of Michael Jordan and his helpers.
No more.
After the Bulls' near poetic defeat of the Los Angeles Lakers last week for the National Basketball Association Championship, the epithet "one-man team" was nowhere heard.
But if the team's scoring, playmaking and defensive maneuvers were uncharacteristically balanced, Jordan still dominated everything.
It was the first championship in the seven-year pro career of the man many say is the best practitioner of the game today and some say may be the best ever.
Nobody even considered naming anybody else the Most Valuable Player.
Clutching the championship trophy, Jordan wept.
"I don't know if I'll ever have this feeling again," he said.
In Chicago, which had never won a basketball championship before, they're saying, "How about next year?"


Art Centers Increasingly Turn to Auctions for Fund Raising
FOR museums, art centers and alternative spaces, fund raising is both a specter and a fact of life.
There is never enough money and now, with the cutbacks in Federal, state and city financing, there is "never enough money" more than ever.
Alternative spaces probably suffer the most, since their "product" tends to be either experimental or else untested in the marketplace or both.
In Manhattan, Franklin Furnace is one that has been augmenting its income for years with benefits; White Columns and Art in General also do benefits while the venerable Artists Space has had success selling multiples.
An alternative space in spirit, the New Museum has raised money in similar ways.


Robbers Bind 4; 5th Calls Police
Thanks to a relative who slipped out a back window, the police captured a group of gunmen who had tied up a Queens family and started to rob them, the police said yesterday.
Four gunmen burst into the house after the door was opened to a woman who was asking directions, the police said.
The woman, who was an apparent accomplice, and one gunman escaped.


A Persistent American Yearning
THE LAST DECADE OF A CENTURY IS A TEMPTING TIME FOR PRESIDENTS, journalists, end-of-the-world preachers and other dreamers.
Presidents in particular begin meditating on their place in history, and wondering how to make it look a little better than it was.
George Washington made his famous farewell address in the last decade of the 18th century, and foresaw safety and prosperity for the new Republic in isolation from the quarrels of the world.
In the last decade of the 19th century, President McKinley was not thinking of isolation (or of his sudden death soon to come), but was planning a new American empire and leading the country into the Spanish-American War.
And at the beginning of the last decade of the 20th, George Herbert Walker Bush, the 41st President, was proclaiming the dawn of a "new world order," and starting it with a war against Iraq in the Middle East.


Cori Foreman and Barry LeVine Are Engaged
Dr. and Mrs.
Spencer Foreman of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Cori Foreman and Barry Jay LeVine, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham LeVine of San Diego.
Ms.
Foreman, 28 years old, graduated from Tulane University and is an assistant manager of sales promotion at Lancome in New York.
Her father is the president of Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
Mr.
LeVine, 33, graduated from the State University of New York at Albany and is the director of field marketing for the Bertelsmann Music Group in New York.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.
His mother retired as a medical coder for the New York State Cancer Registry.
His father, also retired, was a grocer.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 16, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
2
4
SECRETS OF THE MORNING, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.95.) A young music student is haunted by the ghosts of her lovers, present and past.
3
3
ONCE A PRINCESS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.95.) A woman working in Mississippi is visited by the European prince to whom she was affianced as a child.
4
4
"G" IS FOR GUMSHOE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.95.) On her 33d birthday, the private eye Kinsey Millhone finds herself on a hit list.
5
14
RED DRAGON, by Thomas Harris. (Dell, $5.95.) A retired F.B.I. agent returns to service to track down a serial killer.
6
35
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
7
7
MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.99.) A woman journalist's coming of age in the 1960's and 70's.
8
3
HAMMERHEADS, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.95.) A Coast Guard unit wages war against the South American drug cartel.
9
2
THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $5.99.) Murder and chicanery amid the mansions of California's Orange County.
10
2
IMPULSE, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) The search of a vengeful woman to find her father, who wronged her mother, leads to romantic adventures.
11
6
THE CAT WHO LIVED HIGH, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.50.) A reporter and his two cats probe a mysterious death.
12
2
RENEGADE, by Gene Deweese. (Pocket, $4.95.) "Star Trek" 's Captain Kirk moves to stop a new plot that threatens the Federation.
13
8
THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Doomsday brings horrors to America.
14
8
AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick Dunne. (Bantam, $5.99.) Manners, morals and murder in Los Angeles's high society.
15 *
7
FAMILY PICTURES, by Sue Miller. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.95.) The good and bad times of a large Chicago clan during the past 40 years.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
3
BY WAY OF DECEPTION, by Victor Ostrovsky and Claire Hoy. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An account of the operations of Mossad, the Israeli spy service.
3
82
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
4
13
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
5
397
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
6
8
MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff describes the craft of the game.
7
44
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) The Arab-Israeli conflict as observed by a New York Times correspondent over the past decade.
8 *
37
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
9 *
3
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
10
123
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions in treating serious illness.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
46
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2 *
13
THE REVENGE OF THE BABY-SAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
2
LIGHT HIS FIRE, by Ellen Kreidman. (Dell, $4.95.) Ways by which women can excite men romantically.
4 *
26
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
5
1
LIFE 101, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $5.99.) Advice about coping with the human condition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Beverly A. Giannotto Is Wed to William Pattillo
Dr.
Beverly Alison Giannotto, a resident in physical medicine and rehabilitation at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, and Dr.
Robert William Pattillo, a resident in internal medicine at Danbury (Conn.) Hospital, were married yesterday at Our Lady of Sorrows Church in South Orange, N.J.
Msgr.
Philip D. Morris performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
The bride, 30 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her M.D. from New York Medical College.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony S. Giannotto of South Orange.
Her father is a retired physician.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
May housing starts, in thousands
960
960
Wednesday
April trade deficit, in billions
-$4.10
-$4.50
Thursday
Jobless claims, in thousands
440,000
439,000
Friday
May Treasury balance in billions
-$4.6
$30.1
This Week's Developments Monday: ndustrial loan activity *
Wholesale trade  Tuesday: Alan Greenspan before the House Ways and Means Committee on international competitiveness *
Bundesbank president Karl Otto Pohl delivers an address in New York  Wednesday: Federal Reserve releases its beige (tan) book of economic forecasts for July  Friday: Report on commercial loan activity  *I.D.E.A.


Alaska Governor Disciplines Aides Over Tape
Gov.
Walter J. Hickel has disciplined two of his aides for saying they had an audiotape of a private conversation among six reporters who cover Mr.
Hickel's administration.
Whether such a tape ever existed has been placed in doubt in recent days.
In a statement issued Friday, the Governor's chief of staff, Max Hodel, said, "This tape business, as best we can determine, is just a hoax." But Mr.
Hodel added that the entire episode had placed the credibility of the Hickel administration "on the line, and it is not something to be toyed with."


Antoinette Fiore, Lawyer, Wed in Southampton, L.I.
Antoinette J. Fiore, a lawyer for the New York City Department of Investigation, and Mark A. Zebrowski, the senior finance trader for fixed-income securities at Citibank in New York, were married yesterday at the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Roman Catholic Church in Southampton, L.I.
Archbishop Renato R. Martino, the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations, and Msgr.
Edmond Trench performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Fiore, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a cum laude graduate of Tufts University with a J.D. from Fordham Law School.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Americo S. Fiore of Southampton.
Her husband, 30, graduated from the University of Michigan.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Zebrowski of Southampton.


Notebook; Wanted by Major League Managers: A Stronger Corps of Starting Pitchers
For the first two months of the 1977 season, the Yankees had eight pitchers on their staff.
Then they added one and operated with nine until they called up two minor league pitchers in September.
In today's pitching world, that staff would be anachronistic.
Today, teams carry as many as 12 pitchers and certainly no fewer than 10, unlike the earlier years of the designated hitter when many American League teams had a nine-man corps and sometimes eight.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending June 1  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 355,000
1 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, beamed-ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,117, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Ann Weintraub Realty)  SoHo 535,000
143 Prince Street  2,000-sq.-ft. open-loft in a renovated building; marble bath, 16-ft. windows, decorative columns, 3 exposures; maintenance $900, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Meisel Real Estate)  Sutton Place 233,000
36 Sutton Place South  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, dining area, renovated kitchen and bath, terrace, East River view; maintenance $1,200, 49% tax-deductible (Broker: S.W. Bird Inc.)  Upper East Side 670,000
157 East 74th Street  (Saga House)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, fireplace, balcony; common charge $1,191, taxes $4,308 (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 340,000
771 West End Avenue (97th St.)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, entry foyer, maid's room, dining room, French doors; maintenance $799, 30% tax-deductible (Broker: Wendy Walters &amp; Associates)  BRONX  Kingsbridge 168,000
3407 Cannon Place  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,546 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Riverdale 69,000
3601 Johnson Avenue  (Tudor)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining room, windowed kitchen, terrace; maintenance $429, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Trebach Realty)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park West 225,000
545 Westminster Road  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick and stucco house; dining room, dinette, fireplace, 2-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. irregular lot; taxes $1,900 (Broker: Wilke Real Estate)  Park Slope 171,000
158 Prospect Park West  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; renovated kitchen and bath, fireplace, private roof deck; maintenance $490, 66% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  Prospect Park South 212,500
140 Stratford Road  7-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, private deck, landmark district 48- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Mary K. Gallagher)  QUEENS  College Point 185,000
126-05 25th Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 47- by 99-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Middle Village 206,000
64-21 83d Street  3-bedroom, 2 bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,074 (Broker: Century 21/Metalios Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Graniteville 78,000
416-A Lisk Avenue  (City West)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. condo in a 6-year-old building; dining area, loft over master bedroom, pool, tennis; common charge $122, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)  Great Kills 195,000
193 Great Kills Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, colonial; dining room, den, 2 enclosed porches, 2-car garage, 100- by 125-ft. lot; taxes $1,676 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)


Corrections
A chart in the Travel Advisory column on June 2 titled "Europe's Variety of Railroad Passes" misstated rates and availability for German and Austrian passes.
A German Rail pass is called a Flexipass and is valid for a specified number of days within a one-month period, not less.
The correct rates are as follows: a pass allowing 5 days' travel costs $190 in first class and $130 in second; 10 days, $300 first class and $200 second; 15 days, $375 first class and $250 second.
There is no pass for one month of unlimited travel.


Inge's Vintage 'Picnic' Gets Long Warf Revival
IN the theater of the 1950's, William Inge was a critically and commercially successful playwright, but his fame and importance evanesced by the end of the decade.
Even though he went on writing plays, as well as short stories and novels, only the screenplay for "Splendor in the Grass," a 1961 Oscar winner with Natalie Wood and Warren Beatty, made an impression.
In 1973 Inge committed suicide.
Sputtering attempts to revive and re-evaluate his once popular stage works, which came into prominence with "Come Back, Little Sheba" (1950) and fell out of favor soon after "The Dark at the Top of the Stairs" (1957), have not paved the way for an Inge renaissance.


All the World's a Lego At a Park in Denmark
THE world seems comfortably familiar when one can travel from the canals of Amsterdam to a Norwegian fishing village to the Statue of Liberty, then to Abu Simbel and the grasslands of Africa in the space of a day.
Yet that is the feeling one has near the small town of Billund, in Jutland, Denmark.
Anyone who has ever watched a child play with Legos -- as well as anyone who hasn't -- will be delighted with what the Danes have created there, a vast park called Legoland.
The central attraction is a permanent outdoor exhibition of buildings, monuments, cities and villages modeled after sites from all over the world, and constructed from more than 33 million Lego pieces. (The park is operated by the manufacturer of the plastic interlocking blocks, which has its factory nearby; the plant is closed to the public.) In astonishing detail, the scale models (scale 1:20, which means about four-foot-high constructions) take the visitor on a tour of all corners of the world.
Drawbridges are automatically raised and lowered for boat traffic on Amsterdam's canals.
The port of Copenhagen is alive with electronically controlled trains, ships and cranes.
The Rhine River, with an island castle being circled by a tour boat, flows quietly, while above it a train chugs up the mountain.
In a northern Norwegian fishing village, trawlers work their way in and out of the harbor, watched by houses overlooking the water from the rocky shore.
Bonsai trees help create the farmland scenery around a Danish farm, the watermill turning by the red barn, as sheep graze on real grass.


Susan E. Maffei Engaged to Wed
Mrs.
Bryce Blynn Jr. of Vero Beach, Fla., has announced the engagement of her daughter Susan Elizabeth Maffei to John Gabriel Plowden Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Plowden of Riverside, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Maffei, 34 years old, is a fund-raiser for the America's Cup syndicate in San Diego.
She graduated from the University of Rhode Island.
Her late father, Rudolph P. Maffei, was the executive vice president of Gardner Advertising and the general manager of its New York office.


Betsy Orr to Wed J. M. Walton Jr. in September
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas L. Orr Jr. of Darien, Conn., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Elizabeth Andrews Orr, and James Mellon Walton Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walton of Ligonier, Pa.
Miss Orr, 25 years old, is known as Betsy.
She is a graduate of Denison University.
Her father owns Medical Book Service Inc., a distributor of medical publications in Darien.
The prospective bridegroom, 31, is an independent television sports producer.
He is a graduate of Columbia University.
His father, the president emeritus of the Carnegie Institute and the Carnegie Library in Pittsburgh, is the vice chairman of the MMC Group, an investment company in Pittsburgh.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CONFESSIONS OF AN ECO-WARRIOR  By Dave Foreman. Harmony, $20.


Whomp! Thwack! Thump! A Tribute to the Rug Beater
American rug beaters -- bent willow branches, wire wands, rattan racquets and woven-mesh tubes -- so proliferated from the Civil War to World War II that Ivan Karp, a Manhattan art dealer, is puzzled and fascinated.
This is why he has organized an exhibition, "Rug Beaters 'r' Us," at his O.K.
Harris gallery, 385 West Broadway, through July 9.
Mr.
Karp, who has collected 20,000 uncommon objects -- washboards, cigar bands, corkscrews, figural can openers, food choppers, Coca-Cola trays and "naughty Nelly" bootjacks -- rarely buys fewer than 20 of any collectible.
Yet, he said recently, he owns only three rug beaters.
He may be tempted, he said, to buy more from the 40 or so that are for sale in the exhibition of 250 rug beaters.


Lauren Metz Married To John F. Simons 3d
Lauren Harding Metz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James T. Metz of Sharon, Conn., was married yesterday to John Farr Simons 3d, the son of Lois Ann Glasgow of Fort Washington, Pa., and the late Mr.
Simons Jr.
The Rev.
James Pilon, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Bernard's Church in Sharon.
Mrs.
Simons, 24 years old, graduated from Sweet Briar College.
She is the controller of Nick and Nora's, a clothing store in Hamilton, N.Y.
Her father is the chief executive of Huntington &amp; Kildare Inc., a management and investment firm in New York.


Unjust Were the Ways of Milton
THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE
By Eva Figes. 154 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $22.


Leach and Pugh Leads U.S. Past Spain
The United States Davis Cup team received another poised performance from the undefeated doubles tandem of Rick Leach and Jim Pugh this afternoon and, aided by the slick grass surface at the Newport Casino, clinched its quarterfinal series against Spain by a three-matches-to-none margin.
Leach and Pugh tamed the world's top-ranked doubles duo, Emilio Sanchez and Sergio Casal, 7-6, 6-3, 7-6.


A Year to Give Beets Another Chance
RED eggs were the standard fare at picnics during my childhood.
The eggs were hard-boiled and refrigerated in a bowl of pickled beets for several days.
By picnic time, the eggs had absorbed the color of the beets and some of their flavor.
These pickled eggs were (and still are) a Pennsylvania Dutch tradition.
Hardly anyone plants or grows beets these days, and it is a pity.
This fat little root vegetable has a unique flavor, and when it is cooked and served just right, it can be quite delicious.
The beet has gone into such a decline that the National Garden Bureau has declared 1991 as the Year of the Beet to give it a boost.


Golf; Simpson and Stewart Lead Open as Hazeltine Takes Toll
With a stiff wind tightening its once flabby turf, Hazeltine stopped absorbing punishment and began delivering its own blows today in the third round of the United States Open.
The leaders at six-under-par 210 were Scott Simpson and Payne Stewart, who struggled to remain in relative neutral while all around them contenders were falling away.
Simpson shot a par 72 today and Stewart shot a 73.


FILIPINOS FLEEING AS VOLCANO BUILDS
The Philippine Government ordered the evacuation of hundreds of thousands of people tonight after scientists warned that a volcano erupting north of here appeared close to a catastrophic explosion.
Earthquakes associated with the eruption of Mount Pinatubo were felt in Manila, 55 miles away, and volcanic ash blanketed the capital, forcing its international and domestic airports to close because of limited visibility and concern that jet engines would be damaged by the ash.


U.S. Judge Faces Bribery Trial in New Orleans
A United States district judge, one of the first blacks named to the Federal bench in the Deep South, goes on trial here Monday, charged with having accepted at least $16,500 in bribes to soften the sentence of a convicted drug dealer.
A lawyer for the defense accuses the Government of "racial selectivity" in choosing to investigate and then prosecute the judge, Robert F. Collins.


Down With Revisionism
To the Editor:
Bravo Michael Kimmelman for taking the revisionists to task  [ "Old West, New Twist at the Smithsonian," May 26 ] .
The mental contortions that riddle the scholarship of the Smithsonian exhibition "The West as America: Reinterpreting Images of the Frontier, 1820-1920" give art historians a bad name.
To find such sophistry at esoteric exhibitions that attract only other art historians is one thing; to foist it onto a largely unsuspecting public in an exhibition whose theme has such widespread appeal demonstrates unconscionable irresponsibility to both the works of art and the audience.
CHRISTINE B. PODMANICZKY  Wilmington, Del.


Writing's Wrongs Righted
When famous writers are portrayed on screen, their working lives seem too hard, too easy, too sententious or too silly, but rarely just right.
Playing Lillian Hellman in the 1977 film "Julia," Jane Fonda becomes so frustrated that she tosses her typewriter out the window.
As Isak Dinesen in "Out of Africa" in 1985, Meryl Streep entertains her dinner guests by telling eloquent stories, spinning out tales as effortlessly as if the muse were sitting on her shoulder.
The all-too-prescient "Henry and June" (1990) allows Fred Ward as Henry Miller to keep insisting that no one will publish his scandalous novels.
Sure, Henry.
And occasionally the act of writing descends to amazing new depths of goofiness.
In the 1988 television film "Hemingway," Stacy Keach sits hunched over a table in a cafe.
In a scene that goes something like this, he scribbles and says, "Isn't it fine to think so?" then furiously scratches out a word.
"Isn't it
nice
to think so?" Scratch again. You can almost see the light bulb go on over his head when he finally spits out, "Isn't it
pretty
to think so?" having turned the famous final line of "The Sun Also Rises" into a cheery little game of fill-in-the-blank.


Anger Over Church's Building Plan
From the front, the site looks like a routine construction job: two brownstones all but demolished, a deep excavation where a basement is to be sunk, white brick walls going up row by row at the sides and rear.
But as the building -- the new home of the 113-year-old Norwegian Seamen's Church -- rises on East 52d Street in Manhattan, so do tensions between the parish leaders and people who live on the block.
They have become adversaries over the church's construction project where garden space had been, behind the old brownstones -- work that is interrupting an airy, unbroken 300-foot corridor of plants, flowers and trees in private yards along the interior of the block between First and Second Avenues.
On Tuesday the two sides will face off for the second time before the New York City Board of Standards and Appeals, which has the power to revoke the church's building permit.


Security Guards Or Vigilantes?/A special report; In Brooklyn, Private Police as Violent as Their Enemy
A private police force, as heavily armed and sometimes as violent as the drug dealers it is hired to confront, is stalking the dealers in some of Brooklyn's poorest neighborhoods, according to residents, police officers and the guards themselves.
The force, licensed by the New York Secretary of State under the name SSI Patrol Services, provides security for privately owned apartment buildings where heavy drug dealing has gone on.
Among them are the Noble Drew Ali Plaza at 37 New Lots Avenue in the East New York section and the Atlantic Towers, on the corner of Atlantic Avenue and Rockaway Avenue in East New York.
SSI also has contracts at several smaller Brooklyn apartment buildings, nursing homes and at least one factory.
Officers and Neighbors Approve
The company is hired by landlords to oust drug dealers when the police cannot.
The cost is high -- more than $600,000 a year in one case -- but Government housing subsidies sometimes help cover it.
The company's tools are the same ones employed by its adversaries: violence and intimidation.
The Police Department says it opposes vigilante justice, but some officers on the beat and neighborhood residents are enthusiastic about the company's tactics.


Complaints That Get Results
IF the tour brochure for Italy says your hotel will be near St.
Mark's Plaza in the center of Venice, and you find yourself instead in the industrial suburb of Mestre, how do you complain effectively?
The case in hand involves two New Yorkers who took a two-week trip to Italy last fall with Trafalgar Tours, whose brochure makes a point of hotel selection: "In major cities and resorts . . . the Trafalgar central location story is a special one . . . . In Venice you'll stay either on or near the Grand Canal close to St. Mark's Square, or at the two-year-old Ramada on the Venetian lagoon."


Suzanne Kelsey Marries
Suzanne Van Antwerp Kelsey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas V. A. Kelsey of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to Kenneth Vincent Siegert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Noel V. Siegert of Skillman, N.J.
The Rev.
Preston T. Kelsey, an Episcopal priest and an uncle of the bride, officiated at the Reeves-Reed Arboretum.
The bride, 28 years old, is a sculptor and an art teacher at the Fessenden School in West Newton, Mass.
She received a master's degree in fine arts from the Massachusetts College of Art.
She and the bridegroom, 28, a musician and songwriter, are cum laude graduates of Hamilton College.


Favor Jostles Plumer En Route to a Victory
Suzy Favor was sitting in the press tent, all gentility and grace, all smiles on a summery day.
"This seems to happen to me a lot," she said.
"It would really be too bad if PattiSue had hard feelings."


New Basement Doors
HOUSES with basement doors installed below ground level typically have wood doors covering the openings at the tops of the door wells.
Replacing those doors with metal ones adds beauty, security and safety
Basement-door kits cost $200 to $300, depending on whether the kit includes sloping metal sidewalls to support the door.
If the well has sloping masonry sidewalls in good condition, a kit with metal sidewalls is not needed.


Janet Snyder Weds
Janet Marie Snyder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul L. Snyder of Williamsville, N.Y., was married in Buffalo yesterday to William Hugh Kelly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Q. Kelly of Armonk, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph D. Joseph officiated at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Kelly, 26 years old, is a disk jockey at radio station WHTZ in New York.
Mr.
Kelly, 25, is a sales consultant at Medigen of New York, a waste-disposal company in West Babylon, L.I.
Both are Ithaca College graduates.


Baseball; Mets' Focus: Hits and More Hits
Sid Fernandez had just finished pitching a simulated game Friday in his comeback from a broken wrist, and there were plenty of questions to ask.
They included, but were not limited to: How did his left arm feel?
Did he have any pain?
Was he getting velocity on his pitches?
Fernandez had little time to address the topics.
The left-hander snapped off answers and ended a brief interview by rushing back on the field.
As he left, he explained his abruptness.


Tourism's Cost To Shore Towns
If the state is intent on boosting summer tourism revenue, it had better change the practices of its individual municipalities.
The township of Long Beach Island along with cooperation of real-estate agents has effectively made it impossible for any nonfamily groups to rent vacation homes in that area.
We experienced this when our six-week signed lease and financially secured agreement was broken by a local property owner.
He felt it would be too risky to rent to a group of mature adults, in opposition to a new town ordinance passed after the lease was signed.
No concern was shown to us by the owner (though the check was never cashed), and no alternative actively sought by the real-estate agent to accommodate us.


Dallas Approves Curfew on Youths
In response to a growing crime rate and pressure from residents, the City Council has adopted a curfew for youths under the age of 17.
Despite protests from teen-agers, the threat of a lawsuit from civil libertarians and questions about the efficacy of curfews, the Council approved the measure by a vote of 10 to 1 on Wednesday.


Kate Learson, an Artist, Married To John Emmerling, an Executive
Kate Learson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
T.
Vincent Learson of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday in Chatham, Mass., to John Emmerling, a son of Alfred C. Emmerling of Grand Ledge, Mich., and the late Sevilla M. Emmerling.
The Rev.
David White performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Holy Spirit.
Mrs.
Emmerling, a painter, owns and runs an art brokerage in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father, who is retired, was a chairman of the board of the I.B.M.
Corporation.


Focus: South Carolina Plantations; Farmers Yield to Hunters and Developers
THE last year Joe Bostick farmed his 5,000-acre plantation outside this town of 2,300 people, he lost $80,000.
Deer ate his soybeans, corn and wheat.
So Mr.
Bostick, whose forebears had farmed this land since it was given to them by King George III in 1769, decided 15 years ago to break with the past.
He started a commercial hunting operation.


Danica J. Nedela Engaged to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Jiri Nedela of Fairfield, Conn., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Danica Judy Nedela and Gregory Franchuk, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Franchuk of New York.
Miss Nedela, 28 years old, is a producer and reporter at WNYW, a television station in New York.
She is a graduate of Fairfield University, where her father is a professor of communications.


Amy R. Sheon to Marry Marvin Krislov in August
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Sheon of Toledo, Ohio, have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Amy Ruth Sheon, and Marvin Krislov, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Krislov of Lexington, Ky.
Ms.
Sheon, 30 years old, works at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., supervising the collection of data on HIV-infected women and children.
A cum laude graduate of Cornell University, she received a master's degree in public health from the University of Michigan.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Ryan Planning to Buy A Bank in Hometown
Texas Rangers ace NOLAN RYAN, a banker when he is not playing baseball, is going to buy a bank in his hometown, Alvin, Tex., a city of 15,000 about 30 miles south of Houston.
B.
L.
CORLEY JR., president of Ryan's Danbury State Bank in nearby Brazoria County, said last week that Ryan's bank plans to buy the Alvin branch of Merchants Bank-Houston.
He said they're awaiting regulatory approval and expect to close the deal by July 26.
Ryan bought Danbury State Bank about a year ago and renamed it the Express Bank.
The Alvin bank will become a branch of the Danbury bank.


Miss Minter Wed To Jeffrey Yuan
Michele Minter, an associate manager at Columbia Artists Management in New York, and Dr.
Jeffrey Yuan, a research fellow in molecular biology at Princeton University, were married yesterday at the Seven Springs Estate, Rockefeller University's retreat in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The Rev.
David K. McMillan performed the Presbyterian ceremony.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from Yale University, as did her husband, and she received a master's degree in performing-arts management from the City University of New York.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven A. Minter of Shaker Heights, Ohio.
Her father is the executive director of the Cleveland Foundation.


Jessica M. Sinnott, Lawyer, Marries
Jessica Michelle Sinnott, a patent lawyer for the Mobil Oil Corporation in Fairfax, Va., was married yesterday to William Joseph Cotreau, an animal-welfare advocate in Washington.
Msgr.
Anthony Bogdziewicz officiated at St.
Teresa of Avila Roman Catholic Church in Summit, N.J.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is 27 years old.
She graduated from Sweet Briar College and New York Law School.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Sinnott of Summit.
Her father is the chief patent and trademark counsel of American Standard Inc. in New York.


Making a Difference; The Lawyer With a Patent
When Albert P. Halluin was vice president and chief intellectual property counsel for the Cetus Corporation, he earned a reputation as a tenacious and aggressive defender of the company's inventions in biotechnology.
But Mr.
Halluin, 51, also is a biochemist, and last week he received a patent for a novel invention of his own, one that could prove to be a significant treatment for heart attacks.
The patent covers any drug formed by combining a biotech blood clot dissolver known as TPA with heparin, an anticoagulant.
Normally, heparin and TPA are given separately to heart attack victims to prevent the reoccurrence of a clot.
But on their own, TPA does not last long in the body and heparin can cause strokes.


'Dying Young' Survives a Case of Serious Rumors
If rumors could edit movies, much of "Dying Young," the Joel Schumacher film starring Julia Roberts and Campbell Scott, might still be in revision.
All spring there have been stories about changes and second thoughts.
For starters, when would the movie open?
Originally scheduled for summer, there were reports that it might be held until later in the year (the movie opens Friday).
Then there was the title.
The studio, 20th Century Fox, thought "Dying Young" might be too negative, especially when juxtaposed with the fresh, exuberant Ms.
Roberts, indisputably the hottest actress in Hollywood today.
Finally, there was the film's ending.
Marti Leimbach's novel, on which the movie is based, ends with a suicide, as did an early treatment of the film.
Tales circulated about test audiences finding suicide too hard to take and that ending had been changed.


Political Talk
Albany on Holiday
After failing to pass a state budget until the ninth week of the new fiscal year -- costing local governments tens of millions of dollars in interest payments -- the New York State Senate acted swiftly last week to award its 1,600 staff members an extra paid holiday, at a cost of $175,000 to taxpayers, according to the State Comptroller's Office.


Gorbachev Steps Up His Campaign to Recover Credibility on Economy
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today accelerated efforts to convince the Western world that this time, he really means it when he says the Soviet Union wants to move swiftly to a market economy, though on his own terms.
In an interview broadcast on Soviet television tonight, after leading a meeting of Soviet officials and scientists on privatization, he said he had accepted an invitation to address the leaders of seven industrialized democracies in London next month after their summit meeting July 15-17.


Blowfish Are Making a Comeback
LIKE it or not, fishermen and marine scientists say, the blowfish, a voracious and mysterious predator that people love to eat, has returned to the back bays and rivers of the Jersey Shore after an absence of some 20 years.
Blowfish are "all over the place," said Lee Kruysman, the owner of Kaptain Krunch's Bait and Tackle Shop here, just a few blocks from Barnegat Bay.
"They are big, and there are as many as you want."


Travel Advisory; Marriotts Offer Discounts for Advance Payment
Taking a cue from from the airlines, Marriott Hotels, Resorts &amp; Suites is offering nonrefundable discount rates on rooms paid for in advance.
Travelers who pay for rooms at least 21 days in advance of their stay will receive discounts off regular rates of 40 to 60 percent, depending on location; those paying at least 14 days in advance will receive discounts of 20 to 40 percent.
At least 10 percent of each property's rooms will be available at the discount rates.
The offer is valid for from June 21 to Sept. 2 at 192 of the group's hotels in the United States (including Hawaii), Barbados and Toronto.
Payment must be by credit card.
Parties of up to 10 guests may take advantage of the savings.


Margo Lynn Simon Weds
Margo Lynn Simon and Dr.
Marc Allan Schumer were married last evening at the Water Club in New York by Rabbi Charles Davidson.
Mrs.
Schumer, 26 years old and an Emory University graduate, is a sales director at the L.S.
Collection, a gift retailer, in New York.
She is the daughter of Dr.
S.
Lawrence Simon and Dr.
Ellen Simon, both of New York.
Dr.
Schumer, 28 and a Cornell University graduate, is a resident in urology at Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn.
He received his M.D. from the University of Vermont.
He is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel Schumer of Floral Park, Queens.


The Executive Life; An Upscale Gallic Grab for the American Wallet
"It is a joy when you are able to tell the difference between a Chateau d'Yquem and an ordinary burgundy." So said Jean-Louis Dumas-Hermes, fifth-generation head of the Paris-based fashion house that bears his name.
Mr.
Dumas-Hermes was breakfasting at the Mayfair Regent in New York with two colleagues from the Comite Colbert, an association of France's leading luxury goods manufacturers, plus a few upscale providers of services.
Nattily attired in French-cuffed shirts and Hermes ties, the gentlemen were discussing American sartorial style.
It is a subject with which Mr.
Dumas-Hermes first became familiar some years ago, during a brief stint as an assistant buyer at Bloomingdale's.


Hands Across Sea Leave a Town $1 Million Short
Generally, it is understood, if not much discussed, that displays of Japanese-American intermunicipal affection should abide by certain limits.
One city's bonsai tree, for instance, might deserve another's palm.
Or if a town in the United States sent its Japanese sister city, say, a commemorative plaque for the high school, it might expect something like a nice stone lantern in return.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE WING SHOP.
By Elvira Woodruff.
Illustrated by Stephen Gammell.
Holiday House. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Matthew is pining for his old home on Main Street, but being just a little boy he has no way to get there -- until, one day, he discovers the Wing Shop, a magical sort of place that advertises "Rental Wings by the Hour." Matthew tries a number of pairs of wings.
Fine illustrations.


Brooke Nussbaumer Weds
Brooke Wakefield Nussbaumer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Nussbaumer 2d of Buffalo, was married there yesterday to William Albert Muggia, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert L. Muggia of Winchester, Mass.
The Rev.
Ward B. Ewing officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church.
The bride, 25 years old and a graduate of the University of Vermont, is to become an intern at the Winterthur Museum in Winterthur, Del., in July.
The bridegroom, 29, graduated from Middlebury College and is studying for an M.B.A. at Harvard University.
He was a vice president of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in Boston.


A.B. (Happy) Chandler, 92, Dies; Led Baseball During Integration
A.B. (Happy) Chandler, the jovial Kentucky politician who resigned from the United States Senate in 1945 to succeed Kenesaw Mountain Landis in what turned out to be a monentous term as the secon commissioner of baseball, died early yesterday at his home in Versailles, Ky.
He was 92 years old, and according to his family he died of a heart attack.


Former Satellites of Moscow Fault Western Aid for Soviets
Eastern European officials have angrily criticized Western economic aid to the Soviet Union, saying it has hurt their beleaguered economies by causing Moscow to reduce purchases from the former Soviet bloc.
In speeches in the last week, Hungarian, Polish and Czechoslovak officials have called on the West to structure any future aid to Moscow so it boosts, rather than undercuts, their nations' exports to the Soviet Union.


Students Fail to Save Jobs of Two Guards
THE situation had the makings of a television series.
Two security guards are hired in the 1980's to help keep order at Scarsdale High School.
Both are former police officers.
In time, they become part of school life.
Students come to trust them and confide in them.
Many regard them as friends.
Then comes the 1991 state budget crisis and widespread school cuts in the county.
The Scarsdale superintendent of schools asks for a 15 percent cut in the eight support-staff positions in each of the district's seven schools.
Final episode: The high school guard positions are eliminated.
Students stage a sit-in to protest, but the decision is irreversible.


Musical Parade


White House Memo; Saving Face Means Having It in the Picture
The most august corporate titan, the most diligent bureaucrat, the most self-assured lawmaker, all turn into panting dervishes at the prospect of getting into a picture with the President of the United States.
Some cultures feared that pictures would steal one's soul.
But in the culture of power, the fear is that not being in the picture will steal your status.


Looking Inside That Outsider, Othello the Moor
Act IV, Scene 2 is being REhearsed at the Public Theater on Lafayette Street in Manhattan, and Raul Julia as Othello is spilling Iago's motiveless malignity (in Samuel Taylor Coleridge's words) into the tortured ear of Desdemona, played by Kathryn Meisle.
"Impudent strumpet," hisses Mr.
Julia, who then shifts into a famously sarcastic vein as Desdemona denies the accusation.
"I cry you mercy then," he says.
"I took you for that cunning whore of Venice that married with Othello."


Data Update
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
Apr. 91
Apr. 90
Change
New York
377.1
275.7
37%
New Jersey
153.9
198.9
-23%
Connecticut
68.6
82.4
-17%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.77
9.69
10.36
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.31
7.32
8.60
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.61
9.52
10.19
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.25
7.24
8.33
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.61
9.56
10.25
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.07
7.05
8.46
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
10.00
9.88
10.55
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.75
7.71
8.72
Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
6.30
6.13
8.08
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.24
9.24
9.82
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Miles Russ Wed To Ruth Baldwin
Ruth Feagin Baldwin, an associate in pension markets at the Equitable Capital Management Corporation, and Miles Duprey Russ, a manager in sales administration at the Estee Lauder Company, both in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Richmond, Va.
The Rev.
Dr.
Don Raby Edwards officiated.
The couple, both 25 years old, graduated from the University of Virgina.
Mrs.
Russ is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William D. Baldwin of Richmond, where her father is a senior vice president of special markets and a director of the Life Insurance Company of Virginia.


Astropolitics as Usual
EXPLORING SPACE
Voyages in the Solar System and Beyond.
By William E. Burrows.
Illustrated. 502 pp.
New York: Random House. $24.95.


Police Raid Wrong House and Damage It
A police antidrug squad overturned furniture, destroyed appliances and smashed a toilet into bits during a raid this week.
Then the officers discovered that they had raided the wrong house.
The errant raid occurred Wednesday at the home of Lloyd Miner, a 33-year-old construction worker, who says officers hit him with blunt objects, possibly flashlights, to make him lie down.
He was held in jail for about five hours.


Kuwait Sentences 6 Journalists to Die as Collaborators
A martial law court today sentenced six defendants to death for collaborating with the enemy by working for Al Nida, the newspaper that Iraq published here during its occupation of Kuwait.
Pandemonium erupted as the five judges, two of them military officers, announced their verdict.
Defendants and their friends and relatives cried out and wept as soldiers with automatic rifles shoved them out of the courtroom.


The Executive Computer; I.B.M. Is Counterpunching on Assorted Fronts
In a bid to shore up its personal computer family in a climate of slipping sales, the International Business Machines Corporation last week introduced an assortment of products, including four PS/2 models powered by the 20-megahertz version of the Intel Corporation's i386SX chip.
The significance of the new machines is not what is new -- other companies already offer similar machines at lower cost -- but what is old: three of the four computers use the so-called AT bus.
That is the internal data-path system, or highway, that I.B.M. abandoned several years ago but resurrected in the face of apparent customer indifference to its Micro Channel Architecture.


Headliners; Spin Surgeon
Dead men write no columns, either.
In an interview last week, G. Gordon Liddy said that thought had occurred to him and other members of the Nixon White House "plumbers unit" back when Watergate-era revelations in Jack Anderson's column were irritating President Nixon.
Mr.
Liddy, who was interviewed by Mr.
Anderson on the CNBC show "The Real Story," said that in a discussion of how to silence the columnist, political operatives working for the Committee to Re-elect the President considered slipping him a dose of LSD, but dropped that idea as too unpredictable.
"Finally," Mr.
Liddy told Mr.
Anderson, "they came up with striking your car on a turn and making it crash and burn. It was written up in a memo and sent to the White House." But, he added, the White House said that would be wrong.
"Thus you and I are sitting here chit-chatting, the war being over," Mr.
Liddy said.
The show's producer said that Mr.
Anderson kept his personal feelings about the matter to himself.


Murder, and Frustration
When Alexis Welsh was stabbed to death last weekend near Central Park, New Yorkers welled up with pain, frustration and an urge to do something about such senseless violence.
Lashing out is understandable, but it verges on scapegoating.
Why, people ask, was Kevin McKiever, the accused murderer, on the street in the first place, and why was he given only a brief jail term after a violent incident last year?
The instant assumption is that prosecutors should have recognized a potentially dangerous person and removed him from the streets for a long time.


Review/Cabaret; Betty Buckley, Quietly
Although Betty Buckley's signature song is "Memory," the Andrew Lloyd Webber warhorse that she introduced on Broadway in the musical "Cats," it is atypical of her taste in cabaret songs.
At Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza), where Ms.
Buckley is appearing through July 6, she dutifully performs the number, but the rest of the material in her program runs toward quieter, more introspective songs by Paul Simon, Joni Mitchell, Cole Porter and others.
They are songs, Ms.
Buckley explained near the beginning of Wednesday evening's early show, that she lived with and sang in the shower for years.


Philadelphia
To the Editor:
I want to set the record straight about the Market Street East neighborhood and the Gallery, the indoor shopping mall there  [ "A Drive to Restore Luster to Market St.," May 26 ] .
Unfortunately, the Gallery was designed with its back to the streetscape.


Edward Albee and the Road Not Taken
"Maybe there's no place for my kind of play on Broadway any more," says Edward Albee, slipping down in the black leather sofa in his Manhattan loft, so that his hair, long in the back and a bit stringy, hangs over the cushion.
"I find what is encouraged, more and more, is a literate middle-browism. Iconoclasm is discouraged. Rocking the boat is discouraged. And I would hope that every play I write shakes a few people up, asks a few questions that people would rather not think about."
Two days ago, Mr.
Albee's latest play, "Three Tall Women," had its world premiere at the English Theater in Vienna, where it has been widely anticipated, even in this bicentennial summer of Mozart's death, as a major cultural event.
"The public loves him as one of its great idols," says Friedrich Hoess, the Austrian ambassador to the United States.
"For us, Mr. Albee cannot be too thought-provoking."


Sports of The Times; Big City: It's Only For Nimble
THEY'VE already made the movie "The Out of Towners" about the pitfalls of a visit to New York, but just in case they want a modern remake, they can change the plot to a national track and field championship relocated for one time to a forsaken island beneath the Triborough Bridge.
Nevertheless, the site produced an epic moment yesterday as Carl Lewis held on to his 10-year undefeated streak in the long jump with his sixth and last jump, for the benefit of a television audience but a modest live crowd.


HOW TO BE THE WORLD'S POLICEMAN
Col.
Harry G. Summers Jr. provides a fine overview of the changing roles and missions of the military in a very uncertain new world order and raises a number of very provocative issues in his article "How to Be the World's Policeman" (May 19).
However, he has not focused on the demands that will be placed on all of the services to cope effectively with those unconventional confrontations that are now labeled "low-intensity conflicts." The projection of conventional forces or the utilization of high-tech weapons may be of marginal effectiveness under the jungle canopy of a rural insurgency or in the urban battlefield of modern terrorism.
Colonel Summers should have addressed the vital need to increase the military's capabilities to engage in special operations.
For it is those who are schooled in unconventional conflict who will be on the front lines, advising threatened allies or indirectly supporting insurgencies against rogue or outlaw states.
Furthermore, it is the special-operations community that has the doctrine and training to meet military requirements ranging from humanitarian assistance to counterterrorism to peacekeeping operations that are already being required in the conduct of United States foreign policy.
STEPHEN SLOAN Professor of Political Science, The University of Oklahoma
Norman, Okla.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Swift and Smooth at 92
"Them that can, should do," is the creed of Rosalie Ulrich Rosenberger of Rockville Centre.
Mrs.
Rosenberger will celebrate her 92d birthday next Sunday, if she has the time.
Much of her time now is spent dancing.
She recently won three first places in a ballroom-dance championship.
Until a few months ago she was a practicing lawyer.
"I decided to stop at 91," she said.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
JURIED ART SHOW
The Mamaroneck Artists Guild will open its 35th National Open Juried Exhibition on Friday at Westchester Community College in Valhalla.
While the guild's new quarters at 2120 Boston Post Road have more exhibition space than the old gallery on Larchmont Avenue, there is still not enough room for the 248 works in the show.
Paintings and sculpture in all media, fiber, jewelry and ceramics by artists from Florida to Alaska will be judged for 29 awards of $50 to $300.
Two receptions are to be held, one from 6 to 9 P.M.
Friday, the other from noon to 3 P.M. when the show closes on June 30.


The World; Displaced in the Gulf War: 5 Million Refugees
IT took Iraqi soldiers less than four hours to cross the 80 miles of desert between Iraq and Kuwait City last Aug. 2.
But that audacious move set off what is now regarded as one of history's largest, fastest and most widespread migrations.
While the statistics are still being compiled, American officials and representatives of international relief organizations estimate that at least 5 million people from more than 30 countries have been temporarily or permanently displaced by the crisis in the Persian Gulf.
"A world on the move" was how one State Department refugee official characterized the migration.
Another official, Princeton N. Lyman, Director of the State Department's Bureau for Refugee Programs, called the displacement, particularly the phase caused by Iraq's civil warfare this spring, "a human tragedy of tremendous proportions." And Court Robinson, a senior research analyst at the U.S.
Committee for Refugees, a private, nonprofit group in Washington, said, "This was surely one of the largest migrations ever; I can't recall an instance in which so many people moved in so short a time."


Travel Advisory; Oslo Airport's New Shops
A shopping center opened last month in the international hall at Oslo's Fornebu Airport expands the selection of goods beyond the traditional tax-free items such as wines and liquors, tobacco, perfume and cosmetics.
It also has departments for men's and women's clothing, baggage, music and electronics, glass, jewelry, watches, toys and games, and textiles and similar handicrafts.
A separate stand sells a selection of Norwegian souvenirs.
Norwegian officials say that the traditional tax-free goods are among the lowest priced in Europe.


Making a Difference; Energy's 'Cadillac Asset'
Companies have raised billions of dollars on Wall Street by issuing notes backed by everything from mortgages and credit-card receivables to car loans.
But the $616 million that the Mesa Limited Partnership borrowed last week marked the first time big insurers and other creditors accepted investment-grade notes secured by oil and gas reserves.
The unorthodox deal was orchestrated by Michael E. McMahon, a Salomon Brothers managing director and one-time banker to the energy industry for Morgan Guaranty Trust.


Father-Daughter Duo Begins Norfolk Festival
THE Norfolk Chamber Music Festival is about to begin its second half-century, as the Yale Summer School of Music takes up residence on the 70-acre Ellen Battel Stoeckel estate.
From July 6 through Aug. 6, student recitals are given in the Music Shed on Thursday evenings at 7:30 and Saturday mornings at 10:15.
But the Friday and Saturday programs have made the festival a major cultural event, since they feature faculty and guest artists like the Tokyo String Quartet, the Golub-Caplan-Carr and the Frankl-Pauk-Kirshbaum Trios, the flutist Samuel Baron, the clarinetist David Shifrin and the conductor Gustav Meier.
The festivities begin on Thursday afternoon at 4 with a benefit recital by the father-daughter, violin-piano duo of Claude and Pamela Frank, their program listing the Beethoven "Kreutzer" along with Sonatas by Mozart, Debussy and Schubert.
Mozart pops again at most of the other recitals, including the annual Sunday afternoon concert by the Litchfield County Choral Union, on July 28 at 3 P.M., with Jonathan Babbitt conducting two Mozart settings of "Regina Coeli" plus the Grand Mass in C minor (K. 427).
There also seems to be a Brahms-Dvorak festival within the festival, with nine major works on the schedule.


More Young Single Men Hang Onto Apron Strings
The rent is low and the utilities are free.
There is hot food on the table and clean socks in the drawer.
Mom nags a little and dad scowls a lot, but mostly they don't get in the way.
And there's money left at the end of the month for the car payment.
Young, single men say these are the reasons they are living with their parents in record numbers, burrowing into the familial nest far more often than women of the same age and circumstance.


The Pitfalls of Working With 'Informal Investors'
To The Editor:
In "Finding Money to Start a Business" (June 2), Mary Rowland sells venture capitalists short.


W.L.A.F. Players Left Hanging by the Phone
Now that the World League of American Football has concluded its inaugural season, the moment that most of the 400 players on the league's 10 teams have been waiting for has arrived.
Will they be receiving phone calls from National Football League teams?


Burned Out in Bergenfield
TEENAGE WASTELAND
Suburbia's Dead End Kids. By Donna Gaines. 262 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $23.


Kennedy Center Hoots and Hollers
Texans have been sowing their political oats in Washington for a number of years.
Now they are riding high at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, where an 11-day Texas Festival of music, dance, theater and film is in full swing.
On a typical evening visitors can opt for the Fort Worth Ballet in the Eisenhower Theater, the Dallas Symphony Orchestra in the Concert Hall or Western swing with the Texas Tornados in the Terrace Theater. 'Giant' and Bluegrass
One night this week -- the festival started on Tuesday -- folks were two-stepping to the music of the Dixie Rebels on the Roof Terrace after a screening of an archival print of the movie "Giant," while another crowd gathered to listen to the bluegrass and country music of the Dixie Chicks and Larry Gatlin and the Gatlin Brothers in the Roadhouse Cafe.


An Object Lesson From the 18th Century
To The Editor:
Boeing will protect its interest in the new 777 since it will show Japanese partners plans for only those parts each is to make (Business Diary, May 26).
But, you ask, what will the partners show each other?
A good question with a classic answer.
In 1729, Chester Moor Hall conceived an idea for correcting color fringes in the one-piece lenses of the day.
He would use two matching lenses with different refraction character and hope the combination would solve the problem.
Since Hall didn't grind lenses himself, he sent specifications for one lens to a London optician and specifications for the other lens to an optician in a different part of London.
Little did he realize that both opticians would subcontract the jobs to the same third optician.
That fellow recognized the fit and purpose of the two new lenses and blabbed it all over London.
The Dollands, John and Peter, were on their toes and made off with a patent on the idea, which is still in use today.
Poor Chester Hall got nothing for his ideas.
KENNETH G. CATLIN  La Jolla, Calif., June 1


Bridge
By a weird coincidence, the highest-ranked officials of three major bridge organizations resigned in April after serving exactly four and a half years.
All three had faced personal and organizational problems that could not easily be solved.
The first to depart was Denis Howard of Australia, the president of the World Bridge Federation.
His managerial style had brought him into conflict with senior officials of the European Bridge League, the largest of the zonal organizations.
He made a graceful exit when his work as a lawyer required him to move to Hong Kong.
He was succeeded by Ernesto D'Orsi of Brazil, an administrator of proven ability who is expected to pour oil on some troubled waters.


Headliners; Running on Enmity
They are not formally running against each other, but Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder (top) and Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia have for years jostled and elbowed each other for possession of the inside track.
It started in 1977 over which of the two Democrats would run for lieutenant governor first, and now they both have eyes on the White House (Mr. Wilder may run next year).
Their latest run-in is over a tape of a telephone conversation Mr.
Wilder had with a supporter more than two years ago, in which he gloated over newspaper articles containing embarrassing allegations about Mr.
Robb's private life.
When it became known that Mr.
Robb's aides had a copy of the tape, the making of which was illegal, Mr.
Wilder asked for a Federal investigation.
Mr.
Robb, who may run for President in 1996, said that he didn't know where the tape came from, that he had recently destroyed it, and that he had suspended three aides.
Pressed by party leaders to stop fighting, the two have agreed to meet this week.


Travel Advisory; Train Tour of Cognac Country
Remy Martin, the Cognac producer, has installed a small sightseeing train on its 45-acre domain of Merpins, two miles outside the city of Cognac, France, in the heart of Champagne country.
The train carries up to 55 passengers on an hourlong journey through the vineyards, to a workshop where the oak barrels for the Cognac are made by hand, and into one of the 42 storehouses where 6,000 barrels of the brandy are being aged.
A guide gives commentary along the way and audiovisual presentations explain the production process.
The tour, about $1.80 a person (free for those under age 18 and older than 60), is given daily except Sunday until Oct. 15, from 9:30 to 11:30 A.M. and 2 to 5 P.M.
Reservations for the tour must be made by calling the Domaine de Merpins at 45.35.16.16.


Remember Those Who Almost Changed China; 'Socialism Is Rubbish'
To the Editor:
Your June 4 news analysis on hard-liners in China indicates that Li Peng and his associates will be around a long time, but I shall not count on one of the reasons given (by "a senior Chinese official"): "Even after the old men die, those who are now in power will remain a while, and they think the same way: They were all trained in the Soviet Union in the 1950's, and they really believe in central planning."


Technology; Radisson Proposes Twin Hulls for the Queasy
Radisson Hotels International, the Minneapolis-based hotel chain, has decided to get into the $4.6 billion cruise business, and it is doing so in dramatic style.
It has commissioned a 410-foot catamaran-like ship whose novel design is expected to reduce seasickness.
Diamond Cruise Ltd., a joint venture that includes Japanese, Finnish and American investors, began building the vessel, the world's largest twin-hull ship, in January in Finland.
The ship will be managed by Radisson, a unit of the Carlson Companies, one of the largest private companies in the United States.


Promise Is Seen in New AIDS Drugs
Several new experimental drugs hold promise for improved treatment of two of the infections from which AIDS patients most commonly die, researchers said at a meeting here today.
The eventual promise of the experimental drugs is greater safety and options for many people with AIDS who cannot tolerate the standard treatments for the two common complications.


Culture In the Capital
To the Editor:
The greatest virtue of Michael Kimmelman's article is that he actually took the time to see the exhibition and read its catalogue.
Typically, most Washington pontificators about the show appear to have done neither.
Even a modest tour of the galleries makes apparent how overblown, intolerant or merely silly are most of their claims.
As ever in Washington, culture is strictly a brief refresher from politics.
Thus the great innovation of the exhibit is not that it is "politically correct" but that it does not hew to the "correctly apolitical" mode preferred by most art museums here.
FREDERICK N. BOHRER  Assistant Professor of Art, Hood College Frederick, Md.


Salvadorans Know What They Are Fleeing
As a church volunteer who works with Salvadoran refugees on Long Island, I am alarmed by the claims of Harry Katz in his May 12 letter "Why Salvadorans Flock to the Island."
Mr.
Katz states that the Salvadorans he knows have come to the United States for "economic, not political reasons. Their objective is simple. They want to make money." Yet this view fails to acknowledge the role of institutionalized political repression in the exodus of hundreds of thousands of Salvadorans from their tortured nation.


Miss Dodge Wed To Daniel Sears
Robin dePeyster Dodge, a merchandiser for Polo/Ralph Lauren in Boston, and Daniel Hale Sears, a freelance marketing consultant there, were married yesterday at Emmanuel Episcopal Church in Manchester-by-the-Sea, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
George I. Hunter officiated.
Mrs.
Sears, 27 years old, is the merchandise coordinator in the Northeast for the Lauren concern.
She graduated from Vassar College.
She is a daughter of Violetta Dodge of Boston and the late William L. Dodge.
Her father was a consultant on product development for toys and games.
Her mother is the chairwoman of E Co.
Products, a maker of recycling materials.


Ms. Hume Weds Peter G. Morse
Nancy Clayton Hume, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Hume of Boston, was married yesterday in Darien, Conn., to Peter Granville Morse, the son of Arthur H. Morse 2d of Newport Beach, Calif., and Diane Douglas Browning of La Linde, France.
The Rev.
Michael Crimmins performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
John's Church.
Mrs.
Morse, 30 years old, is an actress performing in the play "The Substance of Fire" at Playwrights Horizons in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a professor of surgery at Tufts University and the chairman of the department of surgery at New England Baptist Hospital in Boston.


New Basement Doors
HOUSES with basement doors installed below ground level typically have wood doors covering the openings at the tops of the door wells.
Replacing those doors with metal ones adds beauty, security and safety
Basement-door kits cost $200 to $300, depending on whether the kit includes sloping metal sidewalls to support the door.
If the well has sloping masonry sidewalls in good condition, a kit with metal sidewalls is not needed.


Christy Topper Wed to John P. Tracey
Alice Christy Topper, a sales representative for Paychex, a payroll-managing concern in Kenilworth, N.J., was married yesterday to John Patrick Tracey, an account executive in Princeton, N.J., for G. R. Murray, an insurance agency.
The Rev.
William Strain officiated at Calvary Episcopal Church in Summit, N.J.
Mrs.
Tracey, known as Christy, is 28 years old and a graduate of Skidmore College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Topper of New Providence, N.J.
Her father is an account executive with Targeted Media Inc., a New York-based subsidiary of Time Inc.
Magazines.
Her mother is a medical office manager in New Providence.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Edberg to Play in Final


A Year to Give Beets Another Chance
RED eggs were the standard fare at picnics during my childhood.
The eggs were hard-boiled and refrigerated in a bowl of pickled beets for several days.
By picnic time, the eggs had absorbed the color of the beets and some of their flavor.
These pickled eggs were (and still are) a Pennsylvania Dutch tradition.
Hardly anyone plants or grows beets these days, and it is a pity.
This fat little root vegetable has a unique flavor, and when it is cooked and served just right, it can be quite delicious.
The beet has gone into such a decline that the National Garden Bureau has declared 1991 as the Year of the Beet to give it a boost.


Visitation


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
A VERY CLOSE CONSPIRACY  Vanessa Bell and Virginia Woolf.
By Jane Dunn.
Little, Brown, $29.95.


Census Study Finds Drop in Homeownership
Many Americans, particularly minority members, young people and single people, are finding the prospect of owning their own homes more and more elusive as homeownership rates decline in the country, a Census Bureau study says.
The report found that 57 percent of all owners and renters could not afford to buy a median-priced house with a conventional, 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage.
Thirty-six percent of current homeowners and 91 percent of renters did not qualify for such a property.


South Carolina Inquiry Is Over, Report Says
A Federal grand jury that rocked the South Carolina Statehouse with more than two dozen indictments has completed its work, a newspaper reported today.
After more than a year of investigating statehouse corruption, the panel finished its work last month, The Greenville News reported, citing sources it did not identify.
The grand jury has indicted 27 people, including 17 current or former legislators and five lobbyists since a Federal Bureau of Investigation undercover operation became public last July.
Most have pleaded guilty, five were convicted at trial and five await trials.


Frank Auerbach, Hermit of Camden Town
Seven days a week, 10 hours a day, for nearly 40 years, Frank Auerbach has labored in his studio in the lower-middle-class area of London called Camden Town.
For him, a German immigrant, orphaned by the Nazis and deeply indebted to his adopted country, "London is this raw thing . . . this extraordinary, marvelously unpainted city."
A stretch of alley just outside his studio that most artists might find uninspiring has several times engaged his energies.
One of these paintings, a 1985 work called "To the Studios," was recently bought by the St.
Louis Art Museum, along with 67 preliminary drawings and gouaches.
The ensemble was made the subject of a small exhibition organized by the museum.


Sunday Outing; 3 Antiques-Rich Blocks in Brooklyn
On a hot summer day, Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn near Borough Hall feels like Los Angeles, with here and there a solitary stroller beside four lanes of traffic.
Except for the occasional gas station or car wash, there is little sign of habitation, and with the architectural bleakness comes a sense of isolation.
The sun beats down and there is no escape: no shade trees, not even an awning.
But at Smith Street, where the house numbers rise from the 200's to the 300's, there are three blocks where a few restaurants cluster with many antiques stores filled mainly with Victorian and Mission furniture.
Money can be spent, and thirst quenched.
Like Los Angeles
Stop at Antics, a restaurant that opened in March at No. 320.
The sign's cobalt-blue neon letters are askew, the wooden floors gleam, the walls are yellow and in the garden the tables are shaded by forest-green umbrellas.
There are thin-crusted pizzas baked in the brick oven, excellent coffee and tasty clam chowder, even though the clams are canned.
In its spareness the place looks, smells and tastes like Los Angeles.
Where did the ambience and menu design come from?
"L.A.," said Martin Granne, who, with Bill Harris, owns the restaurant.


Gloves Off Among Late-Night's Gladiators
All the other empires of network television have long since fallen.
CBS News self-destructed.
"The Today Show" slid, recovered, then slid again.
Bart Simpson took a bite out of Bill Cosby.
ABC stopped covering the Olympics.
NBC stopped covering baseball.
But one last corner of network supremacy remains: at NBC, the late-night empire is intact.
So far.


Ms. Perelman to Wed Gregory Jay Schneider
The engagement of Gloria Gail Perelman to Gregory Jay Schneider has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Moritz Perelman of Staten Island.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Perelmen, 24 years old, is an associate in sales and trading at Citibank.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brandeis University, where she also took a master's in international economics and finance.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, Brenda Perelman, is a special-education teacher in Brooklyn.


Francine Norz, Lawyer, Weds Joseph Tobin, Doctor
Francine Norz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin G. Norz of Paramus, N.J., was married yesterday in the Bronx to Dr.
Joseph Peter Tobin, a son of Bettie B. Tobin of Fairfax, Va., and the late John J. Tobin.
The Rev.
Leo Daly performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Fordham University Church.
Mrs.
Tobin, 27 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Fordham and received a J.D. from Columbia University.
She is an associate with the Chicago law firm of Schiff Hardin &amp; Waite.
Dr.
Tobin, 28, also a Fordham graduate, received his M.D. from Georgetown University.
He is a resident in orthopedic surgery at the Loyola University Medical Center in Maywood, Ill.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MICHAEL JACKSON  The Magic and the Madness.
By J. Randy Taraborrelli.
Birch Lane/Carol Publishing, $21.95.


An Arabesque Comeback
Arabesque Recordings, a small but significant label that made a niche for itself in the 1980's, has returned to active production after a year.
The hiatus followed the departure of Ward Botsford, its principal artists-and-repertory executive.
Arabesque began as the music division of Caedmon Records, the spoken-word label, and initially it licensed recordings from EMI and released historically important ones like early performances of Gilbert and Sullivan operettas.
In recent years, it has issued primarily its own recordings, and company officials say they will continue to concentrate on original releases.


Linda Milkowski Is to Be Married
Dr. and Mrs.
John D. Milkowski of Edison, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Linda Marie Milkowski, and Stephen Ming-Hsi Tsai, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen Wei-Lun Tsai of Palo Alto, Calif.
Miss Milkowski, 27 years old, and her fiance, 29, are management consultants at the Boston Consulting Group in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Rutgers University and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was a chemist at Merck, Sharpe &amp; Dohme in Rahway, N.J.


Unfamiliar Lincolns
A Scottish writer and editor who became captivated by the new art of photography, Alexander Gardner joined the successful Washington studio of Mathew Brady shortly before the Civil War.
When hostilities broke out in 1861, Gardner conceived the idea of producing a consecutive photographic history of the conflict; for two years, under the Brady aegis, Gardner and a corps of photographers sent back to Washington a stream of powerful images of the war.
WITNESS TO AN ERA.
The Life and Photographs of Alexander Gardner: The Civil War, Lincoln, and the West (Viking, $60) by D. Mark Katz is well researched, resting comfortably on the pioneering work of other historians, and it is exquisitely presented.
Mr.
Katz, the author of "Custer in Photographs," tracked down original Gardner prints, presented here in their somber sepia-toned glory -- the grimly littered battlefields (sometimes slightly ornamented, we are informed, by a photographer's prop rifle or even rearranged for composition's sake) as well as portraits of most of the North's celebrated personalities.
Those of Abraham Lincoln, some famous but others startling in their unfamiliarity, are possibly the best.
The author follows Gardner's career as he moonlights as a Union spy and, after the war, as he covers the manhunt and execution of the Lincoln assassination conspirators, the war-crimes trial and execution of Henry Wirz, the commander of the Andersonville prison camp, and the burgeoning westward movement spurred by the Union Pacific Railroad.
Gardner's images linger in the mind's eye long after the book is closed.


Karen MacMaster Weds P. J. Williams
Karen Joan MacMaster, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas J. MacMaster Jr. of Whitemarsh Township, Pa., was married yesterday to Patrick Jon Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifton Williams of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
The Rev.
John Fala officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Ambler, Pa.
Mrs.
Williams, 26 years old, graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University and is an associate product manager for the Upjohn Company in Kalamazoo, Mich.
Her father is a senior vice president of Merck &amp; Company in Rahway, N.J.


New Zealand Trout Run in 'Gin-Clear' Waters
They say the water has to be "gin clear" if you're going to catch trout in New Zealand, because most of the time the fishing is for trout a guide spots in the water up ahead.
So a solid night of hard rain on the roof left me pessimistic about the morning, although Marion van der Goes's ginger pancakes for breakfast improved that mood to no worse than skeptical.
Ray Grubb, her husband and the other proprietor of the Lake Brunner Lodge, drove off with me to reconnoiter a couple of possibilities, but the streams we saw were somewhere between the color of bourbon and a chocolate malt.


For Medicine, Art, And War's Victims
More than $1 million was raised for the Hospital for Special Surgery Monday at a dinner-dance in the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
James D. Robinson 3d, the chairman of the American Express Company, was the honored guest.
Later Monday, the School of American Ballet was the beneficiary of a workshop performance in the Julliard Theater followed by a dinner-dance in the school's new studios in the Rose Building at Lincoln Center.


'Lack of Location Is My Location'
Glenn Ligon's way with words -- other people's words -- is bringing him a lot of attention these days.
At the moment, the work of this 31-year-old artist can be seen in the Whitney Museum of American Art's Biennial exhibition and in a group show at Art in General, a gallery at 79 Walker Street in the TriBeCa section of Manhattan.
Five paintings will be shown in July at the Jack Tilton Gallery on 57th Street.
"Interrogating Identity," a group show that includes nine paintings by Mr.
Ligon and was initiated by the Grey Art Gallery and Study Center at New York University, will travel to the Boston Museum of Fine Arts and the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis later this year.
The "found language" that Mr.
Ligon chooses for his lush yet quietly confrontational paintings focuses on the experience of being black.
An avid reader since childhood, he selects words, phrases or short sentences that "stay in my head and have a kind of poetic resonance." They may come from a poem by Rita Dove, the writings of Zora Neale Hurston or newspaper coverage of the Central Park jogger case.
"I remember the very day that I became colored" -- a phrase from a Hurston essay called "How It Feels to Be Colored Me" -- is stenciled more than 60 times in black paint on a white ground in one work at the Whitney. (Mr. Ligon paints on doors because of the way their proportions evoke the human body.) "Passing," the title of a 1929 novel by Nella Larsen, is the repeating word in a painting to be shown at Tilton.


Caramoor Ushers In Summer
ALTHOUGH concerts are held there in spring and fall, along with educational programs, craft fairs and other activities, Caramoor still means summer to most of us.
Now the Music Festival 1991 is about to usher in another series of al fresco performances.
What's new this season?
Caramoor's biggest coup is the festival-within-a-festival that will bring Andre Previn, the conductor, composer and pianist, to the landmark estate in Katonah for three consecutive weekends: July 13-14, 20-21 and 27-28.


Ms. Greeley Wed To S. L. Parkman
Jennifer Greeley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter F. Greeley of Wellesley Hills, Mass., was married yesterday to Samuel Lester Parkman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Parkman of New York.
The Rev.
Jane P. Henderson, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Wellesley Hills Unitarian Church.
The bride, 29 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Harvard University and is an editor and sales representative at Educators Publishing Service, which produces schoolbooks in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father, who is retired, was a lawyer in Boston.


The Youth Movement Puts Jazz Back in JVC
Some 30 years ago, jazz exploded into hundreds of fragments, giving the jazz impresario George Wein a headache that has lasted ever since.
His festival -- the JVC Jazz Festival, originally the Newport Jazz Festival -- has traditionally been a giant billboard advertising the taste of the majority audience and the industry's marketing directives.
One moment crass fusionists would be celebrated, the next venerable be-boppers.
Though he tried to include splinter developments, Mr.
Wein had to face a nasty truth: the audiences he had groomed weren't interested in the new or marginal; they wanted older stars.
But recently everything changed.
Many of the elder musicians who built their reputations in the 1940's have passed away, making the new not so much an option as a necessity.
And fortunately for Mr.
Wein and his accountants, the decade-long proselytizing campaign by the 29-year-old trumpeter Wynton Marsalis has produced a heap of young, capable musicians devoted to the art of mainstream swing.


A Defector's Story
To the Editor:
Our book "Terrorist: The Inside Story of the Highest-Ranking Iraqi Terrorist Ever to Defect to the West" is the personal story of Adnan Awad, former member of the Palestine Liberation Organization, who was recruited in Iraq by a little-known but very lethal terrorist organization to carry out a bombing of a European hotel frequented by Jews.
Instead, Mr.
Awad defected to the West, providing American intelligence officials their first inside knowledge of the May 15 Organization, an Iraqi-supported terrorist group that targeted Americans and Jews.
Mr.
Awad also handed over to Western intelligence officials the first high-tech "invisible" bomb ever obtained by American intelligence.
"Terrorist" also contains a documented investigation into how American policy makers turned a blind eye to Iraqi terrorism for nine years.


Topics of The Times; A National Paper That Wasn't
It's sad to see a newspaper die, especially one with verve and nerve.
But such was the fate of The National, which expired last week after a costly 17-month battle to become the nation's first daily paper devoted entirely to sports.
The candor and irreverence that marked the paper's coverage survived even in its own obituary, written by Frank Deford, the editor.
"If it hadn't been a recession, we might have gotten some legs. The one thing we never got was legs. Gee, we're sorry it couldn't have been longer. We wanted to be an institution."
The National's talented crew provided scoops, special features and enough statistics to satisfy any sports junkie.
Even so, some think the paper was doomed from the start in a country saturated by sports coverage in print and on television.
But The National's experience was not a fair test.
Saddled with distribution problems, it penetrated only a few big markets; much of the nation didn't see it.
Circulation peaked at 250,000.
Advertisers stayed away.


Funerals for 2 Officers In New York


One Tough Bike Race
To the Sports Editor:
Of the one-day cycling races considered the most prestigious in the sport, the Paris-Roubaix, known as L'Enfer du Nord, is perhaps the most notorious.
It covers some 265 kilometers, approximately 60 kilometers being over sections of cobblestone roads dating to Roman times.
In By the Numbers, (The Times, May 5) you have incorrectly attributed victory to Greg LeMond in the 1985 Paris-Roubaix.
Frenchman Marc Madiot won his first Paris-Roubaix in 1985 and repeated this feat on April 14 of this year.
CHARLES WOODWARD  East Chatham, N.Y.


A Year to Give Beets Another Chance
RED eggs were the standard fare at picnics during my childhood.
The eggs were hard-boiled and refrigerated in a bowl of pickled beets for several days.
By picnic time, the eggs had absorbed the color of the beets and some of their flavor.
These pickled eggs were (and still are) a Pennsylvania Dutch tradition.
Hardly anyone plants or grows beets these days, and it is a pity.
This fat little root vegetable has a unique flavor, and when it is cooked and served just right, it can be quite delicious.
The beet has gone into such a decline that the National Garden Bureau has declared 1991 as the Year of the Beet to give it a boost.


BEST SELLERS: June 16, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
2
5
4
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
3
2
64
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
4
3
6
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) Inspired by his grandfather, a London vendor, a man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
5
4
14
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
6
6
7
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of two perpetrators of an insurance scam.
7
8
17
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman enables them to solve romantic problems. (LP)
8
1
VORTEX, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $21.95.) A war in southern Africa sometime in the future involves Cuba and the United States.
9
10
5
THE CROWN OF COLUMBUS, by Michael Dorris and Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $21.95.) A couple who have long disagreed about everything find understanding on a Caribbean research trip.
10 *
11
10
THE SEERESS OF KELL, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) The fifth volume in the "Malloreon" fantasy saga.
11
9
3
IMMORTALITY, by Milan Kundera. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) Through the lives of characters in 19th-century Weimar and present-day Paris, the author reflects on contemporary life.
12
18
POSSESSION, by A. S. Byatt. (Random House, $22.95.) A pair of British academics pursue the relationship between two Victorian poets.
13
4
HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT, by Whitney Otto. (Villard, $18.) The reminiscences of eight women, members of a quilting circle.
14 *
7
6
BRIGHT CAPTIVITY, by Eugenia Price. (Doubleday, $20.) Romance comes to a plantation owner's daughter during the War of 1812. (LP)
15
14
3
THE CAT WHO KNEW A CARDINAL, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $16.95.) To save a friend who is a prime suspect, Jim Qwilleran investigates the murder of a town's most despised man.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How the President and his high military commanders made their decisions during the first two years of the Bush Administration.
2
2
30
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
3
3
8
NANCY REAGAN, by Kitty Kelley. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized biography.
4
13
2
COUNSEL TO THE PRESIDENT, by Clark Clifford with Richard Holbrooke. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the lawyer who served as adviser to several generations of Democrats.
5 *
2
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
6
1
REAL PONIES DON'T GO OINK! by Patrick F. McManus. (Holt, $16.95.) A humorist's essays about life's foibles at home and in the great outdoors.
7
8
3
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) The murder of a young Orange County, Calif., woman.
8 *
5
12
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Random House, $22.) A producer's experiences in Hollywood.
9
4
5
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
10
1
BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS, by Stephen Jay Gould. (Norton, $22.95.) Thirty-five essays on natural history.
11
7
8
THERE ARE NO CHILDREN HERE, by Alex Kotlowitz. (Talese/Doubleday, $21.95.) Two brothers growing up on Chicago's mean streets.
12
14
2
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
13
6
5
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated on campus.
14
15
11
SLEEPWALKING THROUGH HISTORY, by Haynes Johnson. (Norton, $24.95.) A social history of America during the Reagan era.
15 *
12
12
IN OUR DEFENSE, by Ellen Alderman and Caroline Kennedy. (Morrow, $22.95.) How the Bill of Rights affects Americans' lives today.
16 *
9
11
A HISTORY OF THE ARAB PEOPLES, by Albert Hourani. (Belknap/Harvard University, $24.95.) A comprehensive account by an Oxford scholar.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
5
75
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
2
114
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's financial advice.
3 *
2
44
HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were.
4
1
32
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) Illustrated games.
5
1
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
6 *
4
3
LIGHT HER FIRE, by Ellen Kreidman. (Villard, $18.95.) Ways by which men can excite women romantically.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,953 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
MAO II, by Don DeLillo. (Viking, $19.95.) A dark, dazzling, discursive novel in which writers, terrorists and hostages converge to adopt one another's functions and take one another's places in the historical imagination of the world.
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The second volume -- sequel to "A Year in Provence" -- by a London advertising man who packed it all in and has been born again in the heart of Provence.
All his reasons sound like good ones.
A LIFE OF HER OWN: A Countrywoman in Twentieth-Century France, by Emilie Carles, as told to Robert Destanque. (Rutgers University, $19.95.) Rural canniness is conveyed in the voice of a peasant in this memoir, immensely popular in France, of a sharp-tongued country teacher who fought to keep the Alps unspoiled.
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) Afraid of rocking the boat, too many American Jews see themselves as guests in someone else's land, an attorney and civil libertarian argues; the solution, he says, is more chutzpah!
THE BOOK OF SAINTS, by Nino Ricci. (Knopf, $19.) A beautifully paced first novel, almost mythological in its impact, about a poor Italian mountain village and a family left behind by immigration.
FROM LENIN TO LENNON: A Memoir of Russia in the Sixties, by David Gurevich. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $21.95.) A dryly witty account of totalitarian life along the Volga offers an important lesson: the most typical horrors are not savage repressions but the routine humiliations of the average citizen.
CRIMES OF CONSCIENCE, by Nadine Gordimer. (Heinemann, Paper, $8.95.) Tricky moral ground is deftly negotiated in 11 tales of contemporary South Africa, its politics and its betrayals.


Style Makers; Michael Newell, Tie Designer
With their bold colors, abstract, geometric and floral designs and dimensions of 4 1/2 by 55 inches, Michael Newell's hand-made silk ties aren't exactly what come to mind when one thinks of "power ties."
While it's improbable that George Bush will ever don a Newell tie, the basketball star Michael Jordan has five.
"My ties are intended for men who want neckwear that is neither extremely conservative nor extremely avant-garde, but makes a strong statement," Mr.
Newell said.


Out of the Closet, Onto the Bookshelf
FOR ME THE EVOLUTION OF the gay male novel has seemed breathlessly rapid and strangely personal.
As a young teen-ager I looked desperately for things to read that might excite me or assure me I wasn't the only one, that might confirm an identity I was unhappily piecing together.
In the early 1950's the only books I could find in the Evanston, Ill., Public Library were Thomas Mann's "Death in Venice" (which suggested that homosexuality was fetid, platonic and death-dealing) and the biography of Nijinsky by his wife (in which she obliquely deplored the demonic influence of the impresario Diaghilev on her saintly husband, the great dancer -- an influence that in this instance had produced not death but madness).


Tara A. Dehler Engaged to Wed
The engagement of Tara Ann Dehler, a researcher at NBC in New York, to John Charles Schmitt 3d, a sales manager for the P. F. P. insurance marketing company in New York and Connecticut, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Martin D. Dehler of Garden City, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Dehler, 24 years old, graduated from Rosemont College.
Her father is the chairman and chief exective of the New York Bank Corporation, a holding company in Douglaston, Queens.


Style Makers; Donald Southern and Cliff Schorr, Wall-Covering Designers
And now, there's Color-Washed Canvas.
That's what Donald Southern and Cliff Schorr call their creation, an interior wall covering that is actually theatrical muslin to which up to 20 layers of transparent paint have been applied by hand.
The result is a shimmering, velvety blend of color, texture and subtle pattern.
The men paint the fabric -- they refer to their work as "controlled accidents" -- while it is on the floor, then glue it to the area to be covered.
The finished product (seamless or cut into blocks) is washable as well as removable, and can be put on painted or papered walls.


Travel Advisory; Baseball Fanfest Set in Toronto
The Metro Toronto Convention Center will be transformed into a baseball stadium theme park during the five days leading up to the All-Star Game at the Skydome, home of the Toronto Blue Jays, on July 9.
The center will house the Coca-Cola All-Star Fanfest, an event that will include a 3,000-square-foot exhibit from the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., appearances by players who will sign autographs, an all-star dugout and a kitchen selling foods from all 26 major-league parks.
Players, coaches, league officials and sports writers will take part in seminars and clinics, and fans will have a chance to test their pitching skills.
There will be a collector's corner displaying cards and memorabilia.
Fanfest will run from 10 A.M. to 10 P.M. from July 5 to 8, and from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. on July 9.
Tickets, $12, are available at Ticketmaster outlets in southern Ontario, the Ottawa region and Buffalo or by calling (416) 872-1111.


World Markets; Confusion Reigns in Tokyo
This has not been a good year for the Tokyo stock market.
But it has probably been even worse for the forecasters, economists and analysts who attempt to predict the market's course.
Tokyo had been hit by a market crash early in 1990 and again by the Persian Gulf crisis later in the year.
And it is still staggering, lagging way behind the recovery of markets in many other countries, including the United States.
The Nikkei index of 225 leading shares, which closed on Friday at 25,093.89, needs to rally 23 percent to regain its level of 30,837.99 before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August and 55 percent to catch the record high of 38,915.87 that it reached on the last trading day of 1989.


Help With High Costs
During the time they own a car, some people pay more for their insurance than for the automobile, and the cost of coverage keeps going up.
As a result, according to the American Automobile Association, more people are driving with little or no insurance, and the national estimate is that up to half of all drivers in urban areas are uninsured.
Even allowing for inflation, the organization says, new cars now cost 40 percent more than they did 20 years ago, and replacement of the parts on a new $13,000 automobile would cost about $40,000.
Ways to save include buying cars that cost less to insure, choosing cars with effective safety equipment and checking with the insurer before you buy.
Some companies offer discounts for airbags and antitheft devices.


No Pain, No Gain -- or How New York Can Resolve This Crisis and Avert Another; Small Change
In whatever shape New York City survives this financial crisis, another siege is only a matter of time if there are no fundamental changes in how the city gets and spends its money.
Most such structural reforms have been considered politically unthinkable -- until now.
The Op-Ed page asked several specialists for ways that fiscal necessity could be the mother of municipal invention.
Budgets aren't balanced with one or two good, big ideas, and even modest savings don't come easily.
Still, small change can add up.
For example, every Fire Department battalion chief doesn't need a driver; they cost $14 million a year.
Most firemen spend less than 2 percent of their time fighting fires; imagine how many housing code inspections they could make.


New Era at Shakespeare Festival
OVERCOMING the image of a dreary past and such recent calamities as a ceiling that caved in during the first night of technical rehearsals, the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival opened on June 7 under new artistic management -- and under a new roof.
Although the theater's physical restrictions remain among the festival's most conspicuous liabilities, it is a relief to come upon a director who seems to think of outdoing them instead of being done in by them.
Shafts of light, shades of color and a varied stage design bespeak promising beginnings for the new artistic director, Bonnie J. Monte, though her first staging, "The Tempest," indeed a brave if not a wise way to start a new era, is more mundane than magical.


Extremists in India Kill 80 on 2 Trains As Voting Nears End
Gangs of gunmen opened fire on two passenger trains in the tense state of Punjab tonight, killing at least 80 people, according to initial police reports from the scene.
The Indian national news agency said the toll was 110 and that bodies had been found at two sites near the industrial town of Ludhiana.
The attacks came less than five hours after polling closed in a national election that has been marred by violence and interrupted by the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, leader of the Congress Party.
Voting has not taken place in Punjab, which is scheduled to vote separately on June 22 under army protection.
Attacks Seemed Coordinated
The police in Punjab, a state under central Government rule since 1987, blamed Sikh militants for the attacks, but no separatist group has acknowledged involvement and there is no independent evidence.


Zoos May Entertain, but They Do Poorly at Preserving Species
To the Editor:
In "Resist the Anti-Zoo Zealots" (Op-Ed, May 26), Michael Robinson and Ross Simons, zoo spokesmen, assert that animal rights activists are somehow responsible for the threatened demise of the Bronx and London zoos -- both of which are jeopardized because financially strapped urban communities have decided that human priorities must take precedence over the cost of keeping huge numbers of animals in mostly reluctant and uncomfortable captivity.


A Part Of the Tradition
To the Editor:
Regarding "Robert Venturi: Gentle Subverter of Modernism"  [ April 14 ] : for the record, let me say that Denise Scott Brown is intimately involved in the architecture of our firm -- in its theory and in its design.
That she is a planner and urban designer as well does not make her less of an architect.
The architects of the Modern movement believed that just because they were committed architects they owed a responsibility to the city, too.
Denise (and I) are a part of that tradition.
ROBERT VENTURI Venturi, Scott Brown and Associates Philadelphia


Users of Cellular Phones Put Privacy at Risk for Convenience
Graduate students in electrical engineering do it for fun.
Some cellular telephone company workers do it for quality control.
And repair technicians do it inadvertently when fixing cellular telephones.
They all listen secretly to other people's cellular telephone calls.
Although illegal in many cases, the practice has become a telecommunications problem comparable to using computers to tap data bases illegally.


Jacqueline Rackow and Glenn Colton Are Married
Jacqueline Rackow and Glenn Colton, lawyers in New York, were married in New York last evening.
Rabbi Ammiel Hirsch performed the ceremony at the Pierre.
The couple, both 26 years old, received law degrees from New York University.
Mrs.
Colton, an associate at Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel, graduated from Carnegie Mellon University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Asriel Rackow of New York.
Her father is the executive vice president of Jack Resnick &amp; Sons, the real-estate development firm, in New York.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Mountain View, Calif.; A Civic Center For a Revival
A $44.5 MILLION civic center resembling an Italian piazza and part of an effort to bring business and office tenants to this city 30 miles south of San Francisco has opened.
The complex, which was completed in April, includes a 77,000-square-foot City Hall and a 46,000-square-foot community theater that arc around a 30,000-square-foot courtyard opening onto Castro Street, the main commercial strip.


Golf; Third-Round Scores Go Howling in the Wind
With "medium winds and a beautiful day" forecast for Sunday's final round of the United States Open, the 16th and 18th holes at Hazeltine National loom as easier than they were today in howling 25-mile-per-hour gusts.
Throughout the third round, none of the 65 golfers birdied the 16th hole, and only 25 parred it, including Payne Stewart, the co-leader with Scott Simpson going into the final round.
Only one, Nick Price, birdied the 18th hole.


Potato Salad and Coleslaw, With Twists
POTATO SALAD and coleslaw are the staples of summer.
Traditional creamy coleslaw with a touch of sugar in the dressing, and the classic mayonnaise-based potato salad will continue to enhance summer meals, along with some new wave interpretations of these perennial crowd pleasers.
The style, these days, in potato salad is to leave the red skinned new potatoes unpeeled.
Dressings have also changed.


Headliners; All the Way
How far will Linda Backiel go to protect a client?
How far is the jail?
Ms.
Backiel was a lawyer for Elizabeth Ann Duke, a self-described revolutionary who had been indicted on weapons and explosives charges, when Ms.
Duke decided to forgo the rigors of a trial and jumped bail.
Ms.
Backiel acknowledged speaking to Ms.
Duke by telephone before her client fled, and prosecutors believe that Ms.
Backiel was also the last person to see a note in which Ms.
Duke, addressing reporters, described her intent to jump bail.
When Ms.
Backiel refused to testify about the note before a Pennsylvania grand jury last year, a Federal District Court judge ordered her to be held in Bucks County Prison until she talked or the grand jury disbanded.
The latter came first, and last week, Ms.
Backiel was released after six months behind bars.
"I feel both the judge and the U.S. Attorney wanted to make an example of me," she said.
"I feel I made an example of myself, an example of conscience."


What Did We Want From Noriega?
PANAMA
The Whole Story. By Kevin Buckley. 304 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.95.


Frenzy in Capital Over Closing of Military Bases
Racing to meet a July 1 deadline, members of Congress are sparring with the Pentagon and one another in what has become a base-closing war of words and political nerve involving 26 states and thousands of jobs.
In nearly every case, lawmakers find themselves objecting to the very process they designed last year after complaining that the Pentagon had been too political in choosing which bases to close over the next five years.


Send Al Sikes's Agenda to Capitol Hill
To the Editor:
"Al Sikes's Grand Agenda" (June 2) is really too much of an agenda for the Federal Communications Commission.


Monique Evans, Student, Marries
Monique Renee Evans, a graduate student in English, and Chauncey Ramon Newsome, an A.T.&amp;T. administrator in Atlanta, were married in Atlanta yesterday at the First Iconium Baptist Church, where Mr.
Newsome is an associate minister.
The Rev.
Timothy McDonald officiated.
Mrs.
Newsome, 23 years old, graduated from Clark Atlanta University, where she is studying for a master's degree.
She is a daughter of Rochelle W. Evans of New York, the director of human resources for the Times Mirror Broadcasting Group, and Melvin E. Evans of Sugarland, Tex., a vice president of Shell Oil.
The bridegroom, 23, attended Morehouse College and will enter the biblical studies program at Emory University in the fall.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl E. Newsome of Tampa, Fla.
His father is a field supervisor for the Tampa Water Department.
His mother, Azoline Newsome, is an assistant supervisor at the GTE Phone Center in Tampa.


Campus Life: UMass; From the Lab Comes a Plastic Hard as Diamonds
In a small cluttered laboratory at the University of Massachusetts, Roger S. Porter holds up a poster with thin, plasticlike strands taped across one side.
Mr.
Porter, a professor of polymer science and engineering, says the opaque strips are the world's strongest fibers, 7 to 10 times stronger than steel but more flexible.


Emily E. Howard to Marry William A. H. Gantt 3d
August wedding plans for Emily Elizabeth Howard and William Andrew Horsley Gantt 3d have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Howard of Ruxton, Md.
Miss Howard, 26 years old, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and is studying at the Yale University Divinity School.
Her father is a senior partner in the Maryland law firm of Venable, Baetjer &amp; Howard.


Campus Life: Arizona; Artists Take Up Pens To Save Unusual Course
Hundreds of museum curators, wildlife photographers and artists whose skills were honed in the scientific illustration program at the University of Arizona have flooded the school with letters and telephone calls seeking to save the course from its scheduled extinction this month.
And late last week the university began fashioning a plan to spare the popular program from the budget ax, giving hope of survival for a course that has become a breeding ground for talented illustrators.


Mutual Funds; Report Card Time for Morris Smith
When stewardship of the $16 billion Fidelity Magellan Fund, the nation's largest stock fund, changed hands last year -- going to Morris Smith after the retirement of the acclaimed stock picker Peter Lynch -- most fund experts advised investors to sit tight.
Mr.
Smith had built a solid track record managing Fidelity's Over-the-Counter Fund, they noted, so it made sense to give him a chance with Magellan.
One year later, the question posed to a half-dozen experts is: What now for Magellan?
Buy, sell or hold?
The experts are split.


Campus Life: Chapman; Plan to Require Campus Residency Angers Students
Despite opposition from its student government and a protest demonstration by students last month, Chapman College will require its noncommuting undergraduates under age 21 to live in campus housing starting in the fall.
Ann Bolger, the director of residential life and acting vice provost of student life at the private college, said the policy would affect 250 students under 21 who lived in campus residence halls in the last academic year and some 300 incoming freshmen.
They will be billed about $5,000 for room and board for the year.


Baseball; Oldie but Goodie for Knight
The more things change, the more they stay the same, at least when the old-timers don uniforms and participate in events like the Upper Deck Heroes of Baseball game at Shea Stadium yesterday.
Take Ray Knight, for instance.


The Long Wait in Kuwait
In April, six weeks after liberation, the reclusive Emir of Kuwait finally announced that some of his people might vote sometime next year, "God willing." Now a date has been more or less fixed: October.
But his promise is nebulous and political freedom still a distant dream.
Martial law persists.
The press is muzzled.
Opposition meetings are banned.
And a ruling family restored to power by immense international exertion seems chiefly concerned with restoring old prerogatives.


Perspectives: Landmarks Appeals; Fashioning the Role Of a Review Panel
IN 1989, New York City's voters endorsed a change in the City Charter requiring the Mayor to appoint a five-member panel to review denials of hardship applications to nonprofit institutions by the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
The City Council was given the task of implementing the requirement with legislation by June 30 of this year.
If it failed to act, the Mayor had to set up the panel by executive order.
Hearings were held in the Council this month.
Mayor David N. Dinkins introduced a bill -- sponsored mainly by Manhattan Council members -- that would sharply limit the authority of the review panel to overturn actions of the commission involving nonprofits, usually but not exclusively religious institutions.
It would have to find that the commission's decision had "no rational basis."


Essayists Find Threads To Savor the Home Life
SEVERAL years ago, when six women met together for the first time, their only common threads were that they all lived in Chicago and they wanted to write a book together.
Their finished book, "Reinventing Home," a collection of 64 essays about their homes and the importance of their lives within them, describes the women's efforts to balance their homes and working lives.
It was published in March as a Plume paperback by Penguin Books.


Did Eastern Deserve Special Treatment?
To the Editor:
In "The Delicate Bankruptcy Balancing Act" (May 19), Harvey Miller, Eastern Airline's lawyer, argues that Judge Bertram Lifland's actions in Eastern's bankruptcy were justified by precedents set in the Penn Central Railroad bankruptcy.
Mr.
Miller conveniently forgets that Congress wrote special rules for the heavily regulated railroads.
No special provisions were ever made for airlines.
Furthermore, there was never a legitimate economic reason to argue, as Judge Lifland did, that Eastern was a national asset that must be saved.
The public welfare was never threatened since other airlines had excess capacity and could easily take over Eastern's assets.
I recognize the need to suspend creditor's rights and try to balance competing claims in bankruptcy.
However, Congress did not mandate that companies should be saved at any cost.
Judge Lifland did not suspend creditor's rights, and then try to balance competing claims.
Judge Lifland first ignored creditor's rights and then destroyed them.
This is obviously bad law and clearly violates the spirit of the code.


Design; Going for the Gold
Putting gold on the table doesn't have to cost the earth.
In a sleight of hand, new designs transform a setting with just a glint of gold leaf or bronze.


The World; Negotiating With Shamir Can Be All Give and No Take
WHEN Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir defies the United States and refuses requests from Israel's patron state and largest benefactor, he likes to shrug his shoulders and speak in tones of studied nonchalance.
So it was on Wednesday when, once again, he told Washington in essence: Send the money and mind your own business.
In a meeting at the White House with a group of rabbis early last week, President Bush suggested that he might not approve Israel's anticipated request for $10 billion in loan guarantees for new immigrant housing unless Israel agreed to freeze the growth in West Bank settlements.


Southwest Air's New Push West
The airline industry is only slowly emerging from one of its worst recessions ever, but Southwest Airlines has come through the storm almost intact and with its ambitions undiminished.
One of the only leading airlines to report an operating profit last year, the Dallas-based carrier is expediting its push into California and using its tested recipe for growth: short flights, low fares, frequent service, moderate debt and the inspired lunacy of its chief executive, Herbert D. Kelleher.
Southwest has little choice but to look west because there is little room to expand in Texas, where it serves 10 airports, and in adjoining states.
"They need a market to grow," said Jessica C. Tully, an analyst with Eppler, Guerin &amp; Turner in Dallas.
"Their main thing was Phoenix a few years ago. Now it's California."


'Member Items' Stuck in Holding Pattern
WHILE the State Legislature toiled through a record budget impasse, many not-for-profit groups waited to see if their programs would receive financing.
A little-publicized source for such aid are legislative budget initiatives commonly known as "member items."
Long assailed by critics as pork- barrel spending, member items are grants obtained by legislators outside the formal budget process.
The grants are inserted into the budget for programs that legislators deem worthy in their districts.


Talking: Contractors; Resolving Disputes Over Work
ONE of the greatest fears of a homeowner about to have renovations done is a dispute with the contractor before the job is complete.
There is a sense of vulnerability when walls are down, plumbing lines disrupted or windows removed.
Fortunately, a greater acknowledgement of this problem by public officials and industry professionals is leading to speedier and more effective resolution programs.
In addition, the recession is persuading more contractors to accept voluntary resolution methods that might have been spurned in the boom years of the 80's.
"In these difficult times they need reconciliation," said Dave Rosehill, former chairman of the mediation committee of the New York-Long Island chapter of the National Asssociation of the Remodeling Industry.
"They need to keep the good name that leads to referrals."


Dollar Is Strong Against the Franc
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
140.75
140.35
153.90
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7949
1.7715
1.6885
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1432
1.1481
1.1698
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6329
1.6710
1.7090
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$366.75
$366.00
$348.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Jody Bates Is the Bride of Daniel Bliss
Joanne Elizabeth Bates, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Harrison Bates of Lakeville, Conn., was married yesterday to Daniel Bliss, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Blatchford Bliss of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Daniel Bliss, a Congregational minister and a grandfather of the bridegroom, and the Rev.
Harry B. Adams, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony in the chapel of the Salisbury (Conn.) School.
The bride's father teaches science and history at the school and is its senior master.


DEER ON YOUR DOORSTEP
After reading Tom Horton's article "Deer on Your Doorstep" (April 28) and the letters to the editor that followed, I thought your readers might enjoy this letter, written by George Washington nearly 200 years ago, concerning the problem of deer at Mount Vernon:
"The gardener complains heavily of the injury which he sustained from my halfwit, halftame deer; and I do not well know what course to take with them, especially as the hard weather, if it continues, will make them grow more and more bold &amp; mischievous. Two methods have occurred, one or both combined,
may
,
possibly
, keep them out of the gardens &amp; lawns; namely, to get a couple of rounds &amp; whenever they are seen in, or near those places, to fire at them with shot of a small kind that would make them smart, but neither kill or maim them.
If this will not keep them at a distance, I must kill them in good earnest, as the lesser evil of the two." DAPHNE A. PONTIUS Executive Director, The Drumthwacket Foundation, Inc.
Princeton, N.J.


A Bit of Mississippi up North


Design; Heavy Metal
Come Fall, the big bold gleaming accessory will be the one to covet.
These, sculptured by Robert Lee Morris for the Donna Karan collection, are more than worth their weight in gold.


Jennifer E. Brown Wed To David W. Bondlow
Jennifer Elizabeth Brown, the daughter of Digby G. Brown of Salisbury, Conn., and Elizabeth G. Esty of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday in Salisbury to David Wayne Bondlow, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Bondlow Jr. of Darien.
The Rev.
Richard Tabor, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's father.
Mrs.
Bondlow, 25 years old, graduated from Colorado State University.
Her father is a resort consultant in Salisbury.


On Language; Impregnating the Pause
Alcibiades, the ancient Greek orator whose name is pronounced Al Si-BY-a-deez, is quoted less often these days than Al Capone.
Granted, the gangster got off a great line, cited by eminent strategic planners as well as young punks, "You can get much farther with a kind word and a gun than with a kind word alone." Alcibiades, however, is best remembered for what he did not say.
Robert Byrd of West Virginia, guardian of the United State Senate's sense of history, rose in that body recently to call our attention to the lesson of the Greek who was the ward of Pericles.
"Alcibiades is not exactly a paragon of good living," the Senator cautioned.
That's putting it mildly; Alcibiades was the paragon of recklessness and treachery, who sold out his native Athens for a place in Sparta, and is remembered for opinions like "As for democracy...nothing new can be said about an acknowledged foolishness."
But the man could speak, and he had a trick that caused audiences to hang on his words: "Plutarch tells us," Senator Byrd said, 'on the authority of the prince of orators, Demosthenes, that Alcibiades often hesitated in the midst of a speech, not hitting upon the word he wanted, and stopped until it occurred to him." Why, the Senator asked rhetorically, don't we do that anymore? "I think there can be an art in the use of a pause.
And I find nothing wrong with a pause.
It does not have to be filled in with, you know." This pestiferous phrase "betrays a mind whose thoughts are often so disorganized as to be unutterable - a mind in neutral gear coupled to a tongue stuck in overdrive."
Although grease monkeys in garages across the land would rise to raise a point of metaphoric order that overdrive arranges gears to produce greater speed with less power (the drive shaft to the wheels may turn four times for every three revolutions of the engine's crankshaft), the term has been used as a verb in the King James translation of Genesis 33:13 and is used figuratively today as a noun rooted in automotive mechanics to mean "heightened activity potentially leading to the stress of overwork."
Although the Senator's mechanical metaphor is sustainable, is his complaint sound - that is, is the ubiquitous y'know a nervous filler used by speakers too embarrassed to pause when the appropriate word does not come to mind?
Only sometimes.
We are now into wht Demosthenes, Alcibiades &amp; Company would call embolalia - em-bo-loll-ya - from the Greek for "the insertion of chatter".
Modern linguists led by Leonard Bloomfield in 1933 call these "hesitation forms" - the sounds of stammering (uh), stuttering (um, um) throat-clearing (ahem!), stalling (well, um, that is), interjected when the speaker is groping for words or at a loss for the next thought.
You know that y'know is among the most common of these hesitation forms.
Its meaing is not the imperious "you understand" or even the old interrogatory "do you get it?" It is given as, and taken to be, merely a filler phrase, intended to fill a beat in time in the flow of sound, not unlike like, in its new sense of, like, a filler word.
Similarly, I mean, as most frequently used today, has ceased to mean I mean - in its former sense of "for me, this denotes, expresses, represents," or "here is my import, sense, significance, message." Ironically, often the new sense of I mean is no sense at all: It is intended to convey meaninglessness, a habitual, annoying filler phrase synonymous with the unknowing y'know.
All three of these staples of modern filler communication - I mean, y'know, like - can be used as "tee-up words." In olden times, pointer phrases, or tee-up words, were get this, would you believe? and are you ready?
The function of these rib-nudging phrases was - are you ready? - to make the point, to focus the listener's attention on what was to follow.
And that's not all, as the man says. (As the man says, so to speak, and as it were are apologies for cliches; for some reason, the man has replaced they. These are self-conscious interjections related to hesitation forms but considered more adult.) Another purpose of hesitation forms is to dissociate yourself slightly from the harsh reality of what is to follow. (Darling, I'm, like, invovled with this other person.") It is the articulation of a slight grimace.
By the use of a beat of time filled with meaningless interjection, uncommitted people who are "into distancing" make a little space between themselves and their words, as if that lessens their impact.
Thus, when we hear one of the ubiquitous trio of hesitation forms, we should ask ourselves: is this being used as (1) a purposeful tee-up, (2) a cowardly disengager or (3) a mere filler to cover a grope?
If the purpose is to tee up or point, we should accept y'know and its friends as a mildly annoying spoken punctuation, the articulated colon that signals "focus on this." If the purpose is disengagement, we should pity the noncommitter.
If the purpose is to grab a moment to think, we sould allow ourselves to wonder: why are filler phrases needed at all?
What motivates the speaker to fill the moment of silence with any sound at all?
Now we are back to the Alcibiadean pause.
Did the sneaky Greek orator really pause because he was seeking the right word - or did he use that refreshing device, as Churchill later did, to pull listeners to the edge of their seats?
I recall a session that a roomful of image makers held with a Presidential candidate before a televised news conference.
The problem was that the candidate anticipated all the questions, knew all the answers and tended to pop out the reply the moment the question was asked; it made him seem like a smart alek; too glib.
The sage advice was this: On at least one question, cross 'em all up with a pregnant pause.
Stop.
Pause a moment or two - like maybe three whole seconds; driving sound-bite specialists crazy with the waste of costly newtwork time - as if the question caused the interviewee to think his position over.
No need for well, y'know, I mean or any such filler, though a thoughtful hmmm might be permissible.
It worked. Attention was paid. And the ghost of Alcibiades...smiled.


Resolving Defaults in Converted Co-ops
EIGHTEEN months after the first reports that the sponsors of co-op and condominium conversions were defaulting on their bank loans and maintenance payments, the problem has spread steadily and now involves more than 400 buildings and thousands of apartment owners in New York City and its suburbs.
Experts say the problems are being aggravated by the region's prolonged real estate slump and tight credit.
New York area lenders, reeling under steep losses from their loans to commercial developers, home builders and others, are refusing to finance apartment purchases in buildings that hold the slightest risk of sponsor defaults.


In the Clutches of the Superfund Mess
Seven years elapsed from the time the Environmental Protection Agency identified the Helen Kramer Landfill in Mantua, N.J., as one of the nation's worst hazardous waste dumping grounds in 1982 until a $55.7 million cleanup contract was awarded.
Now that work is under way, the litigation over who will pay is rapidly escalating.
The Federal Government is suing 25 companies and New Jersey is suing the same companies and 25 others.
A handful of these defendants have sued 239 other parties they say are responsible for most of the waste, including Philadelphia and other municipalities.
And most everyone is also suing their insurance companies.
Long delays, regiments of lawyers, blizzards of documents, a widespread sense of being unfairly singled out to shoulder others' responsibilities -- this is life in the clutches of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, better known as Superfund.
And that's when things are going smoothly, as they have by most accounts at Helen Kramer.


CRIME
The year is 1892 and life is rowdy in Fort Smith, Ark., which lies just at the edge of the Indian Nations.
In the courthouse, Judge Isaac Parker is working on his record as the hangingest judge in the West.
Down by the freight yards, the bordellos are doing their usual brisk trade, and over in the Nations, "life is cheaper than a ten-dollar goat."
The whole town is shocked, nonetheless, in THE SEARCH FOR TEMPERANCE MOON (Donald Hutter/Holt, $22.50), Douglas C. Jones's big and beautiful western mystery, when someone guns down Temperance Moon, known by legend as the Outlaw Queen. ("She called the dance," one mourner says by way of tribute. "She was smart.") The citizens quiet down somewhat after blame falls on the victim's shiftless brother-in-law.
But that doesn't satisfy Jewel Moon, Temperance's daughter and the proprietor of a "society parlor" that is considered "the class of Fort Smith sin." Jewel hires Oscar Schiller, a former marshal whose steady and thoughtful research into the Outlaw Queen's past is less a manhunt for her killer than the detective's personal quest for reasons why the older, wilder West had to die.


Olympics To Return To Asia In 1998
The Japanese city Nagano was selected this evening by the International Olympic Committee to be the host of the 1998 Winter Olympics, defeating Salt Lake City by four votes.
Aosta, Italy, was eliminated in the first round of voting followed by Jaca, Spain, and Ostersund, Sweden.


Man Guilty in Brooklyn Shooting That Killed Girl Sleeping in a Car
A former minor-league baseball player, charged with killing a 9-year-old Brooklyn girl last July in the first of a series of shootings of children by stray bullets that shocked New York City last summer, was convicted of manslaughter yesterday.
The jury deliberated for six days in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn before finding Dorian Gray Daughtry, 23 years old, guilty of killing Veronica Corales.
The girl was struck in the head by a bullet when she was asleep in her family car, waiting to be carried upstairs to her home after an outing at an amusement park in New Jersey.


Guidebooks
To the Editor: Librairie de France (610 Fifth Avenue, New York City) claims -- on its bags -- to be America's Leading Sellers of Michelin Travel Guides and Maps.
It also charges $8.95 for some Michelin maps that have a recommended retail price of $6.95.
Some of these are 1983 editions of maps that Michelin updated in 1989.
When I discovered this overcharging and phoned, thinking it was a simple error, I was told that it was their policy to charge well above recommended retail price for some products; they did not give refunds and they held to the motto caveat emptor.


Berlin Wall Guards Accused of Shooting Escapees
Sensitive to charges that crimes committed by the ousted East German Communist Government are going unpunished, German prosecutors have announced the arrests of four former border guards in the shooting of the last people who tried to flee before the Berlin Wall fell.
The guards, who were detained on Friday, are charged in the death of Chris Geoffroy, a 20-year old waiter, and the wounding of a companion, Christian Gaudian, who were fired upon as they tried to dash to West Berlin on the night of Feb. 6, 1989.
Nine months later, rebelling throngs in East Germany forced the Government to open the wall that had divided the old German capital since 1961.
Border guards sometimes joined in the ensuing celebrations.


A Fall Wedding For Ellen Iseman
Joseph S. Iseman of Rye, N.Y., and Paris and Marjorie Frankenthaler Iseman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ellen Marjorie Iseman, to Trevor Quaid O'Neill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles K. O'Neill of Greens Farms, Conn.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Iseman, 36 years old, is a vice president for corporate affairs at the American Express Company in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father, a former president of Bennington College, is of European counsel in Paris to the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
Her mother is a freelance magazine writer.
Mr.
O'Neill, 39, is a lawyer in private practice in Westport, Conn.
He graduated from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in forestry and a J.D. degree from Yale.
His mother, Cornelia Rockwell O'Neill, is a librarian at the Pequot Library in Southport, Conn.
His father is a historical writer.


Iwona Jeske Is Married
Iwona T. Jeske, a daughter of Mrs.
Kazimierz J. Jeske of Chicago and the late Mr.
Jeske, was married yesterday to Michael R. DuPont, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold DuPont of Middletown, N.J.
The Rev.
Daniel F. Montalbano officiated at Queen of All Saints Roman Catholic Church in Chicago.
Both graduated from Loyola University of Chicago.
The bride, 28 years old, has a Ph.D. in physiology from Northwestern University and is a fellow in neurobiology at Cornell University.
Mr.
DuPont, 29 and a graduate of the John Marshall School of Law, is an associate at the Red Bank, N.J., law firm of McKenna, Liska &amp; Leone.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on April 7 misstated the toll-free number for callers in New York State to inquire about the National Safety Council's defensive driving courses.
The council telephoned June 3 to point out that the number is (800) 962-3434.


Lorraine Leahy Wed To Robert Winsor 4th
Lorraine Leahy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Leahy of Freeport, L.I., was married in Westhampton Beach, L.I., yesterday to Robert Winsor 4th, a son of Mrs.
Julian Richardson of Prides Crossing, Mass., and the late Mr.
Winsor 3d.
The Rev.
George W. Busler officiated at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Winsor, 28 years old, is a secretary at CBS News in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father is an executive vice president of Cushman &amp; Wakefield , the real estate company, in New York.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Croton-on-Hudson
THE Village of Croton-on-Hudson, in the Town of Cortlandt, is set apart from neighboring Westchester communities by both geography and tradition.
Bordered by the Hudson River on the west and south and the Croton River on the east, it is built on steep, rocky hills, with panoramic water views in almost every direction.
This beauty led Clifford B. Harmon, a developer and arts patron, to buy farmland and build homes there in the early 1900's, hoping to attract artists.


Eritreans, Fresh From Victory, Must Now Govern
When this city of palm-fringed boulevards fell to Eritrean rebel forces on May 24 after a 15-month siege, its residents began celebrations that have yet to die down.
Electrical power and water were restored, the curfew was lifted and happy throngs returned to the late-night cafes that had been a notable feature of this cosmopolitan city's social life before it became a battle zone.


Where Sushi Lovers Get a Wide Selection
ABIS, the new Japanese restaurant in Greenwich, is easy to spot by its blue ceramic tile roof entrance on Greenwich Avenue.
Inside, a sense of authenticity continues, with a further suggestion of roof edging one wall, from which traditional Japanese cast-iron lanterns are hung.
A tatami mat section is recessed along one wall; you remove your shoes to enter, then sit on cushions, tucking your feet into an open space beneath the table.
The center dining area gives way in the rear to a sushi bar, where you can select from a display of fresh sea creatures and watch the sushi chefs at work. (The clear plastic wrap around each piece of fish may help retain freshness, but it isn't very esthetically pleasing.)


Melissa A. Winter Weds Peter Weiss
Melissa A. Winter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter McGowin Winter of Bethesda, Md., was married there yesterday to Peter F. Weiss, a son of Mr. and Peter E. Weiss of Holyoke, Mass.
The Rev.
John C. Haughey officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Little Flower.
The bride, 25 years old, is a student at the School of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
She and the bridegroom, 25, are 1988 graduates of Trinity College in Hartford.
The bride's father, who is retired, was an art antiques appraiser in Washington.


RECORD BRIEFS
Rod Stewart: 'Vagabond Heart'
Warner Brothers 9-26300; CD and cassette.


Remember Those Who Almost Changed China; Sister Shen's Marriage
To the Editor:
"Kunming Journal: China's Disabled Get Helping Hand in High Places" (news article, May 30) implies that China is becoming more accepting of its disabled population.


Dinkins in Agreement on Wage Tax
The Dinkins administration and the City Council agreed yesterday to seek a $335 million increase in the city personal income tax -- raising its top rate to 4.5 percent, the highest in years -- to help balance New York City's budget for the fiscal year that starts July 1.
The increase from the current rate of 3.91 percent, which requires approval by the State Legislature, would take the place of a range of other tax proposals by Mayor David N. Dinkins, including a nickel-a-gallon gasoline tax, that drew little support in Albany.
Mr.
Dinkins and the Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, plan to go to the capital on Tuesday to lobby for the higher tax.


Campus Life: Texas; Smoking Banned But Divestiture Is Rejected
Until this month, Lucy Glenn- Morra thought her job as a manager of the Cactus Cafe, a University of Texas coffeehouse and bar, smelled.
"When I got home from work, my clothes and my hair smelled like cigarette smoke, and there was nothing I could do about it except to take a shower," said Ms.
Glenn-Morra.
She contended that the cafe, a popular campus gathering place, was the smokiest spot at the university.


Review/Rock; Ritual Music From Africa, With Blood
In the weeks before La Fura dels Baus, an all-male experimental performance troupe from Barcelona, descended on New York as part of the New York International Festival of the Arts, advance word likened their performance to a "Mad Max" film or an Ozzy Osbourne concert.
Patrons were advised to wear old clothes to the performance site (Stage G at the Kaufman-Astoria Studios in Astoria, Queens) where they would be sloshed with animal entrails, blood and water and threatened by actors wielding chainsaws.
Primal emotions would be engaged, especially fear.
But although "Suz/o/Suz," which has the last of its four performances this evening, does evoke violence, chaos and irrationality, the hourlong performance is really a structured music-theater ritual that is more beautiful than terrifying.


No Pain, No Gain -- or How New York Can Resolve This Crisis and Avert Another; ALBANY-CITY SWAP
In whatever shape New York City survives this financial crisis, another siege is only a matter of time if there are no fundamental changes in how the city gets and spends its money.
Most such structural reforms have been considered politically unthinkable -- until now.
The Op-Ed page asked several specialists for ways that fiscal necessity could be the mother of municipal invention.
The "two New Yorks" are headed for bankruptcy.
Continuing their current policies would, in the next four years, produce cumulative deficits of $13 billion for the state and $16 billion for the city.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Valenzuela's Early Signs
FERNANDO VALENZUELA, who is on the California Angels' disabled list because of heart problems, had tests four years ago that revealed heart irregularities, it was reported yesterday.
The left-handed pitcher had a routine treadmill test in September 1987 that showed irregularity in his heart rate, The Orange County Register reported.
Valenzuela remained on the active list with the Los Angeles Dodgers, and his treadmill tests from 1987 to September 1990 showed a consistent heart rate.
But before he joined the Angels on June 4, Valenzuela had a routine electrocardiogram that revealed some abnormalities, said team physician JULES RASINSKI.
Angels spokesman TIM MEAD said the physical had found "possible cardiac changes" in Valenzuela.
The 30-year-old left-hander was still signed to a one-year contract with an option for 1992.
He started two games but lost both, giving up nine earned runs in less than seven innings.
On Thursday, he went to St.
Joseph's Hospital in Orange to have a treadmill-thallium scan.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My bathroom ceiling is drywall, and was originally sprayed with a textured finish.
Each year, a small patch of this paint peels off, exposing unfinished drywall.
I scrape off the loose material and then prime the bare areas with BIN before repainting.
The next year, a different section peels.
I am now going to redecorate the bathroom and would like to start by redoing the ceiling.
What would you recommend to remove the textured finish, and what kind of primer should I then apply?
A.
Most such paints can be removed with a heavy-duty semipaste paint remover.
That will be quite messy, and so make sure to cover everything.
Wear goggles to protect the eyes and appropriate clothing to protect the skin.
Brush on the remover in thick layers with no brushing back and forth, and then scrape off the softened goo with a dull scraper.
Prime with a coat of the same shellac-based sealer you used before, like BIN or Enamelac.


Divided They Fell
MODERN AMERICAN RELIGION
Volume Two: The Noise of Conflict, 1919-1941.
By Martin E. Marty.
Illustrated. 464 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. $27.50.


Quake Jolts Soviet Georgia
A strong earthquake struck a mountainous region in the southern Soviet Union today, killing at least six people and leveling villages, officials said.
Less destructive temblors also hit Japan and the South Sandwich Islands.
The Soviet earthquake took place near an area that was struck by a quake in April that left more than 100 people dead and 100,000 homeless.
Specialists classified today's quake, which registered 6.3 on the Richter scale, as an aftershock from that April 29 temblor, which registered 7.0.


Herbert O. Reid Sr., 75, Lawyer Who Taught Many Black Leaders
Herbert O. Reid Sr., a prominent civil rights lawyer and a longtime adviser to former Mayor of Washington, Marion S. Barry Jr., died of prostate cancer on Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 75 years old.
Mr.
Reid, who served on the faculty of the Howard University School of Law for 41 years, also taught many of today's black leaders, including the Governor of Virginia, L. Douglas Wilder, and the current Mayor of Washington, Sharon Pratt Dixon.


Great White Way Still Shimmers
To the Editor:
The Tony Awards held last Sunday highlighted one of New York's continuing success stories: Broadway is and has always been a beacon for actors, writers, producers, directors, musicians and dancers from all over the world.
While in a given year any individual, including the Times critic Frank Rich, may judge the lights on Broadway to be "dimmer" or "brighter"  [ "The Great Dark Way: Slowly, the Lights Are Dimming on Broadway," June 2 ] , it's well to remember that the marquees always shine more brilliantly here than anywhere else.


INSIDE
Working to Bargain Grandly
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev stepped up his efforts to win foreign aid, but said "nobody's going to put anyone on his knees" when he meets with leaders of seven major industrial countries next month.
Page 8.
Kuwait Condemns 6 More


Ms. Futter Weds William D. Cohan
Deborah Gail Futter, a senior editor at Bantam Books, and William David Cohan, an associate at Lazard Freres, were married last evening at the Cosmopolitan Club in New York.
Rabbi Alexander Schindler officiated.
The bride, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in creative writing from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Futter of Port Washington, L.I., and the sister of Ellen V. Futter, the president of Barnard College, who was her matron of honor.


South Africans Take Look At Field They Hope to Join
No sooner had William Legolie and Cedric van Wyk arrived in New York from Cape Town on Friday than they asked their host to take them straight to Randalls Island, where they hoped to catch the 100-meter duel between Carl Lewis and Leroy Burrell in the Mobil national track and field championships.
Legolie is a former sprinter, van Wyk a former shot-putter.
Both are top officials with the South African Amateur Athletics Board, one of the three primary governing bodies for track and field in South Africa.
Legolie is a coach, van Wyk an administrator.


Sports People: TENNIS; First Set to Navratilova
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA has won the first volley in a multimillion-dollar lawsuit brought by her former companion JUDY NELSON.
Navratilova won't have to appear in Fort Worth for a deposition during Wimbledon, which starts June 24.
On Friday, lawyers for Navratilova were granted a continuance for a deposition requested by Nelson, who contends that Navratilova hasn't lived up to terms of a 1986 agreement providing that if they split up, they would divide assets accrued since they began living together in July 1984.
Navratilova sent Nelson a letter in April dissolving their relationship.


Revolving Accounts; Are Banks Going Down the Same Path As S.&amp; L.'s?
AT a time when "savings and loan" has become synonymous with "bottomless pit," warnings last week that the nation's banking system faced worsening problems had an eerie familiarity.
Here was L. William Seidman, who heads both the savings and loan system's bailout and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, once again raising his estimate of the number of banks that are likely to fail and place additional strains on the Government-backed insurance fund that protects deposits.
The "pessimistic scenario" that he called unlikely in January is now playing itself out, he said.
As many as 440 banks may fail this year and in 1992, costing the insurance fund $23 billion and leaving it with a deficit of nearly $6 billion next year.


A Stand-In For a Star
To the Editor:
With all the acclaim that has greeted the Tommy Tune musical about Will Rogers  [ "The Tall Truths of a Yarn Spinner," May 12 ] , I wonder if anyone else recalls the time when Rogers himself appeared on a New York stage in something other than the Ziegfeld shows.


Bullets and Crayons: Children Learn Lessons of 90's
With the spread of gang violence in inner cities, some schools are adapting the "duck and cover" nuclear bomb drills of the 1950's to protect children from the more immediate threat of neighborhood shootings.
In what teachers call a "gang-drop drill" or a "bullet drill," children in some schools in high-crime areas are taught to drop flat onto the floor "so the bullet would fly right across you," as one fourth grader put it.


Miss Ambrosino To Marry in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Paul Ambrosino Jr. of Englewood, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Victoria Kron Ambrosino, and Thomas Eugene Byrne 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Byrne Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
Both are Denison University graduates.
Miss Ambrosino, 28 years old, is an advertising associate at Colgate-Palmolive in New York.
Her father retired recently as the president of A.C.
Chevrolet, founded by her late paternal grandfather in Jersey City.


Tech Notes; New York's Ambulatory Stage
Outdoor performances by the Metropolitan Opera and the New York Philharmonic this summer will feature a portable stage that the music companies say will greatly improve the accoustics for the audience and musicians alike.
The $3 million stage, which was used for the first time last August at the Metropolitan's final outdoor performance of the season, was developed in the past decade by FTL Associates, a New York architecture firm, and Jaffe Accoustics Inc., sound consultants.


Spain
To the Editor: My wife and I recently returned from Europe where we spent eight days in Spain.
On our first sightseeing day in Barcelona, we were both mugged and robbed on a busy street with unconcerned citizens looking on.
Neither of us were harmed but we suffered the trauma of a personal assault.
We lost a full day of our trip making arrangements for credit cards and other documents.
Our camera equipment and photos were also gone.
Upon returning home and being asked about the Spanish portion of our trip, we related our robbery experience including how nice the Barcelona police in the Oficina de Turismo were.
Of the six couples we know who have recently visited Spain, four had been mugged and three of those eight people required medical attention.


Olympics; Flag-Waving Revelers Savor Olympic Victory
Piety, perseverance and, yes, plenty of yen paid off for Nagano, as the famed temple town in central Japan staked its claim on the 1998 Winter Olympics.
Thousands of elated Nagano boosters crowded the city's guardian temple, Zenko-ji, in a predawn rally today to celebrate the victory over Salt Lake City and three other host hopefuls.


Wall Street; Tracking the Bearish Side of Weaponry
Tanks and guns may make a swell parade, but they make a subpar portfolio.
Sifting through tons of ticker tape, the Prudential Securities Social Investing Research Service finds that a blue-chip portfolio that excluded the largest weapons contractors would have sharply outperformed the market in the last year.
Suzanne Harvey, a vice president at the Washington-based service, said the "weapon free" portfolio bars only end-product contractors, not upstream suppliers.
But still, 57 public companies are excluded, including some of Wall Street's best-known generals: General Electric, General Dynamics and General Motors.


A. S. BYATT'S HAPPIEST MOMENT
Most wives and any mother lacking full-time household help would recognize A. S. Byatt's "happiest moment" and understand why it had to happen "relatively late" (at age 54).
What she experienced (". . .  the sense that I belonged to myself, and could finish any thought") is what most women wait decades to feel.
MARCIA RINGEL
Ridgewood, N.J.


Foreign Affairs; The 100 Questions
Twenty-four years ago to the week, I was handed a list of 100 handwritten questions about the Vietnam War dictated by Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and told to establish a task force to answer them.
The assignment for a young Pentagon official was a daunting one, as you will shortly understand.
We were to call our studies "History of U.S. Decision-Making Process on Vietnam Policy." The public would come to know them, fortunately, by another name.


Margaret Maher Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Maher of Garnerville, N.Y., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter Margaret Anne Maher and William John O'Meara, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. O'Meara of Bronxville, N.Y.
Miss Maher, 29 years old, graduated from Dominican College in Orangeburg, N.Y.
She is a commercial-account representative for New York Telephone in White Plains.
Her father is a first vice president of the Dollar Dry Dock bank in White Plains.


Pagnol's Provence: Fertile for Film
Sometimes it is tempting to wonder how much Marcel Pagnol's own imagination took over when, in 1957, he reminisced on his life in the early years of this century.
Could everything have been quite so idyllic for this 10-year-old in the Provence of 1905?
Were the colors of the flowers, trees and hills all so true, were emotions so uncomplicated, villagers so friendly and food so plentiful that life was no more than a procession of tiny adventures wrapped in warmth and security?
That, anyway, is how Pagnol chose to remember things.


Sunday Dinner; Chinese Fare in Elegant Settings
There are different types of Chinese dining in Manhattan.
One involves sitting in a clattering, over-illuminated Chinatown palace, sometimes at a communal table and drinking beer from squat water glasses.
This can be great fun, but at times you may be in the mood for more comfort.
Here are three elegant spots where the setting is matched by provocative food.
Auntie Yuan
1191A First Avenue, near 65th Street; (212) 744-4040 -- This stylish establishment has a strong menu of regional dishes with a few nods to Western tastes: Oriental-style salmon dishes, for example, wines by the glass and sorbets for dessert.
The stark black dining room has dramatic pinpoint lights over the food, and the tables are well separated.


Making a Difference; Going After G.E.
Nancy Cole does not think the General Electric Company brings good things to life.
Which is why, as director of Infact, a grassroots group based in Boston, she is trying to drive the company out of the nuclear weapons business.
Nuclear weapons?
G.E.?
The company that lights America's homes and fills its airwaves with soft-focus ads?
Five years ago, Infact chose G.E. as the target of a boycott because, in its view, the image the company has carefully nurtured is so at variance with its work making components for nuclear missile systems.


The Region; Bridgeport Declares It Can't Go It Alone
BY resorting to bankruptcy court June 6, this city, located in one of the wealthiest counties in the nation, issued a declaration of dependence: Bridgeport's problems were no longer its alone, but also those of its suburban neighbors and the state.
Last week the city's aldermen furthered that declaration by raising property taxes much less than needed to balance its $319.4 million budget.
If Bridgeport succeeds in filing for bankruptcy it intends to operate at a deficit, in defiance of the state financial review board that has supervised the city for the last three years.


Travel Advisory; Fast Train to Link Madrid, Seville
Spain plans to inaugurate fast, high-technology rail travel between Madrid and Seville next April with a train that will cut the journey from six hours to two hours and 45 minutes.
The train, to be known as AVE, after its Spanish name, Tren de Alta Velocidad Espanola, will travel at up to 186 miles an hour.
The project involves major renovations at stations, including tunnels in cities to minimize noise from the trains.
The work has been completed at Atocha Station in Madrid and Santa Justa Station in Seville.
In Seville, a terminal for the AVE has been built on the grounds of World Expo '92, which will take place from April to October 1992.


Lesley Stroll to Wed David Aronstein
The engagement of Lesley Jane Stroll, a senior vice president and the marketing director in the broker/dealer division of the Dreyfus Service Corporation in New York, to David Howard Aronstein, president of a software consulting firm, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Stroll of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stroll, 32 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the vice president of Food Gems Ltd., dessert makers in Queens; her mother, Muriel Stroll, is a regional sales consultant for the company.
Mr.
Aronstein, 34, attended Cornell University and now heads Finite Solutions in New York.
He is a son of Mr. &amp; Mrs.
William B. Aronstein of Manhattan.
His father is a partner in the New York law firm of Warshaw Burstein Cohen Schlesinger &amp; Kuh.
His mother, Helen Aronstein, a director of Planned Parenthood, retired as a health-education teacher at Forest Hills High School and is now a consultant on adolescent health education.


36 Injured in Bus Crash
At least 36 passengers were injured, two critically, when a bus chartered to carry guests from Dallas to a wedding in Clifton, N.J., skidded off an Interstate 40 exit ramp on Friday night in this community 35 miles west of Nashville.
The two critically injured people underwent surgery at a hospital.


Gizmos Galore: The High-Tech Way to Go
TRAVELERS have always been fascinated with travel gadgetry.
In olden times the more affluent crossed land and sea cosseted by many of the amenities of home -- traveling bars, miniature libraries and elaborate toiletry kits, all fitted inside heavy bound trunks -- and necessitating a staff of bearers.
These days the trend toward streamlined travel combined with high technology has brought about downsized, lightweight and often multifunctional devices sleek enough to slip into the side pockets of carry-on luggage.
And even though packing light remains an oxymoron for many travelers, at least the newest gadgets make lugging one's own load less taxing.


Cotton Yields Throne to Hunters and Developments
The last year Joe Bostick farmed his 5,000-acre plantation outside this town of 2,300 people, he lost $80,000.
Deer ate his soybeans, corn and wheat.
So Mr.
Bostick, whose forebears had farmed this land since it was given to them by King George III in 1769, decided 15 years ago to break with the past.
He started a commercial hunting operation.


Housing Audit in Newburgh Cites Misuse of U.S. Funds
A Federal audit has accused an assistant district attorney in Dutchess County, N.Y., and a minister of misusing up to $840,000 from two federally subsidized housing projects they managed in Newburgh, N.Y.
The audit, by the inspector general of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, said some of the money may have been used for personal expenses, but did not elaborate.
It also said H.U.D. warned the two seven years ago that they were violating its regulations but kept doing so.


Keating Won't Testify at Racketeering Trial
Charles H. Keating Jr., operator of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, will not testify at his civil trial in January, his lawyer says.
The trial, to be held in Federal District Court in Phoenix, combines a number of lawsuits, including a $1.1 billion Federal fraud and racketeering action and an attempt by investors to recover $250 million that they lost on junk bonds sold at Lincoln branches.


Track and Field; Lewis Closes Out Meet With Dazzling Leap
After inauspicious beginnings Wednesday with missing equipment, ill-prepared runways and assorted other problems, the Mobil national track and field championships concluded yesterday on Randalls Island with a dazzling array of performances, a few scary moments caused by the heat and one of the most remarkable performances of Carl Lewis's career.
In all, 23 finals were held and they completed the team that will represent the United States at the world championships nine weeks from now in Tokyo.
The first three finishers in each event automatically qualified.


Amy Schneider Is to Wed D. S. Brophy
September wedding plans for Amy Lynn Schneider and Douglas Stockton Brophy have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Eli Isaac Schneider of Cincinnati.
Ms.
Schneider, 27 years old, is a clinical social worker at the Peachtree Hospice in Atlanta.
She graduated from Ohio State University and received a master's degree in clinical social work from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a general practitioner in Cincinnati.


Postings: Bigger Plans on Hold; Range With a River View
Ten years ago, Arthur E. Imperatore bought a 350-acre strip of property along the New Jersey waterfront for $7.5 million from the liquidators of Penn Central holdings.
At the time, he thought that his plans for Port Imperial, the new city he wants to build there, would be well beyond the blueprint stage by now, but the recession and other problems upset the timetable.
Undiscouraged, the onetime truck driver and now head of A-P-A Transport Corporation of North Bergen, has put a portion of his dormant riverfront land to use by opening the Port Imperial golf driving range and minature golf course.
The property is in Weehawken, at the foot of the Palisades between Boulevard East and Pershing Road.


Musa Train, a Battery Park City Aide, Is to Marry Paul Klebnikov, a Reporter
September wedding plans for Helen Train and Paul Klebnikov, a son of George Klebnikov of New York and the late Alexandra Klebnikov, have been announced by her parents, Maria Teresa Train and John Train, both of New York.
Miss Train, who is 29 years old and is known as Musa, is the executive assistant to the president of the Battery Park City Authority.
A graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, she received a Master of Design degree from Harvard University.
Her father is the chairman of Train, Smith Investment Counsel in New York and a director of the African Development Foundation, a Federal financial-aid agency in Washington.
He wrote the book "The Money Masters." The prospective bride's mother is a publisher of books about architecture and landscape design.
Miss Train is a stepdaughter of Frances Cheston Train.


Jean L. Sherman, Researcher, Wed
Jean Lesley Sherman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Sherman of Washington, was married in Brooklyn last evening to Peter Chatzky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Chatzky of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Barry H. Greene performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Chatzky, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a researcher at Dean Witter Reynolds in New York.
Her father is the senior vice president in charge of television for the National Association of Broadcasters in Washington, where her mother, Elaine Sherman, is a librarian at the Capitol Hill Day School.


Yachting; Maxi-Boats Losing Appeal For Racing
It used to be that anyone who owned a multimillion-dollar maxi-boat was assured of sailing against the most elite racers in the world.
But the maxi-fleet has diminished in the last two years, and this season appears almost extinct in the United States.
Sailboats that once toured the maxi circuit are being sold, raced infrequently or have been turned into cruising yachts.
They include Ondine, Kialoa, Boomerang, Matador, Nirvana, Sovereign and Sorcery.


Sunday Menu; The Incredible Shrinking Beef (Smaller Cuts Are No Less Tasty)
When talk turns to making beef a condiment instead of the centerpiece of a meal, this newfangled version of beef in the Chinese mode might be what the talk is all about.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; A New Neighbor for the Maritime Center
RATTLED by the recession, two historic districts in South Norwalk are expected to draw strength from the restoration of a turn-of-the-century red-brick building next door to the debt-ridden Maritime Center on North Water Street.
But while city officials believe that converting the 22,000-square-foot structure into restaurants and shops is best for the area, several merchants and restaurateurs on the adjacent, one-block Washington Street Historic District are concerned about the competition.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
TREE OF HEAVEN
The ailanthus, the tree that grew in Brooklyn, also grows in Elizabeth Park in Hartford, where a collection of 17 champion trees may be admired by following a map distributed by the Connecticut Botanical Society.
Known as the Tree of Heaven in China, where it originated, the park's ailanthus is the tallest in the state; it measures 74 feet and has two trunks.
The park's common hoptree, whose seeds were once used as a substitute for the hops in beer, is the tallest in the nation at 34 feet with four trunks.
A 90-foot golden larch is the tallest of the 17 specimens, followed by an 86-foot hickory.
Cedars, firs, a Japanese cherry tree, European mountain ash, cypress and a rare Norway weeping spruce are among the other trees.
Ed Richardson, a volunteer, catalogued 2,300 trees of 110 varieties last year before identifying the largest of their species.


Baseball; Hayes Is Phillies' Newest Casualty
If the Philadelphia Phillies could sign Alan Alda, they'd be recognized as a M*A*S*H unit.
It's only June 15 and injuries already have forced the Phillies to recall eight players from the team's Class AAA Scranton-Wilkes-Barre club.


Jacqueline Murray, Lawyer, 71
Jacqueline Murray, a lawyer who was active in community affairs in Rye, N.Y., died on Thursday at her home in Rye.
She was 71 years old.
She died of heart failure, a funeral home representative said.


On the Street; A Summer Look Tailored to a T
The classic designer suit and the classic white cotton T-shirt, the kind that comes three to a package, are having a summer romance.
The results are both functional and elegantly cool, adding up to a low-key fashion statement that combines the expensive with the inexpensive.
The chalk-white T-shirts, with their round crew necklines and loose easy fit, can be changed often and tossed into the laundry.
The T-shirts coordinate with all the neutral colorings, as well as black and navy.
The look is pure minimalism, well groomed and uncomplicated.


Airlines
To the Editor: I read the essay on airline announcements (Travel, April 28) with amusement and understanding.
My father, the late Nate Cott, who founded Fly Without Fear because he was "plane scared," said that his knuckles turned white no matter
what
the pilot said on the public address system.
My father's attitude was: "If the pilot wants to talk, let him do the Carson show. During the flight, he should shut up and concentrate on flying."
There was one announcement that my father said would be comforting before takeoff: "Ladies and gentlemen, I want you to know that last night I spent a nice quiet evening with my wife and four kids and I went to bed at 9:30 P.M. and got a good night's sleep." CAROL SCOTT GROSS  Director, Fly Without Fear New York, N.Y.


Amanda Jane Davis Wed to Thomas Hoyne Lister
Amanda Jane Davis, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter E. Davis of Durham, N.C., was married in Durham yesterday to Thomas Hoyne Lister, the son of Thomas S. Lister of Piedmont, Calif., and Mrs.
James Mohan of Larkspur, Calif.
The Rev.
Haywood D. Holderness officiated at the Westminster Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Lister, 26 years old, is an assistant vice president of the NMB Bank in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Mr.
Lister, 27, graduated summa cum laude from Duke, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
He received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
He is to join Morgan Stanley in New York as an associate in August.


Review/Dance; Guillem in 'Don Quixote'
When a dancer's performance is hotly debated in the intermission, you can be sure that the standard is so high that the only thing at issue is a departure from the norm or an occasional fine point.
No one bothers, after all, to waste breath on an ordinary dancer, and Sylvie Guillem was nothing but extraordinary when she appeared as Kitri Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera House for the first time in American Ballet Theater's "Don Quixote."


With History in Tow


Money-Back Offer
The Denver Nuggets say any season ticket-holders unhappy with the club's opening-night performance next November, will be able to get their money back.
The pledge came during a raucous open forum last week when the majority owner, Robert Wussler, and the managing general partner, Peter Bynoe, were heavily criticized and accused of being "carpetbaggers" who led the franchise to a "catastrophic fall from respectability and credibility."
Wussler apologized for the Nuggets' 20-62 record and front-office turmoil.


Data Bank/June 16, 1991
Sales at Retail Outlets
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
1.0
--0.4
0.3
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.2
--0.1
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
78.7
78.8
78.4
Producer Price Index
Finished goods, annual rate in percent
0.6
0.2
--0.3
Industrial Production Index
Percent change
0.5
0.3
--0.6
Mfg. Inventory-Sales Ratio
April
March
Feb.
Current dollars
1.54
1.57
1.57
Auto Production
June 14
June 7
May 31
In units
118,950
110,345
89,662
Truck Production
79,362
79,807
65,168


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
The Library of Mysteries
Archibald MacLeish celebrates the order that libraries weave from the vast body of accumulated knowledge in this excerpt from an essay reprinted in "Reading Rooms," an anthology of work by American writers in praise of public libraries, edited by Susan Allen Toth and John Coughlan (Doubleday).


Social Work Students Upset at Losing Dean
SUMMER session is traditionally a quiet time, but at the Purchase campus of the Columbia University School of Social Work the unrest that began several months ago is continuing as students react to the latest administrative unheavals at the school.
Students held a rally last April to express support for the director of the Purchase program, Naomi Gitterman, an assistant dean who was the top administrator at the campus since 1983 and a popular figure among the Purchase students.
Students at the rally charged that Mrs.
Gitterman was being stripped of her responsibilities and said that they feared she would be forced out of her post.


Anne Lewis to Marry Thomas Blanton
September wedding plans for Anne Harmon Lewis, a United States Senate aide, and Thomas Simpson Blanton, the deputy director of the National Security Archive, have been announced by her parents, Mary Elizabeth Lewis and Dr.
Alfred Baker Lewis, both of New York.
Ms.
Lewis, 30 years old, graduated cum laude from Smith College and received a master's degree in public policy from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.
She is the senior policy adviser in Washington to Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan.
Her mother is the director of health at St.
Bernard's School in New York, and her father is an associate professor of clinical psychiatry at the Cornell University Medical Center and an associate attending psychiatrist at New York Hospital.


On Language; Impregnating the Pause
ALCIBIADES, THE ANCIENT Greek orator whose name is pronounced Al Si-BY-a-deez, is quoted less often these days than Al Capone.
Granted, the gangster got off a great line, cited by eminent strategic planners as well as young punks: "You can get much farther with a kind word and a gun than you can with a kind word alone." Alcibiades, however, is best remembered for what he did not say.
Robert Byrd of West Virginia, guardian of the United States Senate's sense of history, rose in that body recently to call our attention to the lesson of the Greek who was the ward of Pericles.
"Alcibiades is not exactly a paragon of good living," the Senator cautioned.
That's putting it mildly: Alcibiades was the paragon of recklessness and treachery, who sold out his native Athens for a place in Sparta, and is remembered for opinions like "As for democracy . . . nothing new can be said about an acknowledged foolishness."
But the man could speak, and he had a trick that caused audiences to hang on his words: "Plutarch tells us," Senator Byrd said, "on the authority of the prince of orators, Demosthenes, that Alcibiades often hesitated in the midst of a speech, not hitting upon the word he wanted, and stopped until it occurred to him." Why, the Senator asked rhetorically, don't we do that anymore?
"I think there can be an art in the use of a pause. And I find nothing wrong with a pause. It does not have to be filled in with
you know
." This pestiferous phrase "betrays a mind whose thoughts are often so disorganized as to be unutterable -- a mind in neutral gear coupled to a tongue stuck in overdrive."
Although grease monkeys in garages across the land would rise to raise a point of metaphoric order that
overdrive
arranges gears to produce greater speed with less power (the drive shaft to the wheels may turn four times for every three revolutions of the engine's crankshaft), the term has been used as a verb in the King James translation of Genesis 33:13 and is used figuratively today as a noun rooted in automotive mechanics to mean "heightened activity potentially leading to the stress of overwork."
Although the Senator's mechanical metaphor is sustainable, is his complaint sound -- that is, is the ubiquitous
y'know
a nervous filler used by speakers too embarrassed to pause when the appropriate word does not come to mind?
Only sometimes. We are now into what Demosthenes, Alcibiades &amp; Company would call
embolalia
-- em-bo-loll-ya -- from the Greek for "the insertion of chatter." Modern linguists led by Leonard Bloomfield in 1933 call these "hesitation forms" -- the sounds of stammering (
uh
), stuttering (
um, um
), throat-clearing (
ahem!
), stalling (
well, um, that is
), interjected when the speaker is groping for words or at a loss for the next thought.
You know that
y'know
is among the most common of these hesitation forms.
Its meaning is not the imperious "you understand" or even the old interrogatory "do you get it?" It is given as, and taken to be, merely a filler phrase, intended to fill a beat in the flow of sound, not unlike
like
, in its new sense of, like, a filler word.
Similarly,
I mean
, as most frequently used today, has ceased to mean
I mean
-- in its former sense of "for me, this denotes, expresses, represents," or "here is my import, sense, significance, message." Ironically, often the new sense of
I mean
is no sense at all: it is intended to convey meaninglessness, a habitual, annoying filler phrase synonymous with the unknowing
y'know
.
But I want to suggest that the words and phrases dismissed as hesitation forms are sometimes used for purposes other than to moan or to stammer with socially acceptable grunts while groping.
All three of these staples of modern filler communication --
I mean, y'know, like
-- can also be used as "tee-up words." In olden times, pointer phrases or tee-up words were
get this, would you believe?
and
are you ready?
The function of these rib-nudging phrases was -- are you ready? -- to make the point, to focus the listener's attention on what was to follow.
That attention-impelling function, or "articulated colon," today belongs to
I mean, y'know
and
like
, as in "That girl is,
like
, kooky; that guy is,
I mean
, gnarly --
y'know
, far out to the point of spaciness." (Do not confuse this articulated colon with another interjection, known tentatively in the linguistic dodge as "the nail-nibbling self-reassurance"; in the 70's,
O.K.?
was interjected to mean "Are you listening? Am I making sense?" Today,
y'know?
with a rising inflection often serves this nebbishistic function.)
And that's not all, as the man says. (
As the man says
,
so to speak
and
as it were
are apologies for cliches; for some reason,
the man
has replaced
they
.
These are self-conscious interjections related to hesitation forms but considered more adult.) Another purpose of hesitation forms is to dissociate yourself slightly from the harsh reality of what is to follow. ("Darling, I'm, like, involved with this other person.") It is the articulation of a slight grimace.
By the use of a beat of time filled with a meaningless interjection, uncommitted people who are "into distancing" make a little space between themselves and their words, as if that lessens their impact.
Thus, when we hear one of the ubiquitous trio of hesitation forms, we should ask ourselves: is this being used as (1) a purposeful tee-up, (2) a cowardly disengager or (3) a mere filler to cover a grope?
If the purpose is to tee up or point, we should accept
y'know
and its friends as a mildly annoying spoken punctuation, the articulated colon that signals "focus on this." If the purpose is disengagement, we should pity the non-committer.
If the purpose is to grab a moment to think, we should allow ourselves to wonder: why are filler phrases needed at all?
What motivates the speaker to fill the moment of silence with any sound at all?
Now we are back to the Alcibiadean pause.
Did the sneaky Greek orator really pause because he was seeking the right word -- or did he use that refreshing device, as Churchill later did, to pull listeners to the edge of their seats?
I recall a session that a roomful of image makers held with a Presidential candidate before a televised news conference.
The problem was that the candidate anticipated all the questions, knew all the answers and tended to pop out the reply the moment the question was asked; it made him seem like a smart aleck, too glib.
The sage advice was this: On at least one question, cross 'em all up with a pregnant pause.
Stop.
Pause a moment or two -- like maybe three whole seconds, driving sound-bite specialists crazy with the waste of costly network time -- as if the question caused the interviewee to think his position over.
No need for
well, y'know, I mean
or any such filler, though a thoughtful
hmmm
might be permissible.
It worked. Attention was paid. The ghost of Alcibiades . . . smiled.


Ziggy Marley Steps Out Of His Father's Shadow
"My generation will make the change," Ziggy Marley sings in the last song on "Jahmekya" (Virgin 91626; all three formats).
While he's talking about political change, he could also be announcing his own musical transformation.
Mr.
Marley and the Melody Makers, the group that also includes his siblings Stephen and Cedella Marley and Sharon Marley Prendergast, have finally moved beyond the shadow of their father, Bob Marley.
With "Jahmekya," the Melody Makers no longer sound like a Wailers tribute band.
They have joined their contemporaries in a sonic universe where computers and synthesizers jostle percussion and guitars, where dancehall toasting (rapping) can turn up alongside singing, and where the grooves are stark, propulsive and full of unexpected jolts.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My bathroom ceiling is drywall, and was originally sprayed with a textured finish.
Each year, a small patch of this paint peels off, exposing unfinished drywall.
I scrape off the loose material and then prime the bare areas with BIN before repainting.
The next year, a different section peels.
I am now going to redecorate the bathroom and would like to start by redoing the ceiling.
What would you recommend to remove the textured finish, and what kind of primer should I then apply?
A.
Most such paints can be removed with a heavy-duty semipaste paint remover.
That will be quite messy, and so make sure to cover everything.
Wear goggles to protect the eyes and appropriate clothing to protect the skin.
Brush on the remover in thick layers with no brushing back and forth, and then scrape off the softened goo with a dull scraper.
Prime with a coat of the same shellac-based sealer you used before, like BIN or Enamelac.


Northern Exposure


A.B. (Happy) Chandler, 92, Dies; Led Baseball During Integration
A.B. (Happy) Chandler, the jovial Kentucky politician who resigned from the United States Senate in 1945 to succeed Kenesaw Mountain Landis in what turned out to be a monentous term as the secon commissioner of baseball, died early yesterday at his home in Versailles, Ky.
He was 92 years old, and according to his family he died of a heart attack.


Concetta C. Roy, 84, Educator in New York
Concetta Cornacchia Roy, a former high school teacher and administrator in New York City who founded the Council of Supervisors and Administrators, died on Friday at the Long Island Jewish Hospital in Queens.
She was 84 years old and lived in Queens Village.
She died of Hodgkin's disease, a spokesman for the family said.


Fans Ask: Is There a Pharmacist in the House?
One week after New York's big weekend at the races, spiced with classic matchups, photo finishes and memorable performances, it seems certain that nothing is certain in the confused world of race-horse medicine.
The big issue for weeks before the Belmont weekend was Lasix, the medication that is used to control bleeding caused by overexertion in horses.
The medication is banned in New York State, so none of the 11 horses in the Belmont Stakes ran with Lasix, and none of them lost because of it.


Tourism's Cost To Shore Towns
The May 12 article about tourism at the Jersey Shore ("Shore Tries New Tack in Luring Tourists") did not mention the biggest factor affecting both the motivation of Shore towns to attract tourism and the benefits they might derive from it.
That factor is the court decision in 1989 in the Belmar case, which became the standard applied to all Jersey Shore towns.
It prohibited profit from those towns' beach operations and hence from their total tourism picture, since beach badges and concessions were their only means to collect tourism revenue.
Private businesses still profit from tourist dollars, and so does the state from road tolls and sales taxes, but the hapless Shore towns do not share in this, and their "reward" for being hosts to tourists is higher local taxes to pay the costs of services necessitated by the tourist influx.


GENE-ALTERED PIGS PRODUCE KEY PART OF HUMAN BLOOD
Using genetic engineering techniques, biologists have created pigs that produce human hemoglobin, the essential oxygen-carrying component of blood.
Experts said the achievement was a milestone in the effort to find a substitute for blood that could be used in all types of transfusions and might offer advantages over the donated blood now used.
A blood substitute could be stored for months instead of weeks, would be free of any risk of human infection, and could be transfused into anyone without the need for blood typing and matching.


Ideas &amp; Trends; A Day of Celebration for A More Active Kind of Dad
SIXTY-SIX years ago, the National Fathers' Day Committee was founded and dedicated observance of that infant national holiday "to building a democratic world through wholesome child upbringing."
The emphasis then on Dad's vital role in his youngster's formative years has been skewed in intervening decades more toward his role as the annual target of a dutiful deluge of gifts, all of them well-intentioned, some of them even useful.
That change in the tone of Father's Day observances was perhaps inevitable in an affluent, consumer-oriented society that so equates material items with love.


Miss Caldwell Wed to R. W. Collins Jr.
Elizabeth Anne Caldwell and Richard William Collins Jr. were married yesterday at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Msgr.
Timothy S. Collins, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony, assisted by Msgrs.
James G. Wilders and George F. Bardes.
The bride is the daughter of Mrs.
David F. X. Caldwell of Paul Smiths, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Caldwell.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Collins of New York.


The Nation; Minority Leaders See A Clash of Hues In a Rainbow Coalition
AS they have throughout the civil rights struggle, black and Hispanic leaders like to project an aura of solidarity -- at least in public.
Yet, bubbling just beneath the surface are political and social tensions that threaten to undermine gains made by both.
Spokesmen for Hispanic groups say that blacks, with their political strength and with a sense that the term "civil rights" is synonymous with "black," have received a disproportionate share of jobs, power and media attention, often at the expense of Latins.


Mutual Funds; Backing Away From Bonds
As a group, bond funds greatly increased their share of the mutual fund market in the last decade.
While money markets declined, taxable bond funds more than doubled and tax-free bond funds increased almost fivefold.
Most of the industry's growth in the last 10 years was created by "the conversion from savers to investors," said A. Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.
Many people shifted money from bank accounts or certificates of deposit into mutual funds.


Award for Anna Sokolow
The choreographer and dance teacher Anna Sokolow is to receive the 1991 Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival Award on July 14 at the festival in Durham, N.C.
"Ms. Sokolow infused modern dance with a new theatricality and sense of drama; her influence continues to be felt throughout the world," Charles L. Reinhart, the festival director, said in announcing the award, which carries a $25,000 cash prize.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Managing; The Learning Curve in Day Care
The Lego Creative Childcare Center, with its kid-sized entrances and a facade that seems built out of giant Lego bricks, looks like a rich kid's playhouse.
But it's run like a serious school.
Five-year-olds attend classes in music appreciation.
Toddlers dress up and give plays.
Eight-year-olds who come in after school can program computers to run motorized models of factory conveyor belts.
For these older children, there is also a quiet place to do homework, as well as instructors to help them if they need it.


Q and A
Cholera Concerns in Chile
Q.
My wife and I are planning to go to Santiago, Chile, in the fall.
Given the current cholera epidemic, what are the concerns about Chile? -- Howell Huws, New York, N.Y.
A.
In the current epidemic, cholera was first recognized in Peru in late January, and there are now several thousands of cases in Peru, Ecuador and Colombia, mainly in coastal cities, according to the Centers for Disease Control.
There are indications the disease has spread to Chile: as of early this month, 40 cases were reported in the country, with 33 of them in Santiago, according to the Pan American Health Organization, and two people had died.
The organization reports that as of late last month there were about 200,000 cholera cases in Peru, with 12 deaths, about 14,000 cases in Ecuador with 152 deaths, and 1,138 cases in Colombia with 12 deaths.
There were 11 cases reported in Brazil, but most of them were believed to have been imported from other countries.


New Basement Doors
HOUSES with basement doors installed below ground level typically have wood doors covering the openings at the tops of the door wells.
Replacing those doors with metal ones adds beauty, security and safety
Basement-door kits cost $200 to $300, depending on whether the kit includes sloping metal sidewalls to support the door.
If the well has sloping masonry sidewalls in good condition, a kit with metal sidewalls is not needed.


Mary Pat Lester and Douglas Greeff Are Married
Mary Patricia Lester and Douglas Haven Greeff were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Atonement in Quogue, L.I., by the Rev.
Nan E. Chandler.
The bride, who is 35 years old and is known as Mary Pat, is a daughter of Mary L. Lester of Bath, Ohio, and Ronald H. Lester of Kittanning, Pa.
She graduated from the University of Akron and is a vice president at the Gitano Group in New York.
The bridegroom, 35, is a son of Ernest T. Greeff of New York and the late Eugenie Haven Lee.
He is a vice president at Citibank in New York.
He graduated cum laude from Wiliams College and received a master's degree in accounting from New York University.


The Wrong Critic
To the Editor:
In her enjoyable review of Eric Lax's biography of Woody Allen (May 12), Molly Haskell links Jackson Pollock -- the American painter famous for dripping paint onto huge canvases -- with the wrong critic.
Pollock, who was derided by some of his contemporaries, was championed
not
by Harold Rosenberg (who could more properly be tied, along with the critic Thomas B. Hess, to Willem de Kooning) but by arguably the greatest 20th-century American art critic, Clement Greenberg.


Travel Advisory; Statue of Liberty: Beating the Rush
The best way to beat the crowds forming long lines to see the Statue of Liberty in New York -- 2.6 million people visited last year and 5,000 to 10,000 people a day have been flocking to the monument this season -- is to arrive early.
The Park Service recommends arriving a half hour in advance for the first ferries, which leave Battery Park in lower Manhattan or Liberty State Park in Jersey City every half hour starting at 9:30 A.M. (although the recording incorrectly says 9:15).
Because the park closes at 5:30 P.M. and the boat ride takes about 45 minutes, the last ferries from the parks to Liberty Island leave at 3:30.
Once on the island, visitors can visit a museum tracing the history of the statue's construction and restoration, and take the elevator to the top of the statue's base.
From there, the climb to the crown is 354 steps, the equivalent of 22 stories.
There are no guided tours of the island.


The World; The New Europe of 1992 Is Closer in Economics Than in Politics
BARELY one year ago, there was hardly a European leader who was not busily promoting his version of a new European order to replace the bitter divisions of the cold war.
But already those blueprints are looking tattered, as political squabbles once again prevail over dreams of regional unity.
The European Community is badly divided over how far and how fast it should go toward adopting common economic, foreign and defense policies.
There is no solid trans-Atlantic consensus about NATO's future role.
And neither the former Soviet satellites nor such neutrals as Sweden and Austria have found their places in the new Europe.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My bathroom ceiling is drywall, and was originally sprayed with a textured finish.
Each year, a small patch of this paint peels off, exposing unfinished drywall.
I scrape off the loose material and then prime the bare areas with BIN before repainting.
The next year, a different section peels.
I am now going to redecorate the bathroom and would like to start by redoing the ceiling.
What would you recommend to remove the textured finish, and what kind of primer should I then apply?
A.
Most such paints can be removed with a heavy-duty semipaste paint remover.
That will be quite messy, and so make sure to cover everything.
Wear goggles to protect the eyes and appropriate clothing to protect the skin.
Brush on the remover in thick layers with no brushing back and forth, and then scrape off the softened goo with a dull scraper.
Prime with a coat of the same shellac-based sealer you used before, like BIN or Enamelac.


Potato Salad and Coleslaw, With Twists
POTATO SALAD and coleslaw are the staples of summer.
Traditional creamy coleslaw with a touch of sugar in the dressing, and the classic mayonnaise-based potato salad will continue to enhance summer meals, along with some new wave interpretations of these perennial crowd pleasers.
The style, these days, in potato salad is to leave the red skinned new potatoes unpeeled.
Dressings have also changed.


No Pain, No Gain -- or How New York Can Resolve This Crisis and Avert Another; PRIVATIZATION
In whatever shape New York City survives this financial crisis, another siege is only a matter of time if there are no fundamental changes in how the city gets and spends its money.
Most such structural reforms have been considered politically unthinkable -- until now.
The Op-Ed page asked several specialists for ways that fiscal necessity could be the mother of municipal invention.
We've introduced privatization in city government, and the innovation hasn't been nearly as distasteful as many predicted.
In this union town, there were plenty of skeptics.
But privatization has worked -- with bumps.


Fatherhood: the Second Round
His first round of fatherhood, a quarter-century ago, was done the old-fashioned way -- as a benevolent bystander.
He and his new bride were children.
In their 20's.
With not the slightest idea of how to nurture a child or share a household.
A father, as they understood it, put bread on the table, played with his child after work and went along on family outings, leaving the hard and dirty chores to mother.
The day his baby was due, he dropped his wife at the hospital and was shooed off to work by the doctor.
Later, he got a call.
It was a boy, healthy, 7 pounds 5 ounces.


PARLIAMENT MEETS WALESA HALF WAY
Poland's Parliament approved a measure today to regulate the country's first free legislative elections since World War II, but refused to satisfy the demands of President Lech Walesa.
The legislation governing the October voting was rushed through in just two days after Mr.
Walesa vetoed an earlier draft.
Mr.
Walesa's aides said the President was not satisfied because he feared the new proposal would favor minor political groupings and lead to a fragmented Parliament.


Amy Wheeler, Student, Weds
Amy Wheeler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Wheeler of Northford, Conn., was married at her parents' home yesterday to the Rev.
Thomas P. Sullivan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Cornelius Sullivan of Westerly, R.I.
The bridegroom's mother, the Rev.
Virginia S. Sullivan, a Presbyterian minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Sullivan, 25 years old, graduated from Connecticut College and is studying for a master's degree in English at the University of New Hampshire.
Her father is an associate dean of undergraduate admissions at Yale University.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the Walnut Hill School in Natick, Mass.


Telltale Comparisons
To the Sports Editor:
When the Yankees selected Brien Taylor in the baseball draft, reports compared him to a young Dwight Gooden and a young Vida Blue.
Without having ever seen him I knew that he was black.


Making a Difference; Mr. Fife's Power Play to Win a Bigger Global Role
By seeking to buy a rival machine-tool maker much bigger than his own company, William J. Fife Jr. is trying to leapfrog his way out of the United States to become a major player on the world stage.
Last week, Mr.
Fife's company, Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc., the nation's fifth-largest machine-tool producer, announced an agreement to buy the Cross &amp; Trecker Corporation, which ranks No. 3.
The combined company would become the industry leader in the United States, surpassing Litton Industries and Cincinnati Milacron Inc., now ranked first and second.


On 'Reading' A Painting
To the Editor:
Michael Kimmelman's critical review was much too kind, especially his deference to the published exhibition catalogue.
He should have let his readers read what William H. Truettner, the catalogue editor, wrote about the melodramatic painting featured prominently in the Times review: Emmanuel Leutze's 1848 "Storming of the Teocali by Cortes and His Troops."


Miss Parisot Wed To David C. Bell
Jeanne-Mary Parisot, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Thomas Parisot of Waterbury, Conn., was married yesterday to David Carroll Bell, the son of Mrs.
Francis D. Bell of New York and the late Mr.
Bell.
The Rev.
John Regan officiated at St.
John of the Cross Roman Catholic Church in Middlebury, Conn.
Mrs.
Bell, the director of finance and personnel at the Telecommunications Cooperative Network in New York, graduated from Manhattanville College.
The bridegroom, the associate technical director at the Tisch School for the Arts at New York University, graduated from the University of Idaho and received a master of fine arts degree from Yale University, where his grandfather the late Prof.
Arthur Burr Darling, a writer and historian, taught history.


Style Makers; Maribel Garcia and Don and Caroline Simonelli, Fashion Designers
Maribel Garcia began designing clothes in Mexico seven years ago, specializing in leather and suede.
Don and Caroline Simonelli met at the Parsons School of Design and married after graduation.
Mr.
Simonelli, part of the Anne Klein Studio for several years, had a knack for coat and suit design.
His wife, who worked for Mollie Parnis, was known for dresses.
When Miss Garcia, 30 years old, arranged to move her business, Mirabel Garcia, to New York a year ago, she wanted a designer's expertise.
Her aim was to offer a collection of designer clothes at competitive prices, using the best fabrics.
The Simonellis came as a team.
"It's turned out to be fun working together," Mrs.
Simonelli said.
"Don and I find we agree on fabrics and shapes. And the surprising thing is, so does Maribel. If we don't all approve, it doesn't get done."


Commencements; First Lady Urges Tolerance at Northeastern Graduation
Barbara Bush stressed the importance of tolerance in a speech to the graduating class of Northeastern University yesterday.
"Real tolerance is an ideal our country has strived for from its beginning," Mrs.
Bush said to the 2,155 graduates of the Boston institution's nine undergraduate colleges.
"America was founded as a haven for tolerance of people of all kinds. Certainly we've made progress, but we still have a long, long way to go."


Baseball; Steadily on the Rise, Kelly Isn't Feeling Home Free Just Yet
The restaurant still sits idly on the corner of Howertown and Grove in North Catasauqua, Pa., full of memories that Pat Kelly will never forget.
Some good, some bad, some resting uneasily in the recesses of his mind.
The recollections are not always comfortable.
In the middle of the afternoon, in the relative quiet of the Yankee clubhouse, Kelly brings them back in small portions, knowing that they shaped his present but recognizing also the difficulties of his past.


Delaware
Part of this letter was omitted in some copies of the Travel section last week; it is reprinted here in full.


This Week: Just Keep on Weeding
Don't slack off on weeding vegetable and flower beds.
Weeds are heartier plants than cultivars and will hog all the nutrients and water if you let them.
Check nasturtiums, sedum, tomato plants and other flowers and vegetables for aphids; spray heavy infestations with insecticidal soap.


Commercial Property: Metrotech; How Developers and City Hall Retain Big Tenants
TWO months ago, executives at Forest City Ratner Companies were getting nervous.
Unaccustomed to big vacancies in their developments, they had a 23-story tower nearing completion at Metrotech Center in downtown Brooklyn with some 390,000 square feet yet to be leased.
"We were looking at 50,000- to 100,000-square-foot tenants," said Paul A. Travis, chief operating officer of Forest City Ratner, in Manhattan.
"We thought eventually that we'd lease that space to several financial-service companies. The question was how long 'eventually' was going to be."


Graduates Find Road to Jobs Longer and More Difficult
LAST week, a month after graduating from Dowling College in Oakdale, James Kowalski of West Sayville began working, at a salary of almost $30,000 a year, as an associate programmer analyst for Spectrum Healthcare Solutions in Hauppauge.
Mr.
Kowalski has a bachelor's degree, with a major in computer-information systems.
As a participant in the Dowling cooperative-education program since his junior year, he was an intern at Spectrum, receiving $10 an hour for his part-time work.


Wall Street; Ben &amp; Jerry's -- and Dreyer's?
Ice cream makes for strange bedfellows.
There is Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade, the socially scrupulous ice cream maker in Burlington, Vt.
Once a stock market darling, the company has underperformed the market after irritating many investors by putting its principles -- promoting charity, peace and environmental preservation -- ahead of its public shareholders.


The Sea, the Air and Other Marketable Commodities
BIOSPHERE POLITICS
A New Consciousness for a New Century.
By Jeremy Rifkin. 388 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $20.


New &amp; Noteworthy
CONVERSATIONS WITH MOCTEZUMA: The Soul of Modern Mexico, by Dick J. Reavis. (Quill/Morrow, $12.) While Americans are obsessed with the notion that the universe is understandable and that every problem has a solution, the author writes, Mexicans are willing to accept that much about life is absurd.
"When he simply describes Mexico -- its politics, its movements, its geography and its towns -- he gives the reader some of the best pages written on Mexico from abroad in recent years," Jorge G. Castaneda said in The Book Review last year.
THE BOOK OF EVIDENCE, by John Banville. (Warner, $8.99.) From his prison cell in Ireland, Freddie Montgomery tells how he abandoned his career as a scientist to become a drifter, living a life of debauchery that ended 10 years later when he killed a woman for no reason whatsoever.
"Here is an astonishing, disturbing little novel that might have been coughed up from hell," Erica Abeel said in The Book Review last year.
"To capture the full spectrum of Freddie's lunatic moods, Mr. Banville has forged a most supple, most fluid prose. He has a kind of fiber-optic vision that sees where no one else can see. . . . Mr. Banville has gambled that he could write a mesmerizing tale about a monster -- and he has won."


Maura A. Gaudet, Student, Marries
Maura Ann Gaudet, a daughter of Claire Gaudet of Topsfield, Mass., and the late Thomas J. Gaudet, was married in Topsfield yesterday to David William May, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
William F. May of Dallas.
The Rev.
Richard Driscoll performed the ceremony at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church, assisted by the bridegroom's father, who is a Presbyterian minister.
Mrs.
May, 29 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Smith College and is a student at the Parsons School of Design.
She is a freelance interior designer in New York.
Her mother is the president of the Craft Shop in Middleton, Mass.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Howell 115,000
172 Newbury Road
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 26-year-old ranch; 1-car garage, skylight in kitchen, full basement, fenced yard; taxes $2,185.
Jackson 108,000
4 North Dakota Court
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 24-year-old contemporary; c/a, 2-car garage, family room; taxes $2,866.
Lakewood 107,000
1514 Malibu Drive
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; w/w carpeting, pool, 1-car garage; taxes $2,322.
Livingston 273,000
8 Belvedere Terrace
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 45-year-old split level; fireplace, c/a, 2-car garage, patio, deck; taxes $4,941.
Millburn 399,000
118 Sagamore Road
5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 54-year-old colonial; enclosed porch, deck, family room, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $7,545.
Wall Township 250,000
1602 Cammar Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; c/a, h/w floors, patio, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $4,620.
OTHER AREAS  Rye Brook, N.Y. 325,000
67 Rock Ridge Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old split-level; fireplace, flagstone patio, family room; taxes $5,009.
Northfield, Conn. 125,000
60 Hopkins Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 70-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, 1-car garage, pine floors, 2 acres; taxes $1,724.
East Meadow, L.I.  $149,000
209 Stuyvesant Avenue
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old farm ranch; new kitchen, fireplace; taxes $3,200.


Patrice Sbardelli To Wed in August
Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick S. Sbardelli of Chestnut Hill, Mass., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Patrice Marie Larkin Sbardelli, and Robert G. Kester, a son of John Gordon Kester of Alexandria, Va., and Mary F. Kester of Springfield, Va.
Miss Sbardelli, 27 years old, is an associate in the Boston law firm of Burns &amp; Levinson.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father teaches electronics and vocational education at Boston Technical High School.
Her mother, Marie Sbardelli, is a registrar for the elections commission in Newton, Mass.


Ballet Theater's Ensemble Spirit Saves the Day
By definition, American Ballet Theater's spotty season at the Metropolitan Opera House has included high spots.
Financial restrictions and a lack of creativity diminished the sense of novelty.
But not-so-random thoughts about the company's problems and potential explain why, amid a gaggle of lackluster stagings, Ballet Theater's claim to greatness could miraculously be felt again.


A Stepping Stone and a Foundation
From sea to shining sea our land is peopled with thousands of gifted and dedicated musicians.
Yet comparatively few receive widespread recognition; in our democratic nation elitism prevails in the arts.
The problem with the superstar system is that brightness implies surrounding darkness.
In fact, many of those consigned to relative obscurity have as much to offer in the way of artistic quality as their more favored colleagues.
The musical health of the nation will flourish in proportion to the number and diversity of fine musicians at work in it.
But unless young musicians can win a major competition or find a commercial management willing to take risks, they have little chance to develop their careers.


Nassau Symphony Advertises Auditions
On April 28 you printed "Duo Finds Music Can Pave Way for Cupid" about Alex and Lu Ann Peskanov.
There was an erroneous comment made by Mrs.
Peskanov about the Nassau Symphony Orchestra that I, as the N.S.O.'s executive director, cannot leave unrefuted.
Mrs.
Peskanov comments that, "when I got to Long Island, there was nothing for me at first." "The Long Island Philharmonic and the Nassau Symphony both use contractors, not open auditions. I didn't know the contractors, so there was nothing."


INDIA'S DESCENT
Barbara Crossette's article "India's Descent" (May 19) could be seen as prophetic.
Coming just days before the the tragic assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, it provided insight into the events now unfolding, as she documented the alarming statistics and how they have taken not only a human toll but an environmental one as well.
Yet, I was struck by her tone of resignation.
One could sense it particularly in her vivid yet exhausted description of Calcutta.
What I looked for, and didn't find, was some reference to the strength of the will of the Indian people, who have risen above so much tragedy and repression in the past.
During my own travels in India, I witnessed this commitment to life and change.
It should not be underestimated.


Ms. Steeg to Wed Keith Rubenstein
Susan Steeg of White Plains and Dr.
Carl N. Steeg of South Orange, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Kaye Steeg to Keith Glenn Rubenstein, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Laurence Rubenstein of Highland Park, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Steeg, 26 years old, graduated from Syracuse University and is studying for a master's degree in education at Hunter College.
Her father is the chief of pediatric cardiology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center.
Her mother is the development and public relations director at St.
Bernard's Center for Learning in White Plains.


Bush Invites Inquiry on Iran Hostage Release
President Bush said today that he would "welcome" an investigation by Congress of allegations that the 1980 Reagan-Bush campaign tried to stall the release of the American hostages in Iran to help defeat President Jimmy Carter at the polls.
The President said in an interview with three Los Angeles television stations that he would not try to block such an investigation, which eight of the former hostages this week urged Congress to undertake.
But, reflecting his apparent mixed feelings about an investigation that would probably prove troublesome even if his name were cleared, Mr.
Bush said he did not believe a Congressional inquiry was warranted unless lawmakers uncovered more concrete evidence.


Security Seen as a Dividend of Soviet Aid
As a debate simmers in Washington over what sort of economic aid the United States should extend to the Soviet Union if it adopts democratic, free-market reforms, the question inevitably arises: what is in it for the United States?
The answer from many of those who favor aid, including economists, members of Congress and Administration officials, is that the payoff for the United States -- if there is one -- will be primarily in political-security terms and not economic ones.


Miss Pazienza Weds C. R. Wahlestedt
April Dara Pazienza, the assistant to the executive director of the Spanish Institute in New York, and Dr.
Claes Robert Wahlestedt, an assistant professor of neurology at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, were married yesterday at Augustana Lutheran Church in Washington.
The Rev.
Jan Madestam officiated.
The bride, 23 years old, graduated from Georgetown University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Pazienza of Potomac, Md.
Her father is the president of the Uniglobe travel franchise in Washington.
Her mother, Beth Catherwood Pazienza, is the president of the Uniglobe Owners Association of the Middle Atlantic region.


Three Artists So Alike and So Different
When Rudolf Serkin and Wilhelm Kempff died last month, both were identified in obituaries as exemplary products of the Austro-Germanic school of pianism.
That was an accurate description, too, of Claudio Arrau, whose death last week at age 88 further thinned the ranks of pianistic elder statesmen.
A casual listener to the recordings of all three, however, might be hard pressed to discern many similarities in their approaches to music-making.
Where Serkin seemed to hurl himself at a Beethoven sonata with a heady abandon that dramatized the composer's own heroic vision of himself, Kempff characteristically adopted a calmer, more regular style that could frustrate critics who insisted on a more overtly Romantic approach to Beethoven.
Arrau, born in Chile but schooled in Berlin, played a wide range of 19th-century music with great virtuosity and insight but also with a well-tailored refinement that prompted critics early in his career to characterize his style as "aristocratic," a somwhwat misleading label that stuck with him.
That three such different ways of interpreting the Romantic repertory could be heard as representing the same historical school underlines not only the interpretive possibilities inherent in the music but the temperamental range of the artists.
Because Serkin and Arrau lived in America during most of their careers and were tireless performers, audiences came to know and love their every tic of interpretation and style.
Not so with Kempff, who made his New York debut at 69 but had not performed in this country for many years.
When he died in Italy at 95, his American reputation rested almost entirely on his recordings, which were cherished by collectors who could appreciate his measured, unflashy pianism.


Ms. Marsted Wed To A. S. Bermant
Melissa Currier Marsted, the executive director of the Children's Museum of Santa Barbara, Calif., and Andrew Scott Bermant, a real-estate executive in Oxnard, Calif., were married yesterday in West Hartford, Conn.
The Rev.
Betsy Audette performed the Congregational ceremony at the Renbrook School.
Ms.
Marsted, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey G. Marsted of Canton, Conn.
Her father is a vice president of the Connecticut National Bank in Hartford.
Her mother is a research assistant and clinical instructor at the University of Connecticut Medical Center in Farmington.


Remember Those Who Almost Changed China; 'Pure and Simple'
To the Editor:
Your June 5 front-page report on the suicide of Mao Zedong's widow, Jiang Qing, who came to symbolize the fanatical fury of China's Cultural Revolution of 1966-76, states she was born under the name Li Jin in 1914.


Susan McGrath Marries
Susan Emily McGrath and William Curtin Brengle were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Roman Catholic Church in Manchester, N.H., by the Rev.
Julien LaFlamme.
Mrs.
Brengle, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Vermont and is a manager with Massachusetts Financial Services in Boston.
She is the daughter of Ruth R. McGrath of Bethesda, Md., and John H. McGrath of Shelton, Conn.
Mr.
Brengle, 30, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and is a reporter for Waste Dynamics of New England, a magazine published in Manchester.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Brengle of Concord, Mass.


Beauty; Expensive Habits
EVEN IF WE'RE IN THE THROES OF A RECESSION, THERE are still folks who may find it difficult to recede from habits ingrained during the last decade.
Not to worry, though.
Those totems of conspicuous consumption -- cashmere, caviar, pearls,
gold
-- are now available in bottled form.
For those who can no longer afford a $1,000 cashmere sweater set, there's always cashmere mascara, $13.50 from Christian Dior.
If the gold market's got you down, Divinaura, a "beauty enhancer" from Guerlain, comes flecked with bits of gold at a mildly affordable $56 an ounce.
Real gold, six milligrams of 24-karat gold in each bottle, enough to make a prospector sweat.
Here's how a few luxe-laced products match up with the pricey commodities from which they take their inspiration:
Guerlain Divinaura (remember, there are six milligrams of gold in there, a mini-lode that works nicely to make a knee or shoulder gleam): $56 for one ounce.
One troy ounce of gold, roughly 31 grams, traded for $363 the other day.
At $363 for 31 grams, six milligrams would set you back about 7 cents.
La Prairie Skin Caviar (O.K., it's not real caviar, just salmon-roe-sized beads of allantoin and other moisturizing elements. But still, "when the beads were submitted by our development team," says Aileen Rowland, chief operating officer of the company, "what did they look like? Caviar!"): $90 for two ounces.
Beluga caviar at the Petrossian Boutique in Manhattan: $69.50 for one-sixteenth of an ounce.
Mascara Parfait from Christian Dior: Thickening Lash Care with Cashmere (real cashmere, and "it's great because no goats are killed," says Nancy Tessmer, advertising and public relations assistant at the company): $13.50.
Short-sleeved cashmere T-shirt at Cashmere Cashmere in Manhattan: $275.
Hydra Perles Hydro-Protective Day Cream from Yves Saint Laurent (these aren't bona fide pearls, but "perfluorine pearls, silicone pearls and aqueous pearls"): $40 for one ounce.
Thirty-inch single strands of cultured pearls at Mikimoto in Manhattan start at $1,500.
While I doubt that the cosmetics companies were thinking in these terms, the deployment of luxury goods as ingredients is a great gimmick -- one that conjures up all the ghosts of the 80's, but without any scary consequences.
Still, if you're the sort that prefers to tough out tough times, perhaps the new men's cologne Recession (for "the man who used to have everything") is more the ticket.
"The economy stinks," reads the legend on the package.
"You shouldn't have to."


Northern Ireland
To the Editor: American tourists should be cautioned on traveling in Northern Ireland.
The political unrest has resulted in an extensive armed security presence.
Tourists in Northern Ireland are frequently stopped by heavily armed British Army members and questioned as to their presence in the province.
I recently made the mistake of photographing a heavily fortified road block on the road between Belleek and Enniskillen in County Fermanagh.
Members of the Duke of Edinburgh's Royal Regiment refused to allow me to leave until I surrendered my film.
HUGH E. O'ROURKE East Northport, L.I.
Hugh O'Neill, chairman, Northern Ireland Tourist Board, replies: We have to have tight security along the border, but the vast majority of tourists and visitors never pass through security checkpoints, and if they do they only have to show their identity.
The ordinary daily life in Northern Ireland is a lot more peaceful than a lot of big American cities, including New York.


Miss Cornell Wed To Paul Donohue
Carolyn Curley Cornell, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Eastwood Cornell of Greenwich, Conn., was married in Greenwich yesterday to Paul Stephen Donohue, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Donohue of East Williston, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles J. Arancia officiated at St.
Michael the Archangel Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Donohue, 28 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.
A graduate of Rollins College, she received a J.D. from St.
John's University, as did her husband.
Her father is a veterinarian in Old Greenwich, Conn.


Lisa Greene Engaged to Eric C. Mirsky
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen A. Greene of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Hilary Greene, to Eric Charles Mirsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton M. Mirsky of Short Hills.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Greene, 24 years old, graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree from the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, where she is a teaching assistant.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel.
Her mother, Marilyn Greene, is the associate director of the J. Cacciola art gallery in New York.


Cat-Mouse Strategies In Therapy
DOES a young woman named Diana Woods need psychotherapy?
Is Dr.
August Browning's unorthodox treatment what she needs?
In "Tricks of the Trade" by Sidney Michaels, a comedy-romance-thriller now at the Arena Players Second Stage in East Farmingdale through next Sunday, these initial queries are only the beginning of a long list of questions spun together like a dramatic spider web.


Justice Department Aid in Exxon Case Resigns
Assistant Attorney General Richard Stewart, who headed the Justice Department's investigation of the Exxon Valdez oil spill, says he is leaving office to resume teaching.
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr.
Stewart, chief of the department's environment division, denied that his resignation had anything to do with the frustrations resulting from the collapse of two negotiated settlements of the case with the Exxon Corporation.
But he acknowledged that he was disappointed by the inability to resolve the matter.


Correction
Marco Oriti's height, a figure given to editors by his mother, is reported incorrectly on the cover.
After the cover went to press, his doctor confirmed that he is 4 feet 1 inch tall.


Evicted, From a Ramp They Call Home
For two dozen homeless people, the spot under the West Side Highway in Manhattan was their "co-op community," a place with television, home-cooked meals and reading lamps.
Yesterday, they were forced to leave it, to pack up their sleeping bags, books and cooking equipment and make way for the demolition of the ramp where they had built a camp, near West 73d Street at the edge of Riverside Park.


Postings: Rehabilitation Struggle; At Last, Open for Tenants
New York stories are often about small victories over long odds.
Such a story had a happy ending in the Bronx last Tuesday when the Castle, a renovated 223-unit, seven-building complex of Tudor-style apartments at 1950 Andrews Avenue, opened for tenants after years of struggle over the management of the Federal housing rehabilitation grant that helped pay for the project.
The Castle was originally foreclosed by the city for nonpayment of taxes during the recession of the mid-70's.
In the following years, a struggle dragged on between community groups and the Department of Housing Preservation and Development over ownership of the building.
A group of housing activists claimed they held the mortgage on the property, while the city insisted that foreclosure was final, and picked Sydney Engel, of Lynbrook, L.I., for a gut rehabilitation.


Miss Van Kleeck Wed in Baltimore
Harriet Penniman Van Kleeck and William Howard Toedter were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Baltimore.
The Rev.
Robert P. Patterson performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Toedter, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia and is a pension consultant at the Financial Institution Retirement Fund in White Plains.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard R. Van Kleeck of Baltimore, where she made her debut at the 1979 Cotillion.
Her father is a vice president of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in Baltimore; her mother, Marion Van Kleeck, teaches at the Roland Park Country Day School there.


The Cultivated Gardener; Natural Controls for Japanese Beetles
In a week or so, Japanese beetles (Popillia japonica) will be eating the roses and marigolds and covering the grape arbor.
They're beautiful insects, with their shiny green heads and bronze wing covers, but somehow their loveliness doesn't come to mind when they're skeletonizing leaves and burrowing into buds.


United Way Warns Agencies of Drop In Allocations
SOCIAL service agencies in Westchester, many of them already hurt by cutbacks in Government aid, are bracing for another blow: a drop in funds from the United Way.
Ralph Gregory, United Way's president for Westchester and Putnam, said the organization was facing a drop of 8.5 to 9 percent in the money it expects to collect by September, the end of its fund-raising year.
That translates to about $800,000, he said.
"More than 50 percent of our donations come from corporate employee payroll-deduction plans," he said, "and we know we're not going to get some of that money pledged because of corporate downsizing. A lot of those donors have already lost their jobs or have been relocated out of the county."


Baseball; New Teams Need Players and Patience
When Lou Gorman came to the expansion Seattle Mariners as general manager in 1976, he was asked by the comic actor Danny Kaye, then one of the club's six owners, how long it would take for the team to become competitive.
Gorman, who had helped to build the Kansas City Royals from its expansion embryo, told Kaye: "Kansas City was competitive in its fifth year, which was unusual. Generally, it'll take seven or eight years."


Potato Salad and Coleslaw, With Twists
POTATO SALAD and coleslaw are the staples of summer.
Traditional creamy coleslaw with a touch of sugar in the dressing, and the classic mayonnaise-based potato salad will continue to enhance summer meals, along with some new wave interpretations of these perennial crowd pleasers.
The style, these days, in potato salad is to leave the red skinned new potatoes unpeeled.
Dressings have also changed.


Homeless Fathers Wait for a Home-Cooked Meal


Matthew Rossi Is Wed To Maureen A. Martin
Maureen Ann Martin, a daughter of James F. Martin of Islip, L.I., and Mrs.
Gerald E. McCarthy of Flushing, Queens, was married in Flushing yesterday to Matthew Anthony Rossi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Faust Rossi of Ithaca, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph McShane officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ann.
Mrs.
Rossi is a sales representative in New York for Marion Merrell Dow, a pharmaceuticals company.
She and her husband, both 26 years old, graduated from Le Moyne College.
Her father teaches English at Xaverian High School in Brooklyn.
Her mother is an account executive for Xerox in New York.


Stamps
Stamp collectors pretend to be organized: they have catalogues listing when stamps were issued, complete with technical printing details and retail prices.
They have albums with little squares to mount the stamps in.
They also have shoeboxes.
Filling up the shoeboxes can be a lot more fun than mere obeisance to the orderliness imposed by others.


Miss Fitzgibbons Is Wed in Darien
Kathleen Ann Fitzgibbons, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Patrick Fitzgibbons Jr. of Allentown, Pa., was married yesterday to John Rollins Turner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar Victor Turner of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Xavier F. Renda performed the ceremony at St.
John's Roman Catholic Church in Darien.
Mrs.
Turner, 25 years old, is a certified public accountant at Coopers &amp; Lybrand in Stamford, Conn.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Massachusetts.
Her father is the chairman of the department of medicine at the Allentown/Lehigh Valley Hospital Center and a professor of medicine at the Hahnemann University School of Medicine in Philadelphia.


Public &amp; Private; Suddenly No Summer
Summer's come.
If I close my eyes I can hear a hundred insistent hisses as a hundred mothers spray Solarcaine on backs as red as strawberries, hear their tired voices saying acidly: "I told you a hundred times to keep your T-shirt on, but would you listen to me? No."
That was my summer, but summer isn't what it used to be.
Children of the 1990's do not sunburn; they sunscreen.
This is supposed to protect their skin from damage and, as a collateral benefit, teach them math.
Any American kid today can tell you that 30 provides twice the protection from ultraviolet rays that 15 does, and that 2 is a complete waste of time.
They are not impressed by good weather.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Lazy Lavender
Q.
I have a three-year-old lavender plant that produced only a single spike of bloom last year.
What should I do to encourage better flowering?
Susan N. Wijdenes, Madison, N.J.
A.
To flower well, lavender must have sun, at least eight hours s day, said Sal Gilbertie, the owner of Gilbertie's Herb Farm in Westport, Conn.
"But I'm willing to bet the real problem here is the soil pH, which is too low," he added.


Summer Bags for All Types at All Prices
Summer handbags can range from modified pockets for loose change and lipstick to oversize totes for a book, cool drink and a Walkman.
Bloomingdale's offers a wide range, including Donna Karan's white canvas tote with black canvas trim, $95, and Furla's white leather handbag with brown trim and optional shoulder strap, $285.


Beatrice H. Jewett Is Wed in Virginia
Beatrice Hope Jewett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Freeborn G. Jewett Jr. of McLean, Va., was married in McLean yesterday to Frederick Diehl McKalip, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Diehl McKalip of Springfield, Va.
The Rev.
William Billow performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Pleasant Grove Church.
Mrs.
McKalip, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia and is studying at the Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine in Blackburg, Va.
Her father is a senior fellow at the World Resources Institute and the treasurer of the Environmental Defense Fund.


Whitney LeGard Weds N. R. Williams
Elizabeth Whitney LeGard, a legal assistant, and Nicholas Raymond Williams, a lawyer, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Congregational Church of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Crawford Smith officiated.
Mrs.
Williams, who is 26 years old and is known as Whitney, graduated from Wittenberg University and works at the law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin F. LeGard Jr. of New Canaan.
Her father is a partner and a managing director in the investment firm of E. M. Warburg Pincus &amp; Company in New York.


2 Shootings Leave Teen-Agers Dead; Cabby Is Also Killed
Two 17-year-olds were shot and killed in separate incidents early yesterday morning, in two of the eight slayings reported in New York City overnight, the police said.
Another victim was a 44-year-old livery-cab driver who was stabbed to death in a scuffle after an apparent robbery attempt in Manhattan, the police said.


Easter Seal Society Files Suit Over 2d Group's Fund Drive
The National Easter Seal Society has sued the American Lung Association, contending that the association is infringing on the society's trademarks and is confusing the public with a spring fund-raising campaign.
Both groups use seals in fund raising, mailing sheets of them around the country in hopes that households receiving them will respond with contributions.
The American Lung Association is best known for its Christmas Seal campaign, while the Easter Seal Society depends heavily on its spring campaign.


Pamela J. Darer Is Married
Pamela J. Darer, the daughter of Abbey Petersen of New York and the late Norman Darer, was married in New Preston, Conn., yesterday to Graham S. Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Anderson of Scarborough, Ont.
The Rev.
David Simpson, a Congregational minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Stone Church.
Mrs.
Andersen, 25 years old, graduated from Cornell University.
Mr.
Anderson, 30, graduated from the University of Toronto and received an M.B.A. from Cornell.
He is the manager of finance and operations at the Central Guaranty Trust Company in Toronto.


Selling Paseo's Sizzle Between the Lines
THE big new thing in television advertising seems to be tongue-in-cheek subliminals.
In other words, poking fun at the public's perception that advertising is getting the job done by attacking the subconscious.
There is, for instance, the double-talking big-star guy who leaves you with the uncomfortable knowledge that you have been at this viewer stuff long enough to understand even the fastest of ad-speak.


The World; Yeltsin's Gain in Clout Is Dramatic, But Gorbachev Still Has the Real Power
FOR all the excitement and familiar trap pings of the race the whirlwind campaign tours, multiple candidates, rich promises and even dirty tricks -- the presidential election in the Russian Federation last week was still not a presidential election in the Western sense.
For one thing, it was not exactly clear what powers Boris N. Yeltsin had gained and what he could do with them.
For another, it was still an election only in one constituent republic, even if this one happened to comprise three-fourths of the Soviet Union and half its people.


3 Republicans Break With Bush Over 'Star Wars'
In a split with the Bush Administration, three influential Republican Senators have proposed a scaled-back version of the "Star Wars" anti-missile defense system that they said would have broader political appeal in Congress.
The three Senators -- William S. Cohen of Maine, Richard G. Lugar of Indiana and John W. Warner of Virginia -- become the first ranking Senate Republicans to break with the Administration over space-based weapons, a central tenet of the "Star Wars" program.


Paying Attention To the Game
To the Sports Editor:
Those who may be wondering why the Mets are not able to gain ground on the Pirates have not been paying attention.
Consider:


Carol Gladstone Is Wed To Benjamin C. Whipple
Carol Gladstone, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Z. Gladstone of Pleasantville, N.Y., was married yesterday evening in Cambridge, Mass., to Benjamin Carpenter Whipple, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David C. Whipple of Cohasset, Mass.
Rabbi Albert Ginsburgh and the Rev.
Edward T. Adkinson, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Chapel.
Ms.
Gladstone, who is 35 years old and keeping her name, graduated from Yale University and is a student at the Harvard University Graduate School of Design.
Mr.
Whipple, 36, graduated from Swarthmore College.
He is a doctoral candidate in management at M.I.T.


The Region; New York City's School Spending: New Math
THE New York City school system is often pictured as something of a high roller among the nation's school districts, but a series of recent reports suggests that it spends about as much on each student as other American cities, and is falling behind its own state's average.
One major reason is that while New York State's contribution to the city schools has risen, the amount contributed by the city has dropped sharply -- from 24 percent of its tax-levy budget in 1982 to 16.87 percent in 1991.
These disparities were one reason board officials were pleased last week that Mayor David N. Dinkins named H. Carl McCall, a Citibank vice president who served six years as a state senator, to the seven-member board.
Mr.
Dinkins wants Mr.
McCall to become the board's president, an uncertain prospect given the ambitions of the Bronx representative, Ninfa Segarra.


David Kelly Wed To Amy Thornton
Amy Brooks Thornton, a daughter of John H. Thornton of New Bedford, Mass., and Naomi A. Thornton of New York, was married yesterday in Nantucket, Mass., to David Brian Kelly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth J. Kelly of Simsbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Ted Anderson performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Universalist Church.
The bride, 27 years old, is a producer of educational videodisks for colleges and high schools at ABC News Interactive.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College.
Her father is an abstract painter.
Her mother, an actress, teaches drama at Bard College and New York University.


Plenty of Curiosity
To the Editor:
In his rather challenging essay "You're Not Getting Older, You're Getting Nosier" (May 12), Robertson Davies writes that what ails old people generally is lack of curiosity.


Summer Refreshment: Dresses to Let Air In
What is the coolest thing to wear on a steamy summer day?
Why, a dress, of course.
Preferably something that uncovers the arms and doesn't constrict the body.
As the summers seem to get warmer, dressing for comfort gets more important.
A bare little dress will let the skin breathe and catch any stray breeze that wafts by.
If you can go without stockings, so much the better.
We're not talking proper office attire, but dressing sensibly on your own time.


John H. Greene Dies in Scotland; Outward Bound Leader Was 45
John H. Greene, the chief operating officer and executive vice president of Outward Bound U.S.A., died of a heart attack on Thursday in Loch Eil, Scotland, while hiking on a mountain with a group of magazine publishers.
Mr. Greene, a resident of Rowayton, Conn., was 45 years old.


New Basement Doors
HOUSES with basement doors installed below ground level typically have wood doors covering the openings at the tops of the door wells.
Replacing those doors with metal ones adds beauty, security and safety
Basement-door kits cost $200 to $300, depending on whether the kit includes sloping metal sidewalls to support the door.
If the well has sloping masonry sidewalls in good condition, a kit with metal sidewalls is not needed.


The Nation; A First Step In the March To a 24-Hour Stock Market
THE extension of trading by the New York Stock Exchange last week lasted little more than an hour and was greeted with a yawn on Wall Street, with only about 2.24 million shares changing hands in the two sessions.
Yet it signaled one of the most significant fights for power in the global financial marketplace in decades.
On one side of the battle is the Big Board itself.
On the other are the exchanges, including those in London and Tokyo as well as domestic regional exchanges, that have thrived in the last decade as the business of trading securities has become increasingly global.


Jamie Jones Wed To Beth Schwartz
Beth Craig Schwartz and Jamie Anthony Jones were married yesterday at the Scarsdale (N.Y.) Congregational Church by the Rev.
Leslye Noyes.
The bride is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David Schwartz of Larchmont, N.Y.
The bridegroom is the son of Gloria Jones of Sagaponack, L.I., and the late novelist James Jones.
The bride, 27 years old, was until recently a writer and editor for the Advisory Committee on the Food and Drug Administration in Washington.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a dentist and oral surgeon.


Quotation of the Day
"I think us women have got to do something about these boys. It's all our own fault. All we do is wait on them." -- Donna Seaman, who has two grown sons living at home.  [ 18:4. ]


For This Quiz, The Answer Is More Confusion
Take out your pencils for a multiple-choice test.
The best and brightest forecasters at Wall Street's leading blue-chip firms think that:
a. The recession is over, the recovery will be tame and inflation will be low.


Melissa Gross and Kenneth Newman Are Wed
Melissa Tami Gross, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Gross of Blauvelt, N.Y., was married in Congers, N.Y., last evening to Kenneth Brian Newman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Newman of Great Neck Estates, L.I.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson officiated at Town and Country Caterers.
Mrs.
Newman, 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude and received a master's degree in educational psychology from the State University of New York at Albany.
She is a psychologist at the Thiells (N.Y.) Elementary School.
Mr.
Newman, 23, graduated cum laude from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and is a student at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


Campus Life: Chicago; Moscow Mission: Graduate Study Of Gypsy Life
When Alaina Lemon visits Moscow again this summer, it won't be as a tourist.
Instead Ms.
Lemon, a graduate student in anthropology at the University of Chicago, will be there as one of the first Western researchers to study the gypsies of the Soviet Union.
"She has become an expert in a culture that is not well known," said Ms.
Lemon's adviser, Paul Friedrich, an anthropology professor.
"There's been practically no Western anthropology on Soviet gypsies."


All About/Car Recycling; An Afterlife for Automobiles
The entire building shakes and shudders as a 6,000-horsepower electric motor drives a rotary shredder that reduces whole automobiles to fist-sized recyclable pieces of metal scrap in about 30 seconds.
The pieces fall onto a moving conveyor that passes under a magnetized drum, which lifts off the steel and iron.
The drum leaves other metals, plastic and miscellaneous materials for hand sorting.
The iron and steel chunks are stored in huge piles nearby until they are shipped to steel mills around the world to be made into new products.
This is recycling that works.
As governments and industries struggle to establish recycling programs for newspapers, plastics and other household trash, the Prolerized Schiabo Neu Company, a privately held recycling company here, turned 300,000 old cars into high-grade iron ore last year.
With scrap at about $90 a long ton, a typical car fetches about $100.
For the shredder, costs vary widely depending upon location, the age of the equipment in use and the costs of disposing of what cannot be recycled.


Paging June, Donna and Harriet
To the Editor:
As a clinician with a specialty in women's and family issues, I, too, am disheartened and puzzled by the absence of mothers on television  [ "Poof! The Mommies Vanish in Sitcomland," May 26 ] .
Perhaps this is some strange response to the lack of the glorified mothers -- June Cleaver, Donna Reed and Harriet Nelson -- in the TV writers' lives.


Aleka A. Akoyunoglou to Wed in Fall
Aleka Alexandra Akoyunoglou and Stephen Hardwick Blackwell, graduate students, are planning an October wedding.
Ms.
Akoyunoglou, 24 years old, graduated from Northwestern University and recently received a master's degree in Slavic linguistics from the University of Illinois.
She plans to begin studies for a doctorate in applied linguistics at Boston University in the fall.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
George Akoyunoglou of Athens, where she is a biochemist at the National Research Center, and the late Dr.
Akoyunoglou, also a biochemist and a founder of the center.


Q and A
Broken Rules  Question: I live in a co-op that has house rules and regulations saying there should be no obstructions of common areas like hallways and courtyards.
But mothers and children constantly leave bicyles, strollers and toys in these areas.
The board seems powerless to do anything about it, despite the rules.
Is there anything that can be done to get the board to uphold the rules? . . .
Arthur Ranthehello, Bronxville, N.Y.
Answer: Maybe.
According to Charles Rappaport, president of the Federation of New York Housing Cooperatives, house rules are usually spelled out in the corporation's prospectus and therefore are part of the legal documents.
"House rules make formal what is really common courtesy and reasonable behavior," he said, "and as part of the legal documents they can be enforced. If they are not enforced, they should not exist."
Mr.
Rappaport said that the co-op's board might look to its attorney for help with compliance by reminding shareholders that the co-op corporation could be vulnerable to negligence suits if someone is hurt because existing rules were not enforced.
Mr.
Rappaport also said that some co-ops lock up toys, bikes and strollers that are stored in hallways or left unattended on walkways.
Stray Animals  Question: My apartment faces the back of the building.
I have two large windows that look out onto a small concrete area above the basement.
It has become a haven for stray cats, with as many as eight congregating there at one time.
To make matters worse, a neighbor has turned the area into a kitty soup kitchen by feeding them.
The smell and noise disturb me.
Is the building responsible for dealing with this problem? . . .Evelyn Nunlee, Manhattan  Answer: Yes.
The so-called "warranty of habitability" gives tenants the right to a safe and livable environment.
Your landlord has the responsibility to at least attempt to rid his property of the stray cats.
If complaints to the owner or his representative are not fruitful, you can notify the city's Department of Health or the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals to ask that the animals be removed.
The telephone number of the Health Department's Bureau of Control Complaints &amp; Information is 285-9503.
The number for the A.S.P.C.A.'s animal rescue operation is (718) 257-6000.
Retroactive Rent Increase  Question: We rent a condominium apartment in Manhattan.
The owner has informed us that the condominium board passed an increase in maintenance last July and he now wishes to assess us retroactively.
According to the terms of our lease, the owner can add the increase to our rent.
Is there a statute of limitations on the matter of retroactive rent collections? . . .
John Ressner, Manhattan  Answer: Yes, but it does not apply in your case.
According to Michael Finder, a Manhattan lawyer specializing in real estate matters, the statute of limitations for enforcing contracts like rent collections in leases is six years.
"In this case," said Mr.
Finder, "the owner's failure to inform the tenant of the increase as soon as possible may not seem fair, but it is not grounds for a tenant's refusing to pay."
The only protection you would have would be if the lease required the owner to pass along the increases within a certain period of time.


Topics of The Times; A Graduation, as It Ought to Be
A sentimentally inclined grandfather, attending a graduation ceremony for a preschool class, thought the proceedings were a model for all graduations.
No speech lasted more than 90 seconds.
The applause from the graduates was enthusiastic and on cue, and the applause from the families when diplomas were handed out was heartfelt and impartial.
As they came up for their certificates, the 5-year-olds were a facsimile of all the older graduates the grandfather had seen.
Some were brisk and matter-of-fact; others had a where-do-we-go-from-here look.
Some marched up with triumphant grins, others sidled up hesitantly and a few came running.
Decorum broke down only when a favorite teacher came in and the program was interrupted with hand waves and cries of "Hi, Rosa!"


SEX DISCRIMINATION PERSISTS, U.N. SAYS
Although there have been important changes in the lives of women around the world over the last two decades, with some significant regional gains, "the majority still lag far behind men in power, wealth and opportunity," Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar concludes in a new United Nations report on women.
The 120-page book, "The World's Women 1970-1990," will be released this Friday.


A. S. BYATT'S HAPPIEST MOMENT
Why Mira Stout finds the age of 54 to be "relatively late to have a happiest moment," and why A. S. Byatt "agrees quietly" struck me as most remarkable in an article about a woman of great accomplishment ("What Possessed A. S. Byatt?" May 19).
The continuing notion that a woman's happiest moments had best occur before middle age contributes to the ongoing dread most women have of losing their youth and the frantic efforts to deny the passage of time.


Milton Tarlau, Neurologist
Dr.
Milton Tarlau, a psychiatrist and neurologist with practices in Manhattan and eastern Pennsylvania, died on Wednesday at his home in Riegelsville, Pa.
He was 81 years old.
He died of bone cancer, his brother, Theodore, said.


A Builder of Our Time
CESAR PELLI
Buildings and Projects 1965-1990.
Introduction by Paul Goldberger.
Essays by Mario Gandelsonas and John Pastier.
Illustrated. 288 pp.
New York: Rizzoli.
Cloth, $50.
Paper, $35.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bluepoint 128,000
21 Davis Street
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,000.
East Meadow  $149,000
209 Stuyvesant Avenue
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old farm ranch; new kitchen, fireplace; taxes $3,200.
Hauppauge 180,000
3 Swan Lane
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 28-year-old colonial; dining room, family room w/fireplace, gas heat; taxes $4,000.
Mineola 178,000
256 Marcellus Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; fireplace, screened porch, Florida room, 1-car detached garage; taxes $2,500.
Smithtown 130,000
191 Edgewood Avenue
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, 1-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,400.
Village of the Branch 180,000
28 Hemlock Lane
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $4,800.
OTHER AREAS Rye Brook, N.Y. 325,000
67 Rock Ridge Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old split-level; fireplace, flagstone patio, family room; taxes $5,009.
Northfield, Conn. 125,000
60 Hopkins Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 70-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, 1-car garage, pine floors, 2 acres; taxes $1,724.
Lakewood, N.J. 107,000
1514 Malibu Drive
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; w/w carpeting, pool, 1-car garage; taxes $2,322.


Fresh Air Fund Teaches Joy at Camp to Disabled Youths
When Saladinn Loving caught sight of the yellow sliding board and the jungle gym, he struggled out of his wheelchair and, with the help of a counselor, clambered over the boulders to join the other children.
"Sal always wants to join in all the activities and doesn't like using a crutch or a walker," said Saladinn's mother, Saladina Loving, as she and her son took part in the activities offered as part of a family camping weekend at the Fresh Air Fund's Camp Hidden Valley.
Saladinn, who is 9 years old and suffers from cerebral palsy and the effects of meningitis, could only crawl until an operation in 1985.
Now he wears a brace and manages to move slowly on his own.


Potato Salad and Coleslaw, With Twists
POTATO SALAD and coleslaw are the staples of summer.
Traditional creamy coleslaw with a touch of sugar in the dressing, and the classic mayonnaise-based potato salad will continue to enhance summer meals, along with some new wave interpretations of these perennial crowd pleasers.
The style, these days, in potato salad is to leave the red skinned new potatoes unpeeled.
Dressings have also changed.


Its Big Time Now For Camel GT Circuit
The International Motor Sports Association, the chief sanctioning body for professional sports-car racing in this country, is in the middle of an important two weeks, with two of its flagship Camel GT races being broadcast on network television.
One race, the Nissan Grand Prix from the Mid-Ohio Sports Car Course, was shown June 8 on NBC, and the other, also on NBC, will be the Nissan Grand Prix du Mardi Gras from New Orleans on June 23.
Although both events are tape-delayed broadcasts, instead of live, any venture onto network television is a major journey for I.M.S.A., which is trying to shed its image as the stepchild of American racing series.


Postings: 22 Stories on East 44th; Nigerians Building A Tower
The Nigerian Government not only be will the prime tenant, it also will own a sleek 22-story, green-tinted-glass building going up at 301 East 44th Street, at the northeast corner of Second Avenue.
The 90,000-square-foot building, with a cost estimated at $25 million, is expected to be completed by the summer of 1992.
"We want to be part of New York," said Mohammed Umar, minister counselor and head of chancery of the Nigerian Mission to the United Nations.
"And nothing really makes you as much a part of something as when you own property there."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-12
An evacuation in the Philippines was ordered for hundreds of thousands of people after scientists warned that a volcano erupting 55 miles north of Manila appeared close to a catastrophic explosion.
Page 1


Stalin's 'Understudy' Dies
A man who looked so much like Stalin that he was hired to sit in for the Soviet dictator at meetings and banquets has died in the southern city of Krasnodar, a newspaper reported today.
The newspaper Rabochaya Tribuna identified the Stalin double only as Rashid and said without elaboration that he died "several days ago" at the age of 93.


Mimi Peet Wed to Louis Magarelli Jr. on Shelter I.
Mary Jacqueline Peet, a network executive for Showtime in Atlanta, and Louis Dominick Magarelli Jr., a sales manager for Sony Magnetic Products there, were married yesterday at Our Lady of the Isle Roman Catholic Church on Shelter Island, L.I.
The Rev.
John J. Traynor performed the ceremony.
The couple, both 26 years old, graduated from Iona College.
Mrs.
Magarelli, known as Mimi, is an affiliate coordinator for Showtime.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Chester Peet Jr. of Shelter Island.


Essex to Suffolk: 3 Country Inns
THE English country house hotel, let it be known, is an elaborate fraud.
Thank goodness.
Those of us who spent our adolescence in the real thing cast a cynical (and appreciative) eye upon the lavish appointments of your four-star, Egon Ronay-recommended establishment.
Central heating, forsooth!
Wall-to-wall carpeting?
Immaculate furnishings, comfortable beds, hot baths?
Sumptuous meals!
We veterans know about the genteel jockeying for position around the meager open fire that was the only source of heat.
The horsehair mattresses and the expanses of icy linoleum in the bathroom; the dribble of lukewarm water from the tap.
The cold mutton and the rice puddings.
In winter you wore your overcoat indoors and went to bed fully clothed.
The commercial concept is relatively recent and is frequently a cunning way to bring back into circulation some agreeably situated mansion too cumbersome for private use.
Expect isolation, comfort and probably an emphasis on cuisine.
You may well get peacocks, antiques and homegrown vegetables thrown in or if the style is more flashy, Jacuzzi and sauna.
We sampled two in Suffolk and one just over the border, in Essex, any of which would make a good base for exploring Suffolk, a delectable county, or for striking north to Norwich or east to the coast.


New Yorkers, etc.
Sometimes it seems as though there's nothing left that someone won't ask.
It's no surprise to be asked one's age, income or marital state, how much a dress, suit or apartment cost, what the rent or maintenance is, and whether the facial glow, simply the result of 10 hours sleep, is due to love or plastic surgery.
And if it's love, who is it and if it's plastic surgery, who was it?
Still, all that is another matter because although rude, intrusive and downright nervy, these questions are often asked, generally with little hesitation.


Headliners; Reverberations in the Ring of Fire
OF the world's 37 active volcanoes, 29 lie on the circumference of the Pacific Ocean, an area so seismically turbulent that it is called the Ring of Fire.
Last week in Japan, about 40 miles east of Nagasaki on the island of Kyushu, Mount Unzen erupted in the second big explosion in nine days, hurling stones more than three miles.
And 1,500 miles away, on Luzon Island in the Philippines, Mount Pinatubo sent thousands of people fleeing when it shot a mushroom cloud of ash and smoke 80,000 feet into the air.
Though seismologists believe it is a coincidence that the two volcanoes have come to life at the same time, they say both events are caused by the movement of the Philippine plate, a huge section of the ocean floor.


The Improbable Wagnerian
In 1981, Glenn Gould announced that he had "pretty well exhausted" the piano music that interested him and felt ready to try something besides playing the piano.
Long before, he had dabbled in conducting.
He now hired an orchestra in Hamilton, Ontario, and rehearsed it.
Then, three months before his death at age 50 in October 1982, he recorded Wagner's "Siegfried Idyll," in the original chamber version for 13 players, with a freelance group drawn mainly from the Toronto Symphony.
The recording has just been released for the first time (Sony Classical SK 46279; CD and cassette).
It proves a disturbing document for what it suggests both about Gould and about musical affairs in the late 20th century.


William Lewis Dies; Economics Laureate And Adviser Was 76
William Arthur Lewis, a Princeton University professor emeritus who was an adviser to several nations and won the Nobel Prize in economics in 1979, died yesterday at his home in Barbados.
He was 76 years old.
Mr.
Lewis was widely considered an authority on economic growth and political and social change in emerging nations.
He shared the Nobel Prize with Theodore W. Schultz, a University of Chicago professor, for research into economic development "with particular consideration of the problems of developing countries."


Lay Off 'Thelma and Louise'
Because he didn't smile when he said it.
Because he stole, cheated or lied.
Because he wasn't lucky.
Because it was a good day to die.
Those are traditional reasons for which characters in outlaw movies are disposed of, sometimes only in the wink of an eye.
It's a list to which a new one can now be added: because he tried to rape and beat a woman whose best friend had once been the victim of a sex crime, and the best friend went berserk while watching history repeat itself.
And because he was smug instead of sorry.


Changing the Schools In Oyster Bay
To quote Oyster Bay-East Norwich School Board president John Specce  [ May 19 ] : "We can't bring back the horse and buggy. We must carefully plan for change and bring the 20th century into this village."
Ask renowned author and native Thomas Pynchon and "recent" arrivals Gary Carter, Oleg Cassini, John McEnroe and others if Oyster Bay is a pathetic anachronism.


Flying


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Goshen, Conn. 500,000
52 East Hyerdale Drive  5-bedroom, 4-bath 10-year-old lakefront contemporary; fireplace, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $7,111.
Litchfield, Conn. 317,000
14 Cramer Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 57-year-old Cape Cod; fully renovated, fireplace, 2-car garage, 1.75 acres; taxes $2,694.
Northfield, Conn. 125,000
60 Hopkins Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 70-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, 1-car garage, pine floors, 2 acres; taxes $1,724.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 725,000
42 Whippoorwill Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 86-year-old manor; 3 fireplaces, sun porch, library, office, deck, playroom, 2.3 acres; taxes $13,510.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 1.1 million
150 Sarles Street  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; fireplace, w/b stove, cathedral ceiling, eat-in kitchen, pantry, flagstone terrace, stall, 9.5 acres; taxes $7,440.
Rye Brook, N.Y. 325,000
67 Rock Ridge Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old split-level; fireplace, patio, family room; taxes $5,009.
OTHER AREAS Millburn, N.J. 399,000
118 Sagamore Road
5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 54-year-old colonial; enclosed porch, deck, family room, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $7,545.
Wall Township, N.J. 250,000
1602 Cammar Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; c/a, h/w floors, patio, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $4,620.
East Meadow, L.I.  $149,000
209 Stuyvesant Avenue
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old farm ranch; new kitchen, fireplace; taxes $3,200.


With Its Population Still on Rise, Beijing Pushes One-Child Family
Throughout China's vast countryside, it is often not so much democracy that stirs emotions as it is the desire to procreate, and few policies cause more heartbreak than the Government's family planning measures.
These days there are signs that the one-child policy will be carried out more rigorously.
The number of women of child-bearing age is climbing dramatically, leading China to exceed its population targets, and the Government is now calling for tougher enforcement of family planning measures. 'Many Women Are Scared'
Here in Sichuan Province, as in most of the nation's countryside, population control has caused a mixture of anger, support, frustration, enthusiasm, deviousness and pain.
Many Chinese intellectuals endorse the policy and believe it has given new hope for their country's long-term development, but it has also ruined marriages, intensified sexist attitudes and led to murder, bribery, abandonment and countless battles between mothers and daughters-in-laws.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 16


Correction
An article in The Times Magazine on May 12 about the British royal family and a correction in this space on May 19 referred incompletely to the reason the sovereign is called Defender of the Faith.
The title was given to King Henry VIII by Pope Leo X in 1521 but was withdrawn by the Roman Catholic Church after Henry broke with it.
During Henry's monarchy, an act of Parliament later joined the title to the English crown.


Historic Chandelier Restored
VISITORS to the First Presbyterian Church of Roselle see the light -- Thomas A. Edison's light, that is, the first incandescent light ever installed in a church.
The church was recently honored by Union County's Cultural and Heritage Programs Advisory Board and the Office of Cultural and Heritage Affairs of the Department of Parks and Recreation for the restoration of the fixture.


Campus Life: Middlesex County; Hunting Munitions At a Campus Built On an Arsenal Site
Summer is typically a quiet time on college campuses, but Middlesex County College may see some explosive activity this year.
Beginning this month, officials say, contractors hired by the Army Corps of Engineers will be excavating areas of the campus, looking for live munitions that might have been buried there decades ago.


Chess
Winning a bright game early in a tournament usually presages a good result for the player, just as an early loss is an omen for a lack of success.
Yet it isn't always so.
America's greatest come-from-behind player, Sammy Reshevsky, began his first United States Championship, in 1936, by losing two of his first four games, but won the championship anyhow.
The stumbling after promising beginnings is not as carefully chronicled, not as dramatic perhaps, but they are not wanting, either.


Orwell Journal; On Some Plots, Sheep May Not Safely Graze
The problem was how to mow the steep, rocky hillsides of two cemeteries in this farming town next to Lake Champlain.
Noel Smith, the town manager, was certain he had a solution that was perfect for the 1990's: environmentally safe and at the same time economical.
The answer, he thought, was sheep.
That was why he was pleasantly surprised last winter, when Jean Beck, a local sheep farmer, was the low bidder on the job of mowing two of Orwell's four cemeteries.


Witt Put on Disabled List
The Yankees, who already have two rookies in their pitching rotation, added a third today when they announced they were calling up right-hander Scott Kamieniecki to take the place of Mike Witt, who was placed on the 15-day disabled list.
Kamieniecki, who is 6-3 with a 2.36 earned run average at Class AAA Columbus, is expected to make his major-league debut Tuesday against the Toronto Blue Jays at the Skydome.
Witt worked a third of an inning Thursday night at Minnesota before he was forced to leave the game because of soreness in his right elbow.
He was placed on the disabled list retroactive to Friday and will not be eligible to come off until June 29.
General Manager Gene Michael said he hoped Witt would throw in a simulated game before then. 'He's Got a Good Arm'
Kamieniecki will join a Yankee rotation that includes Wade Taylor, who was brought up from Columbus on May 31, and Jeff Johnson, who was added June 4.
Kamieniecki threw a two-hit shutout in his last start, a 5-0 victory last Saturday over Oklahoma City.
He walked one and struck out 14.
"He's got different numbers than Taylor and Johnson," Michael said, "but in some ways he's pitched even better. He's got a good arm, and he stepped it up a notch after Taylor was called up."
The Yankees selected the 26-year-old Kamieniecki in the 14th round of the free-agent draft in June 1986.
He pitched four years at the University of Michigan and has a 45-42 record in five seasons in the minors.
The choice of Kamieniecki was somewhat surprising, partly because the team could have picked either Chuck Cary, who was demoted to the bullpen after a 1-6 start, or Dave Eiland, who is at Columbus under a 30-day rehabilitation program.
Eiland is scheduled to pitch Sunday for the Clippers.
The Yanks, though, apparently remain committed to their younger players, even though Johnson is 0-2 and Taylor is 2-1 with a 12.27 e.r.a. after being chased by the Texas Rangers in the first inning Friday night.
"I like giving these kids a chance," Michael said.
"Growing pains are part of it. It was shock treatment for Taylor, but I still feel he's going to be a good pitcher."


Energy Chief Emphatically Denies Rumors That He Plans to Resign
Energy Secretary James D. Watkins has accused some weapons contractors of mounting a campaign to try to force him to resign, but he said in an interview, "I'm not going anywhere."
Rumors have been circulating for months that Mr.
Watkins will resign this summer, as his department continues to face criticism over its handling of safety concerns and other problems in its nuclear weapons program.


East Harlem Classes in Violin Are Spared
For 130 violin students in three East Harlem public schools whose season's-end concert might have been a swan song, there was good news on Friday: Roberta Guaspari Tzavaras, their instructor, announced that she plans to continue the program next term using $35,000 donated by foundations, corporations and individuals.
The program had been cut by the Board of Education because of city and state budget cuts.


A Year to Give Beets Another Chance
RED eggs were the standard fare at picnics during my childhood.
The eggs were hard-boiled and refrigerated in a bowl of pickled beets for several days.
By picnic time, the eggs had absorbed the color of the beets and some of their flavor.
These pickled eggs were (and still are) a Pennsylvania Dutch tradition.
Hardly anyone plants or grows beets these days, and it is a pity.
This fat little root vegetable has a unique flavor, and when it is cooked and served just right, it can be quite delicious.
The beet has gone into such a decline that the National Garden Bureau has declared 1991 as the Year of the Beet to give it a boost.


Ellen Oler to Marry Jeremy Epstein
September wedding plans for Ellen Curtis Oler, a psychotherapist in Brooklyn, and Jeremy Ethan Epstein, a stockbroker in New York, have been announced by their parents, the Rev. and Mrs.
Clarke Kimberly Oler of Pasadena, Calif., Mike Epstein of Brooklyn and Ruth Epstein Lee of Manhattan.
Miss Oler, 38 years old, graduated from the University of Colorado, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's in social work from the University of California at Los Angeles, after serving with the Peace Corps in Senegal.
Her father, a former rector of the Church of the Holy Trinity in Manhattan, retired last year as senior pastoral minister at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Pasadena.
Her mother, Wendy Salmond Oler, is a former head of the middle school at the Spence School in Manhattan.


Pennies Add Up for Charity
There are about 129 billion pennies in circulation in the United States.
This is the story of 2,024,974 of them.
Students at the Dalton School in Manhattan collected that many pennies, weighing about five tons, plus other donations for a total of $29,912.45, which they have donated to the homeless through a philanthropy called Common Cents.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My bathroom ceiling is drywall, and was originally sprayed with a textured finish.
Each year, a small patch of this paint peels off, exposing unfinished drywall.
I scrape off the loose material and then prime the bare areas with BIN before repainting.
The next year, a different section peels.
I am now going to redecorate the bathroom and would like to start by redoing the ceiling.
What would you recommend to remove the textured finish, and what kind of primer should I then apply?
A.
Most such paints can be removed with a heavy-duty semipaste paint remover.
That will be quite messy, and so make sure to cover everything.
Wear goggles to protect the eyes and appropriate clothing to protect the skin.
Brush on the remover in thick layers with no brushing back and forth, and then scrape off the softened goo with a dull scraper.
Prime with a coat of the same shellac-based sealer you used before, like BIN or Enamelac.


Travel Advisory; Exhibit Honors Blacks' Inventions
"The Real McCoy: African-American Invention and Innovation," an exhibition organized by the Anacostia Museum of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, begins a two-year tour in July, when it starts a three-month stay at the California Afro-American Museum in Los Angeles.
The exhibition highlights early creative and scientific achievements by African-American inventors and enterpreneurs.
Artifacts, audiovisual presentations and copies of inventions show the major contributions to America's industrial and technological development.
Among the inventions is the McCoy lubricator, which is a device to oil moving locomotives.
The inventor, Elijah McCoy, the son of slaves who fled to Canada, put an end to the costly and time-consuming process of stopping a locomotive so it could be oiled.


King Is the Best
To the Sports Editor:
Watching the French Open reminded me that the best of the tennis commentators is Billie Jean King.
She is the only one who teaches tennis while commenting.
She makes watching all those hours of tennis worthwhile because we tennis players watch it mainly to learn how to improve our games.
Bud Collins should be retired.
Even if he is knowledgeable, he doesn't show it with his overexaggerated, verbose and useless comments.
Mary Carillo makes lots of overstatements and centers too much on the gossip and politics involving the players and forgets about commenting on how they are playing the match.
ELIZABETH JOHNSON Newfield, N.Y.


Travel Advisory; Guide to Venice For the Disabled
The Institute of Architecture of the University of Venice has published a map and guide to Venice designed specifically for disabled sightseers.
The free guide is part of a project called Veneziapertutti, or Venice for all.
The guide shows areas that wheelchair travelers can reach by vaporetto, or water bus, which is boarded by means of a ramp.
It includes all monuments, churches, gardens and museums in accessible areas (although the interior of the buildings may not always be accessible).
Hotels and the city's few accessible toilets are also listed.
The map and guide may be obtained by writing to Assessorato Sicurezza Sociale, Ufficio Inserimenti Sociali, Ca'Farsetti, Comune di Venezia, Italy, or to Settore Sociale, U.L.S.S. 16, Dorsoduro 3493, Piazzale Roma, Venice, where it may also be picked up in person.


Dr. Wilder Wed To C. C. Richards
Dr.
Elisabeth Johnson Wilder, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Wilder of Brooklyn, was married there yesterday to Christopher Cameron Richards, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Richards 2d of Andover, Mass.
The Rev.
F.
Goldthwaite Sherrill performed the Episcopal ceremony at Grace Church.
Mrs.
Richards, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Harvard University, as did her husband, and received an M.D. degree from New York Medical College.
Later this month she is to start a residency in internal medicine at the Tufts New England Medical Center in Boston.
Her father, a lawyer, is a legal consultant in New York.
Her mother, Elinor D. Wilder, is the acting assistant director of the Center for Career and Life Planning at New York University.


Usually Unnecessary, Often Undesirable, That's the C.I.A.
To the Editor:
In response to "Do We Still Need the C.I.A.?" (Op-Ed, May 19), your articles by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Representative Bud Shuster: Through my 22-year Foreign Service career, I found that the Central Intelligence Agency presence was neither necessary, nor in most cases desirable.


Heather Glenn to Marry Jesse Bender in October
Lynn Glenn of Greenwich, Conn., has announced October wedding plans for her daughter Heather Glenn and Jesse Bender, a son of George Bender Jr. of Holliston, Mass., and the late Marjorie Ann Bender.
Miss Glenn, 24 years old and also a daughter of the late Benjamin Duke Glenn Jr., is a personnel assistant at the International Science and Technology Institute in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Cape Town in South Africa.
Mr.
Bender, 23, is an industrial engineer at the Bureau of Engraving and Printing in Washington.
He graduated from Cornell University.


More People Heeding The Good Earth's Call
In increasing numbers, Westchester residents have been taking to their backyards, spading, hoeing and nurturing the earth.
They are composting, mulching and -- eschewing chemical products -- feeding their garden plots an array of new organic compounds coming on the market.
This is a back-to-nature phenomenon, part of the growing concern for the health of the planet, say the owners and managers of garden centers and nurseries in the county.


Postings: Tenants Win; Preservation of a Cornice
Leaning well over the edge of the roof atop the seven-story St.
Agnes apartment building at 41 Convent Avenue, John Contreras, president of Polonia Contracting, stuck his hand inside the 80-year-old cornice and made a remarkable discovery.
"The wood bracing was completely clean," said Carolyn Kent, of Community Board 9, who was with him on the roof that day.
"It was amazing. It had never been wet. There was flaking of the metal but there was no rust."
What made his discovery important was that the tenants at No. 41, a city-owned building between 129th and 130th Streets, were fighting to preserve the cornice against efforts by the Department of Housing Preservation and Development to remove it, in the belief that it posed a safety hazard.
The tenants had already struggled to restore the marble walls in the lobby of the building, designed by Henri Fouchaux.


Travel Advisory; Help in Shipping Sets of Golf Clubs
A heavy-duty cardboard container for shipping golf clubs to your vacation destination is being marketed by a Milwaukee company.
The reusable Golf Bag Express measures 47 by 15 by 10 inches and comes with a polyethylene container to hold the clubs and with shipping labels and sealing tape.
Each box costs $26.50.
More information: Pro-Pak, Post Office Box 37316, Milwaukee, Wis. 53237; (414) 761-3041.


Campus Life: Pennsylvania; Oriental Studies To Be Renamed After Criticism
The University of Pennsylvania's Oriental Studies Department will change its name this fall after a yearlong dispute over whether it is offensive to Asians, as some students have contended.
Faculty members will vote on the alternatives in the fall.
Already more than 60 names have been proposed, said Victor Mair, a professor of Chinese literature and the chairman of the department's graduate division.
They include Asian and Near Eastern Humanities; Asian, North African and Pacific Languages and Civilizations, and Eastern Philology.


3-Judge Panel Will Consider a Challenge to Redistricting
A three-judge Federal panel will hear arguments on Tuesday in a suit filed by a Hispanic group that wants to postpone the New York City Council election scheduled for November.
The group says the new Council districts are unfair to Hispanic people.
Judge I. Leo Glasser ruled in the group's favor on Wednesday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, saying that Council candidates could not begin submitting their nominating petitions on Monday as scheduled because the Justice Department had not yet approved the redistricting plan.


Lauren Jaburg to Marry Peter L. Lese
Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Jaburg of the Van Cortlandt section of the Bronx have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Lauren Renee Jaburg, and Peter Lawrence Lese, a son of Ruth E. Lese of Manhattan and William M. Lese of Manhattan and London.
Ms.
Jaburg, 27 years old, is studying for a master's degree in midwifery at Columbia University, where she received a bachelor's degree in nursing.
She received a Bachelor of Arts degree from Oberlin College.
Her father is a vice president of the Chain Furniture Shops in Manhattan.
Her mother, who is retired, was a psychiatric social worker at the Bronx Psychiatric Center.


'Out of the Channel'
To the Editor:
In one of the final paragraphs of his review of "Out of the Channel: The Exxon Valdez Oil Spill in Prince William Sound" by John Keeble (April 28), Timothy Egan informs us: "There are sharp passages in this book about what a flood of oil does to an unspoiled landscape and its inhabitants -- descriptions of otters scratching their eyes out, birds gagging on the toxic sludge and villagers discovering the capitalistic impulse to gouge their customers." Two sentences later, Mr.
Egan continues: "While there is nothing funny about the spill, the tone of this book is a bit too grim, occasionally even preachy, and misses the raucous humor that Alaskans themselves found in an oil giant humbled by the accidental release of its prized cargo."


Finley Battered in First Inning As Red Sox Rout Angels, 13-3
Chuck Finley gave up seven runs on six hits in the first inning and the Boston Red Sox went to rout the California Angels, 13-3, today.
Finley (10-3) entered the game tied for the major-league lead in victories and with a 3.12 earned run average.
But he lasted only two-thirds of an inning.


Elizabeth Walsh to Wed B. D. Rutledge
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph N. Walsh Jr. of Bedford, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Hunt Walsh, to Brian Dean Rutledge, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul D. Rutledge of Malden, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Walsh, 29 years old, is a product manager for American Express in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is the vice president of personnel at New York Telephone.
Her mother, Patricia Walsh, teaches English at Rye High School in Rye, N.Y.


A.B. (Happy) Chandler, 92, Dies; Led Baseball During Integration
A.B. (Happy) Chandler, the jovial Kentucky politician who resigned from the United States Senate in 1945 to succeed Kenesaw Mountain Landis in what turned out to be a monentous term as the secon commissioner of baseball, died early yesterday at his home in Versailles, Ky.
He was 92 years old, and according to his family he died of a heart attack.


Pangs of an Abandoned Child
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE
By Amy Tan. 415 pp. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


Works of a Former Body Builder Reveal a Potential for Power
UNDER the direction of Zina Davis, the Joseloff Gallery has become an outpost of sophistication by showing artists of distinction but not necessarily of Connecticut.
They have ranged from the sculptor Mia Westerlund Roosen to the photographer Aaron Siskind, from Arakawa to Neil Welliver.
The agenda is always unpredictable.
The present incumbent is Alfred Leslie, who is this year's occupant of the Richard Koopman Distinguished Chair in the Visual Arts at the Hartford Art School, which adjoins the Joseloff on the University of Hartford campus.
Mr.
Leslie's painting is to be found in the collections of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago and the Hirshorn Museum, in Washington.
In Manhattan, he has exhibited in groups at the Museum of Modern Art and the Whitney and Metropolitan Museums, and there have been numerous solos in private galleries, there and abroad.


Grace Sheffield and Thomas Patterson Are Wed
Grace Wacker Sheffield, the daughter of Thomas C. Sheffield of Chicago and Sandra S. Sheffield of Lake Forest, Ill., was married in Lake Forest yesterday to Thomas Alan Patterson, a son of Dr.
William R. Patterson of Grand Junction, Colo., and Joan T. Patterson of Denver.
The Rev.
J.
Clark Grew performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Holy Spirit.
Both are Harvard University graduates.
Mrs.
Patterson, 23 years old, is a policy evaluator in the Chicago bureau of the U.S.
General Accounting Office.
Her father is a member of the Chicago Board of Trade.
Mr.
Patterson, 25, is a business analyst in Cleveland with McKinsey &amp; Company.
His father is an orthopedic surgeon in Grand Junction.


Deborah Savitz Is Married
Deborah Renee Savitz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Savitz of Philadelphia, was married there yesterday to Richard Adam Senzer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Senzer of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Ira Grescott officiated at Congregation Shaare Shamayim.


Nancy Lebowitz Wed to Gregg Linde
Dr.
Nancy Beth Lebowitz, a daughter of Estelle Lebowitz of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., and the late Meyer Lebowitz, was married yesterday to Gregg Randall Linde, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Linde of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Richard Chapin at the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 34 years old, is an obstetrician and a gynecologist.
She is an assistant attending physician at New York Hospital and a clinical instructor at the Cornell Medical College.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received her M.D. degree from the University of Cincinnati.
Her father was a floor manager at B. Altman &amp; Company in New York.


20,000 Ordered Back to the U.S., Fleeing Volcano
The Defense Department announced Sunday that because of the deadly volcanic eruption in the Philippines 20,000 Americans were being evacuated to the United States, including the families of Navy and Air Force workers at two huge military bases and all civilian employees.
At least 76 people have been killed since the volcano, 4,800-foot Mount Pinatubo, began spewing molten rock and a miles-high cloud of swirling ash a week ago, the Philippine Red Cross reported early today.


Kim Wachenheim Is Married in Rye
Kim Wachenheim, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar Wachenheim 3d of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday at her parents' home to David Wagman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Wagman of Rye.
Rabbi Emily Korzenik performed the ceremony.
The bride, 24 years old, is a teacher at the Fieldston Lower School in Riverdale, the Bronx.
A graduate of Skidmore College, she is studying for a master's degree in education at Manhattanville College.
Her father is the chairman of Greenhaven Associates, investment managers in New York.


Karen Saponar Marries Steven Lindsey Begleiter
Karen Saponar, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Saponar of North Bellmore, L.I., was married last evening in Melville, L.I., to Steven Lindsey Begleiter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin Begleiter of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Earl Kideckel and Cantor Saul Rubenstein performed the ceremony at the South Huntington Jewish Center.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
She is keeping her name.
Her father is an engineer with the Long Island Lighting Company.


Spanish Politics? The Generation Gap Is Yawning
In the late 1960's, with the Franco dictatorship still very much in power, Spain's version of the generation gap defined the distance between idealistic young leftists who were fighting for democracy and parents who preferred the safety of political indifference.
Today, with the middle-class students of 25 years ago now dominating business, professions and politics here, a generation gap has again opened up, but this time Spain's youths have chosen the search for security instead of political activity as their form of rebellion.


Sununu Went to Stamp Auction in U.S. Car
John H. Sununu, who was rebuked by President Bush last month for using military aircraft for personal trips, used a White House limousine and driver last week to take him to a stamp auction in New York and to run other errands in Manhattan.
Newsweek, which reported the trip in the issue that goes on sale Monday, said Mr.
Sununu, the White House chief of staff, had consulted his own staff but not the White House counsel, C. Boyden Gray.
Last month the White House adopted a new policy requiring him to get approval in advance from Mr.
Gray for trips that mixed official business and personal or political travel.


Bronx Crash, Then Contest Of Lawyers
When four Canadian tourists burned to death in a fiery collision with a tanker truck in the Bronx last month, condolences poured in to their families from friends, strangers -- and many New York lawyers.
One New York lawyer showed up at a memorial service at McCall's Bronxwood Funeral Home.


Ora Schorr Weds Alan Kriegstein
Ora Lee Schorr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joachim Schorr of Warren, N.J., was married last night at the Plaza in New York to Alan Michael Kriegstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roman Kriegstein of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi William Horn and Rabbi Eugene Lipman performed the ceremony.
The bride, 25 years old, graduated from Brandeis University and is a doctoral candidate in health psychology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
Her father owns Aspiring Associates, a residential land development and management company in Warren.


Baker Will Visit Albania for the First Time
Underscoring the Administration's heightened attention to unrest in the Balkan region, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d is to visit Albania and Yugoslavia this week.
His trip to Albania on Wednesday, after talks in Berlin on the future of Europe, will be the first by an American Secretary of State.
Albania resumed diplomatic relations with Washington in March after a 51-year interruption.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet New York State Theater
Because he constantly developed traditional ballet technique, George Balanchine is sometimes called a Neo-Classicist.
But he did more than use old steps in new ways.
The content of his ballets is frequently akin to that of visionary or even Surrealist art.


Big Order Expected By Airbus
Airbus Industrie plans to announce this week that the Federal Express Corporation, the express airfreight carrier, will order up to 75 new cargo planes from Airbus in a $6 billion deal, officials from the European aircraft consortium said.
The deal, which is set to be announced at the Paris Air Show in the next few days, will be one of Airbus's biggest successes in the American market, which has long been dominated by Boeing and McDonnell Douglas.
The order will also be the consortium's largest ever for cargo aircraft.


Hospital in Bronx Fights to Save Service
Over the last few years, as Lincoln Hospital expanded its clinic for the sick people who can still walk in off the streets of the South Bronx, the hospital managed a small revolution.
The hospital's emergency room -- suffocated by asthma cases and heart attacks, AIDS and urban violence -- began to breathe easier.
The thousands of patients who needed less urgent care each month were seen separately, and did not have to wait so long.


Small Surprises In Sports Survey
Of all sports, only basketball has increased its fan base over the last five years, according to a Sports Illustrated poll released yesterday.
Pro football, though, remained king, just as it was in 1986 in the magazine's last such poll.
The poll also measured attitudes toward various aspects of sporting life.
For instance, it showed that more Americans reject the idea of women reporters in mens' locker rooms than did five years ago.


Lightning Causes Fire at A-Plant in Massachusetts
A nuclear plant in western Massachusetts declared an emergency early yesterday after lightning set fire to one of its transformers, knocked out both power lines carrying electricity for safety systems and shut down its telephone switchboard.
No one was injured, and there was no release of radiation.


It's Hot. And So Are the Twins.
The Minnesota Twins are not exactly nonchalant about their remarkable winning streak, but they aren't dwelling on it either.
"They're in there watching the golf," Tom Kelly, the Twins' manager, said, speaking from his office in the visiting team's clubhouse in Cleveland yesterday after his torrid team trimmed the Indians, 4-2, in 10 innings.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Ad Scene; An Intimate Warning Against Mediocrity
WHEN a scholar writes that "commercial culture" is increasingly driving television and journalism "toward the lowest common denominator, suppressing variety in taste and opinion," it would seem easy to dismiss the complaint as one more critique of mass media.
But when the writer has one of the most respected names in media and advertising, and when he blames advertising for shortening attention spans, diminishing the capacity to distinguish news from entertainment and suppressing novelty in the media, he may find himself in a lively debate whith the marketers and media companies he once served.


Editorial Notebook; Wrong Track for Tribes
Connecticut is getting a casino, like it or not.
Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan has approved the operation of a gambling hall on the Mashantucket Pequot Indian reservation near New London.
Two governors tried to stop it, but the Pequots won in court.
Casino gambling now has another foothold, setting a precedent for still more.
It may seem ugly to object just when Indians are getting a crack at this lucrative business.
But the overriding issue is the spread of casino gambling; that the issue is raised by Indians is unfortunate happenstance.


AIDS TESTS URGED FOR 328 PATIENTS
A family doctor who practices in the Minneapolis area has sent letters to 328 of his patients telling them he has the AIDS virus and urging them to be tested by the state.
The doctor, Philip Benson, 39 years old, continued to perform invasive procedures, including delivering babies and conducting oral, rectal and gynecological examinations, after the virus was diagnosed last September, state health officials said.


Seasons' Meetings
That no sweet corn or local tomatoes were for sale at her neighborhood Greenmarket surprised a New Yorker last week.
It's not that she doesn't know which season produces what.
It's just that for one absent-minded moment she'd confused this June with August.
Small wonder.
Summer's already been with us long enough to suggest that September is just around the corner.
Once, months stood for something: they had parts to play.
March, for instance, possessed both a lion's roar and a lamb's bleat.
April laughed her girlish laughter, and then, a moment after, wept her girlish tears.
May had its darling buds, October had its bright blue weather and December was invariably drear-nighted.


European Ban On Fur Imports
The European Community, ignoring United States and Canadian demands for a delay, said on Friday that beginning in 1995 it would ban imports of animal fur from countries using leg-hold traps considered inhumane.
But under heavy pressure from France, community environment ministers decided to put off outlawing the traps in the community itself until 1995, two years later than planned.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings for this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late in the day Friday the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.59 percent and the six-month bill at 5.78 percent.


Gerrymandering In the Name Of Equality
The following exchange actually took place last year before New York City's Board of Elections:
Assemblyman Vito J. Lopez of Brooklyn was complaining that a challenger in the impending Democratic primary, Victor Lopez, was running only to dupe voters into electing a third candidate.
To distinguish one Lopez from another, Victor's lawyer suggested that the ballot follow traditional Hispanic style and list the surnames of each candidate's two parents.
Like Victor, the district is predominantly Hispanic; Vito isn't.
He's of Italian descent and was rejected by the Legislature's Black and Puerto Rican Caucus (but maintains that he is 12 1/2 percent Hispanic because one grandfather was born in Barcelona).


Searching for Gems in the Slush Pile
It's called the slush pile.
And as the name implies, it is the book publishing equivalent of the industrial slag heap, a mound of unsolicited proposals, sample chapters and full-length manuscripts.
Even houses that bother to read slush, as the industry calls it, view it as a mixed blessing, while some prominent houses do not read it at all -- and do not return manuscripts unless postage is enclosed.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of June 16, 1991:  MONDAY Bunker Hill Incm Secs Inc NBD Bancorp PHH Corp Rykoff-Sexton Inc


Pew Trusts to Offer $50,000 Arts Grants
Sixteen artists in the Philadelphia area will receive fellowships of $50,000 from the Pew Charitable Trusts next June, administrators at the Trusts has announced.
The fellowships are part of a three-year pilot program, called the Pew Fellowships in the Arts, under which a total of 48 artists in five Pennsylvania counties will be given grants to continue and develop their work.


East Europe's Press Still Beckoning
More than a year after the start of a fierce bidding war among foreign publishers for newspapers and magazines in Eastern Europe, the involvement of American media companies there remains minimal.
Except for Time Warner Inc., which has a partial interest in developing and operating cable systems in Hungary representing 250,000 subscribers and is looking into developing a pay-television movie service there, none of the big American newspaper or magazine publishers are competing for ownership of Eastern Europe's emerging free press.


A Mystery From China's Census: Where Have Young Girls Gone?
The pigs amble lazily among the mud-brick houses and the grinning children play Ping-Pong on flat bits of ground, for an almost picture-perfect image of bucolic contentment.
But villages like this one in central China still have their secrets, perhaps dark ones, as something is missing in these hamlets: several million little girls.
Newly released data from China's 1990 census support previous suspicions that 5 percent of all infant girls born in China are unaccounted for.
It is not clear what has happened to them.


CHRONICLE
FRANK LANGELLA , the suave actor in "Dracula" and many other plays and films, is rehearsing for his first musical role, as Henry Higgins in "My Fair Lady." The musical runs from July 10 through July 28 at the Houston Grand Opera.
First, Mr.
Langella learned the songs in New York.
"About 95 percent of the cast, 50 people, are singers," he said, "so I didn't want to show up not knowing the music." He said that he had not previously tackled a musical because he wanted a strong company.
Houston has produced many acclaimed music theater works, including a "Porgy and Bess" that came to Broadway in 1977.


Namibia Is Declared Eligible for 1992 Games
In an unexpected move, the International Olympic Committee announced today that it had granted recognition to Namibia, enabling the southwest African country to participate in the Olympics next year in Barcelona, Spain.
The move appeared to be a precursor to the readmission of South Africa, which could come next month.
South Africa was expelled from the Olympics in 1970 because of its system of racial separation.


Quotation of the Day
"I think we have an obligation to help these people -- that's why I've been here for 16 years. But if they cut back too far, they're putting our licenses on the line. How can you provide good quality care with so few people and so many patients?" -- Dr.
B.
K.
Rajegowda, chief of neo-natology at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx.  [ B4:4. ]


Stocks Ease in Tokyo
Prices fell on the Tokyo Stock Exchange this morning.
At the midday recess, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was lower by 84.82 points, or 0.34 percent, to 25,009.07.


Will Stadium Be House That Youth Rebuilt?
Every day, it seems, a fresh face passes through the Yankee clubhouse door.
Last month, it was Pat Kelly, then Wade Taylor.
Two weeks ago, Jeff Johnson was called up.
Today, Carlos Rodriguez.
Tomorrow, Scott Kamieniecki.
If there was ever a question about the Yankees' commitment to their young players, they answered it clearly this weekend when they summoned Rodriguez to play shortstop -- for today, at least -- and announced that Kamieniecki would make his major league debut on the mound Tuesday in Toronto.


People
*
Joseph Philport has joined Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising, New York, as senior vice president and director of media research worldwide.
He had previously been senior vice president of market development for the A. C. Nielsen division of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation. *
Jack V. Walz has been promoted to director of account management, BBDO South, Atlanta, from executive vice president.


Women's Combat Role Raises Questions
To the Editor:
"As the military downsizes in the coming years," Capt.
Carol Barcalow suggests in "Women's Role in Combat: The War Resumes" (front page, May 26), "women will need to be convinced that they have the chance for future advancement. And that means combat arms cannot be closed to them." You also quote Prof.
Charles Moscos of Northwestern University saying: "I don't know if everyone will rush to expose enlisted women to combat so female officers can advance their careers. Enlisted women are not clamoring for it."


Hackensack to Hobe Sound
From the 1940's through the 1970's, two generations of Yankee fans said, "Meet me at Manny's." That would be Manny's Baseball Land, across the street from the Yankee Stadium bleachers on River Avenue in the Bronx.
Manny's was the place you bought your pennants and programs ("I used to hawk them on the corner," says Manny's daughter, LISA ).
But in 1978, MANNY KOENIGSBERG retired to Las Vegas, Nev., and the business moved to New Jersey, first to Cliffside Park, then to Hackensack.


Saab Agency in Move To Expand Services
Angotti, Thomas, Hedge, the advertising agency for Saab, is hiring its first media director in a move that might have an impact on where another auto maker's account lands.
Effective today, Gene Willhoft joins the agency from Grace &amp; Rothschild, where he was director of media services.
"It made sense for us to bring a greater focus in-house to media," said the agency's president, Barrie Hedge, who confirmed Mr.
Willhoft's appointment, which was first reported in the trade publication Inside Media.


A Town Goes Alaskan for 'Northern Exposure'
On a chilly day a few weeks ago, Pat Reed, a clerk at Central Sundries in the tiny mountain city of Roslyn, raced to the window, adjusted her trifocals and watched a dozen or so naked men run down Main Street.
They ran smack into the mayor and police chief, who were livid.
"I could have died!" bellowed Mrs.
Reed, who is 59 years old.
"My goodness, I've been married 40 years, and I've never seen anything like that!"


Life Is an Endless Unfolding, Stanford Is Told
Addressing graduates at the 100th commencement of Stanford University, John W. Gardner, the founder of the lobbying group Common Cause, said yesterday that society was too goal oriented.
"Life isn't a mountain that has a summit. Nor a game that has a final score," said Mr.
Gardner, who is the Haas Professor of Public Service at Stanford.
"Life is an endless unfolding, and if we wish it to be, an endless process of self-discovery, an endless and unpredictable dialogue between our own potentialities and the life situations in which we find ourselves."


Ruffled Feathers in Random Eaves
Harold Evans was brought to Random House eight months ago with a mandate from its owner, S. .I.
Newhouse, to revamp a publisher that was scarcely profitable.
Since then, drastic changes in staff and style have left no doubt that Mr.
Evans takes this mission seriously.
He seems to have provoked resentment and admiration in equal measure.
Moving with a dispatch to which a conservative industry is unaccustomed, the former British newspaperman has appointed a new director of marketing, a new associate publisher, a new executive editor, a new creative director and a new executive art director.
Several people have been quietly eased out.
Mr.
Evans, a man never much interested in the status quo, has also committed Random House to broadening its publishing in business, science, art and current events.


Doubt Grows on Recession's End
After being roiled for weeks in a debate over whether the economy was recovering, the bond market decided on Friday that the recession's end was not yet in sight.
What prompted this assessment was the growing belief that the flow of Government economic data for May that was released late last week was not adjusted for the weather factor.


U.S. Ban of Infected Travelers Attacked at World AIDS Conference
The United States Government came under sharp attack at the opening of the seventh international meeting on AIDS here today for its policy on restricting entry of travelers infected with the disease.
The critics, including scientists and health officials from around the world, also attacked the Bush Administration's last-minute decision to send only a couple hundred Federal scientists -- half the size of the original delegation -- to Italy for the six-day meeting.


CHRONICLE
ROBERTO MEMMO , an Italian real- estate developer, textile tycoon, art collector and investor, has scored an amazing coup -- taking a collection of Old Master drawings from the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, England, to Rome.
The exhibition of drawings from the museum's Cabinet of Rarities consists of 100 works by such artists as Michelangelo, Bernini, Rembrandt and others.
The works have never traveled.
"The exhibition includes a representative group of drawings including some of the most famous in our collection," said DR.
CHRISTOPHER WHITE , the museum's director.
"It is a unique event for us to send drawings of that caliber abroad and we've never done so to Italy before."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None


4 Guards Killed in Denver Bank Robbery
Four guards were shot to death today in a bank robbery, the authorities said.
The police said three guards were found in a basement room used for monitoring the United Bank of Denver.
The room is near the bank's vault.
A Police spokesman, David Neil said, the fourth victim was in the same general area.


Coleman on Disabled List
The Mets placed center fielder Vince Coleman on the 15-day disabled list with a strained left hamstring yesterday, and utility player Keith Miller was activated to replace him.
Coleman's placement on the list is retroactive to Saturday.
Coleman injured his leg Friday night while running out a grounder in the seventh inning against the Astros.
Manager Bud Harrelson said that Coleman had pulled muscles in his left leg before and that the Mets want to be cautious and allow him to recuperate slowly.
"We're being on the safe side with what we've done," Harrelson said.


Air Turbulence Injures 7 Aboard KLM Jet
A jetliner belonging to KLM Royal Dutch Airlines ran into turbulence 20 minutes from Baltimore today, injuring one passenger and six crew members, an airport official said.
The Boeing 747 flying from Amsterdam went through turbulence for about five seconds, said Carol T. Riley, a spokeswoman for Baltimore-Washington International Airport.


A Screwy Subsidy for Drivers
Your employer can give you $15 worth of tax-free tokens, passes or fare cards each month for riding to work on public transportation.
If it's more, you're taxed on the full amount, not just the part over $15.
There is no such lid, however, when companies provide free parking for people who commute by car.
That's a tax-exempt freebie, worth hundreds of dollars.
Sound screwy?
It is.
Heedless of fuel efficiency and the environment, the tax code favors driving to work.
President Bush's energy message declared that something -- he didn't say what -- should be done about it.
Administration officials lean toward a one-third increase in the modest mass-transit subsidy, plus an adjustment for inflation.


The End of Union
On June 22, 1941 50 years ago this Saturday -- Hitler's "Operation Barbarossa" began: three million German troops invaded the Soviet Union.
The "Great Patriotic War," as Communists like to call it, gave a temporary sense of nationhood to a far-flung collection of separate peoples who never were a nation.
Now, a half-century later, that imperial unity is dissolved, defeated not by any invader but by the failure of its overextended tyranny.
The Soviet "union" is no more a union today than the British Empire is an empire.


Equity Issues Scheduled to Take Place During the Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week: Advanta Corp., 1.75 million common shares.
Prudential Securities.


Books of The Times; Tales From Japan's Postwar Generation
Monkey Brain Sushi New Tastes in Japanese Fiction Edited by Alfred Birnbaum 304 pages.
Kodansha International . $18.95.
New Japanese Voices The Best Contemporary Fiction From Japan Edited by Helen Mitsios 175 pages.
Morgan Entrekin/ Atlantic Monthly Press . $18.95.


Fittipaldi Wins After Mishap
Emerson Fittipaldi today came away with his first victory of the season by winning the Detroit Grand Prix, a race featuring a bizzare incident involving Mario and Michael Andretti and a safety truck that caused a stoppage of nearly an hour.
Fittipaldi, the Brazilian who also won here in 1989 on the way to the CART driving championship, held off a determined effort by the series point leader, Bobby Rahal, over the final dozen laps on the tight 2.5-mile, 17-turn circuit winding through the streets of downtown Detroit.


A Baby for Father's Day, Via 1-800-Deliver
A Manhattan man celebrated Father's Day yesterday by delivering his daughter in his apartment while getting step-by-step instructions over the telephone from an ambulance dispatcher, the police said.
The man, Juan Silva-Raymos, delivered his daughter, 6-pound-6-ounce Ashley Anne Silva-Raymos, at 10 A.M., shortly after her mother, Sherri, 27 years old, went into labor, said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman.


Midge Nutman, Lawyer, Is Wed
Martha Jane Nutman and Leonard Joel Kreppel were married yesterday at Congregation Kneses Tifereth Israel in Port Chester, N.Y., by Rabbi Alfredo S. Winter.
The bride is the daughter of Dr.  and Mrs.
Norman N. Nutman of Oradell, N.J.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris M. Kreppel of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The bride, who is keeping her name and is known as Midge, is an associate at the New York law firm of Ross &amp; Cohen.
A graduate of the University of Michigan, she received a J.D. degree from St.
John's University.
Her father is a retired oral surgeon, and her mother, Norma S. Nutman, is a sculptor.


Kuwait Orders 3 More to Die
Three men were sentenced to death today by a martial law court, bringing to 12 the number of defendants facing hanging for collaborating with the Iraqis during the occupation of Kuwait.
Eleven other defendants were given prison terms ranging from 7 to 25 years of hard labor.


Lauren Osborne, An Editor, Is Wed
Lauren Melanie Osborne, a daughter of Judith Edwards of Glen Head, L.I., and Conrad L. Osborne of New York, was married yesterday to Robert Charles Lieberman, the son of Elizabeth C. Lieberman and Henry S. Lieberman of Newton, Mass.
Rabbi Albert S. Axelrad performed the ceremony at the Boston Center for Adult Education.
The 26-year-old bride, who is keeping her name, is an editor at the Harvard University Press.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a novelist, a voice teacher and a freelance opera critic in New York.
Her mother teaches English in the East Meadow, L.I., public schools.
The bride's stepmother, Molly Regan, is an actress.


Vladimir Petrov, 84, Soviet Defector in '54
Vladimir M. Petrov, a Soviet spy whose defection in 1954 opened espionage investigations in Australia, died on Friday, officials announced today.
He was 84 years old.
No cause of death was given.


3 Saved From Brooklyn Blaze
A 4-year-old Brooklyn boy, his mother and his aunt were rescued from their burning home yesterday morning by two police officers who kicked in the front door, the police said.
The boy, Raynard Johnson; his mother, Erica, 19, and his aunt, Ella Johnson, 24, were not injured in the fire, at 143 Moffat Street in the East New York section.
They were rescued by Officers Robert Mascia and Ernest Graham, who were on patrol.


East Europe's Press Still Beckoning
More than a year after the start of a fierce bidding war among foreign publishers for newspapers and magazines in Eastern Europe, the involvement of American media companies there remains minimal.
Except for Time Warner Inc., which has a partial interest in developing and operating cable systems in Hungary representing 250,000 subscribers and is looking into developing a pay-television movie service there, none of the big American newspaper or magazine publishers are competing for ownership of Eastern Europe's emerging free press.


PARTY OF GANDHI NARROWLY AHEAD IN INDIA ELECTION
After the most violent election campaign in India's 44 years of independence, the Congress Party appeared to be leading in the national election today, but by a margin that would force it into a coalition with another party in order to form a new government.
Political experts projected that the party, which had hoped for a sympathy vote after the assassination on May 21 of its leader, Rajiv Gandhi, would win about 210 seats; 256 are needed for a majority in Parliament that would permit it to name a Prime Minister.
At 10 A.M. today, the Congress Party had won 136 of the 237 seats decided.


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater Metropolitan Opera House
Cynthia Harvey and Susan Jaffe were prominent among the young dancers whom Mikhail Baryshnikov selected to groom from the start in 1980 as he began his 10-year tenure as artistic director of American Ballet Theater.


Gail Pomerantz Is Married
Gail Felice Pomerantz, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Pomerantz of Denver, was married last evening in Cedarhurst, L.I., to Bruce David Shapiro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Shapiro of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Stuart Saposh officiated at Temple Beth-El.


Police in India Put Toll in Train Attacks Between 76 and 126
Police accounts in the north Indian state of Punjab said today that somewhere between 76 and 126 people had died Saturday in attacks on two passenger trains near the industrial city of Ludhiana.
Early reports on Saturday night had put the death toll between 80 and 110.
A reporter for the national news agency, The Press Trust of India, said that the uncertainty on the number of casualties was explained in part by wounded passengers' lying among the dead, either unable or too fearful to move after gangs of men with automatic weapons strafed compartments.


Hindu Nationalists' Power Solidifies
A Hindu revivalist party, attacked by political critics as dangerous to India's secular tradition and alarming to the country's large Muslim minority, emerged early today as the most powerful force in Indian politics after the Congress Party.
Election returns on Sunday and early today indicated that the Hindu nationalist group, the Bharatiya Janata Party, had won control of India's most populous state, Uttar Pradesh, and had made gains -- and suffered some losses -- in the nation's 10th Parliament election.
Early returns indicated that the party may have suffered seriously in three states where it holds power, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan.
Gaining ground in those states was the Congress Party.


Ethiopians in Israel Get Equal Treatment
To the Editor:
Your June 6 report "200 Ethiopians Trapped in West Bank" implies that these immigrants from the 1984 airlift are being denied choices in housing and employment, being forced to hold menial jobs far from home.


Corrections
An article in some editions last Monday about the Puerto Rican Day Parade misidentified a colleague of Capt.
Manuel Rivera Jr. of the Bronx, a Marine jet pilot who was killed in the Persian Gulf war.
The colleague, Capt.
Wayne T. Ice of Atlanta, was a squadron mate of Captain Rivera, not his commander.


Accounts
*
Austin Computer Systems, Austin, Tex., a manufacturer of I.B.M.-compatible computers, to Larsen Colby/ LHV&amp;B, Los Angeles.
The agency said that billings are $3 million to $4 million.
Six other agencies were included in the review. *
Embassy Suite Hotels, Irving, Tex., to Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine, Orlando, Fla., for two hotels, in New York and Palm Beach Shores, Fla.
The agency said billings are about $2 million.


Homeless Deserve Help as Much as Victims of War and Famine
To the Editor:
This morning, I heard an advertisement for aid and resettlement of Ethiopian Jews on a radio news station.
This was followed by a news item involving the removal of the homeless and squatters from Tompkins Square Park that had none of the sympathetic tone of the preceding commercial.


Nicknames in the Age of P. C.
At Texas Christian, they've been calling the school's female athletes the Lady Frogs for years.
Given the questions of political correctness recently sweeping American college campuses, Women Frogs might be more sensitive.
Either way, it sounds better than the men's teams name of Horned Frogs.
Or does it?
Following is a selective look at other differences in names of men's and women's teams on campus:


But Dad, What If Skip Tries to Call
The news media, friends, and well-wishers had a tough time reaching PHIL JACKSON just when they needed him most.
The Chicago Bulls' coach, hardly a prima donna, changed his phone number during the finals against the Lakers.
It seems that every youngster in Deerfield, Ill., a Chicago suburb, was calling.
The yearbook at the school one of his daughter's attends listed her phone number. . . .
Hoboken, N.J., another town where baseball was not invented, nevertheless will try to perpetuate the myth on Wednesday.
First comes a parade at 5:30 P.M., and then a pair of games at Stevens Tech, starting at 7 P.M.
The opening games promise to be a re-creation of a game played in 1846 by ALEXANDER CARTWIGHT , and which village historians contend was really the first baseball game.


World Economies


Review/Theater; A Recognizable O'Neill And a Strange Chekhov
Ingmar Bergman's version of "Long Day's Journey Into Night" is an evening of anguished cries and fearful whispers, in which the troubled Tyrones haunt one another with specters from the past.
In this Swedish-language production (presented on the weekend at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Majestic Theater), the director has made minor alterations in the text, but has kept the powerful core of O'Neill's masterpiece intact.
In contrast, Eimuntas Nekrosius's Lithuanian-language production of "Uncle Vanya" (through June 30 at the Joyce Theater) is an eccentric adaptation, like no other version of the play one has seen -- or that Chekhov could have imagined.
This State Theater of Lithuania production is earnest in its eagerness to be unconventional and unerring in its ability to be digressionary.


Dirt Roads: Deep Ruts, High Cost, but Status
In the beginning, there were dirt roads.
In spring, tires got stuck in the mud; in summer, a film of dirt dulled shiny cars.
Then there were paved roads, an indisputable sign of progress.
Right?
Wrong.
Across northern Westchester County and in neighboring Putnam County, dirt road devotees argue that it is worthwhile to save a disappearing network of back roads that evoke the bucolic simplicity of another century.
And these advocates -- often affluent commuters to Manhattan, horse farm owners and would-be naturalists -- hold their position even as some officials of financially strapped towns point out that dirt roads cost twice as much to maintain as paved roads do.


A Flower Vendor Dies After Youths Beat Him
Xisto Martinez rose early yesterday.
His own family was in Mexico, but for flower vendors in New York City, Father's Day is always busy.
From the windowless basement room he shared with three other men on 158th Street, he set out for the streets of Washington Heights, stopping at a Blimpie's for a coffee.
When he came out, three youths stood beside his shopping cart and asked him to give them flowers for Father's Day, the police said.
When he refused, they demanded.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


Braves' Nixon Steals a Record Six Bases
Former Expos player Otis Nixon set a modern-day National League record with six stolen bases, but it wasn't enough as Montreal rallied for three runs in the sixth inning to beat the Atlanta Braves, 7-6, today.
Nixon singled in the ninth and stole second and third, but was stranded as the Expos swept the three-game series.
Nixon tied the modern major league record for steals in a game set by Eddie Collins of the Philadelphia A's in 1912.


Reviews/Pop; Fishbone's Group Dynamics
One of the better things about American popular music is that it has traditionally encouraged audience participation, and at Fishbone's show on Saturday night, the audience participated.
At one point the group's lead singer, Angelo Moore, had the entire floor of the Academy, on West 43d Street, moving in a huge slam-dancing circle.
At another, he had himself carried out by members of the audience on the floor to the balcony, where he lifted himself off their hands, wandered around upstairs, then jumped back into their waiting arms.
For the whole show, the audience, miasmic and dancing wildly, offered up enough stage-divers to keep the bouncers at the stage looking threatened.


TBWA Chosen By Club Med
The Club Med account, estimated at about $15 million, has been awarded to TBWA Advertising Inc., New York, after two stays with Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York.
For 8 of the last 10 years, Ammirati had created high- visibility campaigns for the resort chain, developing its theme "An antidote to civilization." But the relationship between the two had been turbulent -- they split up in 1985 and reunited in 1987.
In April, Club Med started reviewing the account; two weeks ago, Ammirati withdrew from the review.


East Europe's Press Still Beckoning
More than a year after the start of a fierce bidding war among foreign publishers for newspapers and magazines in Eastern Europe, the involvement of American media companies there remains minimal.
Except for Time Warner Inc., which has a partial interest in developing and operating cable systems in Hungary representing 250,000 subscribers and is looking into developing a pay-television movie service there, none of the big American newspaper or magazine publishers are competing for ownership of Eastern Europe's emerging free press.


U.S. Says Honda Skirted Customs Fees
After a yearlong audit, the United States Customs Service has concluded that Honda took improper advantage of the United States-Canada free-trade agreement to avoid paying millions of dollars in duties on cars imported into the United States from its Alliston, Ontario, plant.
Under the agreement, which was intended to encourage the use of auto parts and labor from the United States and Canada, cars assembled in one of the two countries and shipped across the border are exempt from tariffs if at least half their content comes from either country.


Brazil Seeks To Resolve Debt Impasse
On the eve of a visit to the United States, Brazil's President and his new Economy Minister said in interviews here today that they planned to speed up talks with commercial banks over Brazil's $50 billion foreign debt.
"We have a sense of urgency," Marcilio Marques Moreira, the Economy Minister, said of the debt impasse which has moved little in the first 15 months of the Government here.
"I hope that by the end of the year we might have it wrapped up."


From Moscow to Leningrad, Russia's Timeless Heartland
To drive from Moscow to Leningrad in the springtime is to wander through the backroads of Russian history.
The high-rise boxes of Moscow give way quickly to a panorama of whimsically painted wooden huts listing in the mud, to a vast horizon of birches, fields and swollen rivers punctuated by the onion dome of a village church.
Grizzled men still wield razor-sharp axes to shape raw logs and grannies wrapped in thick shawls tend goats by the roadside.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 17


Jets and Redskins Defy the Trend
The Jets and the Washington Redskins remain the last National Football League clubs that do not require their season-ticket holders to buy tickets for preseason games (the Giants recently joined the rest of the pack).
The Jets' president, STEVE GUTMAN , said, "Our fans have not had great enthusiasm for preseason games."


New England Bank Report
The Bank of New England in Boston turned to its sister bank, the Connecticut Bank and Trust Company in Hartford, for billions of dollars in emergency loans in late 1989, a House Banking Committee said.
The report detailed the events that brought down both banks and their parent company, the Bank of New England Corporation, last January.


Reviews/Pop; From the Streets of Brazil To the Stage in New York
Olodum's music was made for the streets.
In Salvador da Bahia, Brazil, Olodum is the best known of the blocos afros, groups of drummers and singers who parade at carnival time and run community centers and political programs throughout the year.
From deep booming fundo drums to penetrating timbales, the percussion is somber and militant, endlessly inventive variations of a marching beat called sambareggae; those words were stenciled on the sides of Olodum's red-gold-green-and-black fundo drums.
The lyrics, set to short call-and-response phrases made for sing-alongs, praise Pan-African culture and revolutionary struggles.
A stripped-down version of Olodum, which is touring the United States, performed indoors on Friday night at Symphony Space, on a triple bill presented by the New York International Festival of the Arts.
Olodum has begun to reach for a worldwide audience, assisted by its appearance on Paul Simon's album "The Rhythm of the Saints." The group's transition from local effort to international phenomenon is a little rocky.
Music that is galvanizing in the streets can grow slightly repetitive on a stage before a seated audience.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
New England Telephone and Telegraph Co., Boston, a Nynex Corporation subsidiary, has filed wiith the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $350 million in debt securities.


We'll Need Home Care and Nursing Homes
To the Editor:
We disagree with "The Nursing Home Rip-Off" by Mary Johnson (Op-Ed, June 2).
Nursing homes are not filled with residents to line the pockets of rapacious owners, nor to warehouse them for the convenience of relatives.
The typical resident of a skilled nursing home is an 81-year-old widow with two chronic medical conditions.
Often she is incontinent and suffers from confusion, usually senile dementia of the Alzheimer's type.


Melissa Foodman, Veterinarian, Wed
Dr.
Melissa S. Foodman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold W. Foodman of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Warren I. Shapiro, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold N. Shapiro of New Hyde Park, L.I.
Rabbi Robert Lennick and Cantor Mark Lipson officiated at Temple Shalom in Norwalk, Conn.
The bride, 30 years old, is a veterinarian and the owner of the Visiting Veterinary Service in Norwalk.
She graduated from Purdue University and its School of Veterinary Medicine.
Her father is the president of the Data Service Company of America in Norwalk.
Her mother, Arline Foodman, is a teacher at Tracey Elementary School in Norwalk.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-9
The most violent elections in India in its 44 years of independence ended with the Congress Party in the lead but by a margin that would force it into a coalition with another party to form a new government.
Page A1
A Hindu nationalist party emerged as the most powerful force in Indian politics after the Congress Party.
The Bharatiya Janata Party is attacked by its political critics as dangerous to India's secular tradition.
A9


Review/Theater; Closing the Books, With Difficulty
Sooner or later, no matter what trade or profession one is in, the urge strikes to cash in one's chips and try a different game.
Plumbers want to become musicians; lawyers yearn to go to sea; accountants decide to write plays.
"Selling Off," a new comedy by Harris W. Freedman at the John Houseman Theater, is about an accountant who decides to quit solving other people's problems and "find himself." By odd coincidence, Mr.
Freedman is a former accountant himself.
One hopes he kept his C.P.A. certificate.
"Selling Off" has about as much humor as a tax audit.


Homeless Deserve Help as Much as Victims of War and Famine; Of Libraries and Odors
To the Editor:
Despite New York City's problems, I am proud to live in a city that does not try to bar the homeless from public libraries.
I am grateful for coverage of the successful court challenge of the Morristown, N.J., practice of ejecting a homeless man from the library for "odoriferousness" (news article, May 23).


Criminologists Disturbed at Private Police Growth
Experts on law enforcement, asked yesterday about the operations of a heavily armed and sometimes violent private security force in some poorer neighborhoods of Brooklyn, called the existence of the group an indictment of the criminal justice system and said it illustrated the need for regulation of the private security industry.
The force, licensed as SSI Patrol Services, provides security for several apartment buildings in the East New York section where heavy drug dealing has been rampant.
The company's unconventional operations were detailed yesterday in The New York Times.


Have Bat, Will Travel: Sasser Goes to First
Mackey Sasser played first base for the Mets yesterday, just as he did at times during spring training.
But back in Port St.
Lucie, when the Mets had not yet lost a game, Manager Bud Harrelson had very different reasons for making the assignment.
"I think he was thinking that if I was catching every day, and it was hot, they'd put me someplace else," Sasser recalled.


Market Place; Victory Predicted By Time Warner
TIME WARNER'S investment bankers told the company that its stock would trade at $100 to $105 a share after it announced its complex rights offering.
But the shares plummeted on the initial news of the deal and continue to languish in the mid-90's; they dropped $1 on Friday to close at $94 in the face of a rising market.
In the offering, made on June 6, the company gave stockholders the chance to buy 34.5 million new shares for $63 to $105 a share, depending on how many accept the deal.
The offering could raise $2.1 billion to $3.5 billion to repay part of $11 billion in bank debt.


Sports of The Times; Two Holes Designed For a Disaster
EVEN before the United States Open began, the golfers feared that Hazeltine National would emerge as a candidate for having the most demanding finishing holes in the history of this annual outdoor torture chamber.
In other years, people talked about the Open's finish at Pebble Beach, Winged Foot, Merion and Oakland Hills.
But out here in the prairie farmland near Minneapolis, the finishing holes, notably the watery 16th -- where a duck blind in the marsh along Lake Hazeltine would be more appropriate than a green -- and the uphill 18th where a Sherpa guide would be more helpful than a caddie, built a reputation faster than most duffers' backswings.
And the more the wind blew, the more their reputation grew.
"Wind is the greatest factor," Tom Watson said before the Open began.
"Wind creates the greatest doubt. I hope to see 20-mile-an-hour wind."


Digital Sees More Layoffs To Cut Costs
The Digital Equipment Corporation, continuing to feel the effects of a sluggish computer market, acknowledged last week that more employees would be laid off in the company's fiscal year that begins on July 1.
James M. Osterhoff, the company's chief financial officer, said costs at the nation's second-largest computer company continued to be too high.
"We're continuing to look for places to cut costs and that is likely to mean fewer jobs," he added.
The company, which is based in Maynard, Mass., ranks only behind the International Business Machines Corporation.


Bridge
Four decades ago two New York experts devised a system that was to have great influence on the game.
Edgar Kaplan and Alfred Sheinwold played their Kaplan-Sheinwold methods with excellent results and attracted a large following.
With teammates using the same style, they captured the National Board-a-Match Team title in 1958.
In New York they were a dominant force, with a record string of four victories in the Reisinger Knockout Teams beginning in 1956.
In 1963 Sheinwold moved to California and put tournament play aside, concentrating on journalism.
But he rejoined Kaplan and other old teammates, Norman Kay, Leonard Harmon and Ivar Stakgold, to win the Reisinger again in 1970.


McDonnell Awards Job
Alenia, an Italian aeronautics group, said today at the Paris Air Show that it had signed contracts to provide the McDonnell Douglas Corporation with 500 fuselage panels for the MD-80 passenger plane and estimated the deal would be worth up to $1 billion over eight to nine years.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Federal Express will order up to 75 cargo planes from Airbus in a $6 billion deal, Airbus officials said.
The deal, which is set to be announced in the next few days, will be one of Airbus's biggest successes in the American market, which has long been dominated by Boeing and McDonnell Douglas.  [ Page D1. ]


World Enough And Time
The road turns a corner, and there across the fields of barley and peas is an enormous church.
Blythburgh, Suffolk, is a tiny village with one shop.
Why does it have such a church?
In the 15th century, when the church was built, Blythburgh was a thriving wool town.
Ships from the Continent came across the North Sea and up the River Blyth to here, trading for Suffolk wool.
But by the time the church was finished, the traders had built larger vessels that could not navigate the river.
The town decayed and disappeared; the church remains, living history.


INSIDE
Pink Slips in New York City Thousands of city workers will get pink slips today, as officials struggle to balance the budget.
Page B1. 43 Shots, One Big Question


Depth and Intensity of U.S. Talent Reflects in Major Turnovers
The four days of competition in the Mobil national track and field championships on Randalls Island last week demonstrated how capricious prominence can be.
Of the 105 athletes who qualified for the world championships in August in Tokyo, just 40 were people who made the American Olympic team in 1988 for the Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea.


Question Box
Early N.B.A. Rival
Q.
About 30 years ago, several years before the American Basketball Association was created, the American Basketball League was the chief rival to the National Basketball Association.
What cities made up the A.B.L. and how long did it last?


A Time for Perspective For Berkeley Chancellor
Shortly after Chang-Lin Tien was sworn in last July as the first Asian-American to head one of the nation's top research universities, the University of California at Berkeley, three students were killed in a fraternity house fire and a deranged gunman took 30 students hostage at a hotel pub, killing one before he was shot and killed by the police.
Dr.
Tien, an engineer with little experience in handling such human stresses, could have been overwhelmed.
But instead he used the crises as opportunities to bring this fractious and divided campus together.


What of the Children Left Behind?
Choice.
It is touted by the Bush Administration as a principal instrument for reforming education.
And it can be a laudable instrument indeed, giving parents, especially poor parents, more say about where their children go to school.
But as the Administration stubbornly refuses to acknowledge, choice by itself is an insufficient instrument, for reasons evident in two questions:
What of parents who are unable or unwilling to choose -- if they are even present?
And what of troubled, poorly performing students who might be less desired by schools?
Until the Administration responds realistically to the children left behind, its drumbeat about school choice offers little bang, and less bucks.


Review/Dance; Folkways Of Russia, Performed On Stage
It is not your usual program of Russian folk traditions.
Knights in medieval tunics appear on the horizon sounding a clarion call to defend Mother Russia, carrying icon banners and pennants.
Women in 19th-century dress and men in Cossack uniforms twirl their sabers, singing of the Cossacks' historical role as defenders of Russia's frontiers.
A young woman has her hair braided by her friends in bejeweled costumes and in a heart-rending lament expresses her fear at an arranged marriage and her sorrow that her mother is dead and cannot bless her.
At the other end of the scale, merriment explodes from an elderly group of men and women from a village in Kursk, in the Russian heartland.
They move counterclockwise in trios as part of the timonya, a dance native to their region.
But another version of the dance is performed by automobile workers from Moscow and others who are attempting to preserve Russian folk culture in an urban environment.


The U.N. Today
Security Council Meets at 4 P.M. on Iraq and Kuwait.
General Assembly SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST APARTHEID -- 10:30 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council SOCIAL COMMITTEE-- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, GOVERNING COUNCIL -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, BUDGETARY AND FINANCE COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M


Louisiana G.O.P. Declines to Back Roemer
Endorsing a candidate for governor in the fall election, the Louisiana Republican Party on Saturday spurned the candidacy of Gov.
Buddy Roemer, a former Democrat who converted to the party this spring, and gave its support instead to United States Representative Clyde C. Holloway.
Delegates to the state convention here also refused to consider endorsing the candidacy of State Representative David Duke for governor after he and Mr.
Roemer refused to sign a pledge to drop out of the race if the party's endorsement went to someone else.


Heat Reportedly Names Loughery
Atlanta Hawks assistant coach Kevin Loughery has been named head coach of the Miami Heat, the Miami television station WTVJ reported today.
Spokesmen for both the Hawks and Heat said tonight that they were unaware a decision had been made on a replacement for Ron Rothstein, who resigned.
Loughery is a former teammate of the Miami owner Billy Cunningham.
He was head coach of the Hawks from 1981-83 and also was head coach with Philadelphia, New Jersey, Chicago and Washington, compiling a 341-503 record.


Sixth Avenue Journal; 50 Years With the Dogs, Not to Mention the Buns
If Leo Cohen were to place all the hot dogs he has sold end to end, the buns would all burn.
"What do I know how many I've sold?" the diminutive gray-haired man with the ready grin said on Wednesday.
"Fifty years I've been here; that's a lot of tube steaks."


Reva Frankle Is Wed To Harold H. Fischer
Dr.
Reva T. Frankle and Harold H. Fischer were married yesterday at the Kittle House Country Inn in Chappaqua, N.Y., by Cantor Dana Troupp.
The bride is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Treelisky of Pittsburgh.
Her husband is a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
David Fischer of Brooklyn.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a nutrition consultant to Weight Watchers International in Jericho, L.I.
She graduated from Carnegie Mellon University and received a doctorate in education from Columbia University.


Roofless Ghost Mocks Exiting Soviet Troops
Among the mementoes left by the Soviet Army as it withdraws from Hungary is a half-completed building on the edge of Budapest's 16th district, a roofless symbol of a rapid departure.
Local inspectors, who made a tour of the base as soon as the Soviet military vacated it last month, have no idea what the building was meant to be.
No documents were left behind, and nothing can be deduced from the piles of pockmarked concrete slabs and broken bricks, gaping stairwell, uneven floors and dangling wires.
But judging from the building's condition, the inspectors were able to conclude that construction had continued during the last l5 months -- that is to say, after Hungary and the Soviet Union signed an agreement for the total withdrawal of Soviet troops by June 30 of this year.


A City Ripe for Depiction


Elena Neuman Wed to Jay Lefkowitz
Elena Neuman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Neuman of New York, was married yesterday in New York to Jay Lefkowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Lefkowitz of Albany.
Rabbis Haskel Lookstein and Moshe Davis performed the ceremony at Tavern on the Green.
Mrs.
Lefkowitz, 24 years old, graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in history from Yale University.
Her father is a real-estate developer and investor in New York.
Her mother, Stephanie Neuman, is a senior research scholar and an adjunct professor of international affairs at Columbia University.


Ms. Frishberg Wed to Louis Wolfowitz
Leslie Robin Frishberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Frishberg of Brooklyn, was married in New York last night to Louis Boyd Wolfowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Wolfowitz of New York.
Rabbi Alvin Kass performed the ceremony at the Equitable Center.
Mrs.
Wolfowitz, 29 years old, is an assistant account executive at Young &amp; Rubicam in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a pharmacist in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Sally Frishberg, teaches a course on the Holocaust at Fort Hamilton High School in Brooklyn.


Enthusiasm Fades for Tying Agency Pay to Performance
IN recent years, the concept of paying advertising agencies based on criteria like how well sales pitches sell products has been one of the hottest trends in the business.
But the latest version of an annual survey of client-agency relationships suggests that the appeal of the concept, known as performance-based compensation, may be waning.
A preview of the 1991 Salz Survey of Advertiser-Agency Relations showed a surprising shift in attitudes toward such compensation practices, said Nancy L. Salz, an industry consultant and author.
She is head of Nancy L. Salz Consulting, a New York-based firm that specializes in counseling companies on ways to improve relations with their agencies.


K. H. Klipstein, 91, Cyanamid President And Philanthropist
Kenneth H. Klipstein, a former president of the American Cyanamid Company and a longtime New Jersey civic leader, died on Friday at the Meadow Lakes Retirement Home in Hightstown, N.J.
He was 91 years old.
He died of emphysema and respiratory failure, his son, David, said.


All Mets Can Field Are Questions
The frustration was obvious in Frank Viola's mannerisms during what proved to be a dreadful seventh inning yesterday.
He waved his arm in the air when Dave Magadan failed to cover first on a grounder the pitcher had deflected toward the base and he shook his head after Gregg Jefferies muffed a grounder at second.
Frustation was also biting at Viola's lips after the game as he spoke of how a 3-2 lead on a promising day at Shea Stadium evolved into a humbling 5-4 loss to the Astros.
Though Viola would not blast the fielders who had played behind him, there is no doubt they were on his mind after New York lost for the sixth time in eight games.


We'll Need Home Care and Nursing Homes; Doing the Job
To the Editor:
Mary Johnson attacks nursing homes (Op-Ed, June 2), using our writing as ammunition.
We are far from apologists for nursing homes, but vigorously disassociate ourselves from her inaccurate analysis.


Boxer Has Head Injury Amid Glove Controversy
Kid Akeem Anifowoshe regained consciousness today after undergoing surgery to relieve pressure on his brain following a loss to Robert Quiroga, the International Boxing Federation junior bantamweight champion.
The fact that six-ounce gloves were used in the fight rather than eight-ounce gloves, which provide more protection, provoked a controversy.


Review/Television; Latter-Day B Pictures For a Smaller Screen
Going to the movies via television is not very different from going to movie houses a few decades ago, when the bill of fare consisted of two or maybe even three features.
There was the main attraction, and then there was the equivalent of potluck.
The latter is what you get, more often than not, in made-for-television movies.
Oddly enough, the experience can be fun, even if discombobulating.
Tonight, for instance, buffs can sample "Seeds of Tragedy," the "Fox Night at the Movies" presentation on Channel 5 at 8, or "Dead on the Money," on TNT at 8 and 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.
"Seeds of Tragedy" is a very serious, often powerful essay on drugs, produced by Sarah Pillsbury and Midge Sanford ("Desperately Seeking Susan," "Eight Men Out," "The Accused").
"Dead on the Money" is a messy but disarmingly loopy mystery adapted by Gavin Lambert ("Inside Daisy Clover") from a Rachel Ingalls story called "The End of Tragedy."


Mauritania Persecutes Its Black Citizens
To the Editor:
"Winds in Mauritania Kill 4," a brief June 2 news item describing a violent storm in Mauritania that killed three women in Nouakchott, the capital of the West African country, and a child in Boutilinit, and injured 300 people, is obviously cause for concern and sadness.


S&amp;A Restaurant Corp. Switches to North Castle
The S&amp;A Restaurant Corporation has awarded its advertising account, estimated to be at least $20 million in billings, to North Castle Partners, of Stamford, Conn.
For nine years, advertising for the company's two restaurant chains, Steak &amp; Ale and Bennigan's, had been handled by Lintas New York.


Playoff Today For Simpson And Stewart
Showing more grit than he ever has before, Payne Stewart alternately withstood and stalked Scott Simpson today until he finally caught him on the 72d hole of the United States Open.
Seemingly dominated by Simpson's metronomic play through 15 holes at the Hazeltine National Golf Club, Stewart was two shots down when he raised his game for the last three holes as Simpson finally faltered.
Finally, on the 452-yard par-4 closing hole, Stewart made a pressure-packed 5-foot par putt to tie.


Among Notables, Bush Plays One Tough Room
President Bush is doing California. The celebrities are underwhelmed, like totally.
Scores of actors, actresses, directors and other movie industry luminaries turned out Saturday night at a party for the President at the Malibu home of Jerry Weintraub, producer of films like "The Karate Kid" and "My Stepmother Is an Alien."
But this is a city where it takes a lot of candlepower to impress the crowds, and as they left the party in a stream of glamour and glitter, the notables seemed to think the event was matter of fact.
Asked about the experience, the actor Tom Hanks shrugged and reported, "He said he played golf today, something new for Republicans."
Perhaps it was because many, if not most, of the guests were Democrats, like the actor Danny DeVito.
He turned to a reporter who asked if he was a Republican and said, "Watch your mouth."
The actor Chevy Chase was unimpressed with the surroundings, as well.
"Malibu," he concluded, "smells like anchovies."
Asked why so many Democrats turned out to see a Republican President, Mr.
Chase merely smiled, reached into his pocket and pulled out a wad of money, which he waved.
But Mr.
Bush could take comfort in that the guest list read like a lineup for Academy Awards night, something that might have seemed more appropriate to the Reagan years than the Bush White House: Jimmy Stewart, Johnny Carson, Olivia Newton-John, Goldie Hawn, Sally Field, Raquel Welch, Sylvester Stallone, Billy Crystal, Demi Moore and Bernadette Peters, to name a few.
And there were some Republicans in the crowd.
Asked if he was a member of Mr.
Bush's party, Jon Bon Jovi, the rock idol, replied: "Yeah. I'm mainstream." Fury of Fitness
In 1980, Mr.
Bush was trounced in the Republican primaries by Ronald Reagan before signing up as his running mate.
On Saturday, Mr.
Bush was beating Mr.
Reagan at last.
The two men played a round of golf at the tony Sherwood Country Club, where the tee markers are miniature brass archers.
The current President was being polite as he outdrove and outputted the former President.
On the ninth hole, he just smiled when asked whether he was winning.
But when Mr.
Reagan turned away, Mr.
Bush grinned and flashed a thumbs-up, shielding the gesture with his body.
Apart from playing golf, Mr.
Bush continued his usual mad dash of recreation.
This morning, he was in such a hurry to get to a tennis game that his motorcade roared off without his personal aide, his personal physician and, more important, the military officer who carries codes for launching nuclear missiles.
Unnerved by this omission, White House aides hurriedly rounded up transportation and sped the officer to the tennis courts.
Still Fighting the 'Wimp'
The President may have been having fun with his old boss on the links, but there are some things that just make him mad.
Two years and eight months after he was overwhelmingly elected President, two and a half months after he defeated President Saddam Hussein in battle, Mr.
Bush is still fuming about a Newsweek magazine cover in 1988 that talked about him combating "the wimp factor."
"You're talking to the wimp," Mr.
Bush said.
"You're talking to the guy that had a cover of a national magazine, that I'll never forgive, put that label on me." Sort of Talking About '92
Mr. Bush also does not like being forced to talk about the 1992 elections.
If he runs, he said Saturday -- as he has before -- he would run with Dan Quayle.
But Mr.
Bush insisted he had not yet made the decision to seek a second term, even if he sounded a lot like a candidate in the process.
"I haven't decided," he said. "It's too early. Don't push me."
Well, he was asked, what might prevent him from running?
"Can't really think of a reason except, certainly, health," he replied.
"I'd owe it to the American people to say, 'Hey, I'm up for the job for four more years.' "
Perhaps concerned that he might be leaving the wrong impression, Mr.
Bush hastened to add: "I'm absolutely convinced on that one -- if you had to ask me on that one today -- I think health's in good enough shape to certify, 'Yeah.' But I want to take a look at it later on. I don't know. I've got a strong-willed wife. Oh, she's strong. The Silver Fox, boy."
Of course, Mr.
Bush said, he would not shy from a fight.
"It wouldn't be decided on running away from a battle. The fact if there's a battle, and there will be, that would make me inclined to say I'm going to be a candidate again." Touching Political Bases
Despite these protests, Mr.
Bush seemed very much like a candidate over the three-day weekend in California as he touched many of the political bases in the nation's most populous state.
On Friday, he gave the commencement speech at the California Institute of Technology, a symbol of the state's high-tech industries.
On Saturday, there was the party at the Weintraubs'.
This morning, he traveled to Fountain Valley, in Orange County, for a two-for-one appearance of sorts: He addressed Asian-Americans, an important ethnic group in California, and he did so in the state's staunchest Republican area.
This evening, Mr.
Bush spoke at a dinner sponsored by the Simon Weisenthal Center, during which his friend, the actor Arnold Schwarzenegger, received an award for his support of the center.
Mr.
Bush's political advisers say this trip is all part of the President's efforts to mend fences in a state where the local politicians and celebrities have long complained of being neglected by the Bush White House.
Mr.
Bush declined to offer an opinion on whether California should move its primary to March, from June, when it can be anticlimactic if the nominations are already decided by then.
"I'm going to take a heroic position on that one and say let Californians decide," Mr.
Bush said.
But his political advisers said the President would be deeply immersed in California politics before too long.
"Keep your sunglasses and Lycra pants packed," one aide said.
"We're going to be coming out here a lot as '92 heats up."


William Ogdon, 89, On Editorial Board of New York Times
William D. Ogdon, a member of the editorial board of The New York Times from 1946 to 1966, died on Saturday at his home in Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 89 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his son, Thomas, said.


Sizing Them Up, From Top Down
To MARTY BLAKE , the metaphysical question "How high is up?" doesn't really matter as long as it's high enough.
Blake is the former general manager of the St.
Louis Hawks and the National Basketball Association's current director of scouting and official arbiter of players' height.
He was not surprised when the acclaimed LARRY JOHNSON from the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, supposedly a 6-foot-7-inch forward, measured 1 1/2 inches shorter than he had been listed throughout his collegiate career.
At the N.B.A.'s recent pre-draft camp, Johnson stood 6 feet 5 1/2 inches, barefoot.


Trump's Debt Revision Nearly Done
On the eve of an important regulatory hearing, the restructuring of Donald J. Trump's holdings is near completion and the developer has settled most of the major legal and financial issues facing his deeply indebted empire, Mr.
Trump and some of his big bank lenders say.
The New Jersey Casino Control Commission meets this morning to review Mr.
Trump's financial stability and whether he has been able to reorganize his bank debts.
In April, the commission told the developer that he had to complete new loan agreements with his banks and bondholders by today's hearing or the gambling licenses for his three Atlantic City casinos might not be renewed.


Orchestra Officials, Their Coffers Bare, Compare Grim Notes
No one at this year's American Symphony Orchestra League conference here can remember money being so hard to come by.
Soothing the savage breast has always been a high-cost, deficit-driven operation, but 2,040 delegates are taking more time out from artistic matters to confront financial support from every level -- Federal, state, community, corporate and private -- that is thinner and more hesitant.
"You can see it in the smaller delegations here," said Catherine French, the league's chief executive officer.
Ranking staff members of prominent orchestras report sleeping two to a room at the Hilton.


City's Layoffs Of Thousands Begin Today
Thousands of New York City workers are to receive pink slips starting today informing them that they will be laid off by the end of the month to save money, even as city officials continue to press for union concessions and record-setting tax increases to help balance the budget for the fiscal year that starts July 1.
First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel said yesterday that 6,000 to 9,000 city workers in a variety of agencies, who were notified a month ago that their jobs were at risk, would start receiving actual dismissal notices today.
Most of them will lose their jobs in two weeks, although the process is bound to be complicated by disputes over employee seniority, and some workers laid off in one agency could be shifted to similar jobs in other areas.


43 Police Shots, 2 Deaths, and a Big 'Why?'
What began as a normal night for a group of teen-agers in Newark's Central Ward last weekend -- "hanging out" and "chasing girls," as one said -- ended with police officers pumping at least 43 shots into a stolen van in which the group was riding.
Two of the seven occupants were killed, and four were wounded.


Tensions Remain at Closed Tompkins Square Park
Two weeks after New York City officials removed about 150 homeless people from Tompkins Square Park and closed it for renovations, a thick cloud of tension permeates its East Village neighborhood.
Bitter animosities remain between groups of residents, some of whom wanted the homeless people out and others who argued to let them be, as well as between demonstrators rallying to have the park reopened and scores of police officers assigned to the area to maintain a tenuous peace.


Rangers Defeat Yanks By 4-3 in 15 Innings
By the end of the long night, Nolan Ryan had retired to the clubhouse and left the finish to others.
Ryan had done his work, coming within three outs of his 307th career victory, but the game didn't end until the 15th inning tonight when Mario Diaz lined a run-scoring double to right-center field, giving the Texas Rangers a 4-3 victory over the Yankees.


CHRONICLE
An anti-tax lobbying organization, founded earlier this year by conservative New York Republicans, has formed an economic research group, the Empire Foundation for Policy Research.
On its 11-member advisory board are PEGGY NOONAN , a writer and former White House speechwriter; WALTER B. WRISTON , the former chairman of Citicorp, and IRVING KRISTOL , the publisher of The National Interest, the neo-conservative magazine.
The foundation's chairman is THOMAS L. RHODES , a partner in the investment firm of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Allison Sekuler Weds Patrick Bennett
Allison Britt Sekuler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Sekuler of Concord, Mass., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Patrick John Bennett, a son of Catherine Bennett of Point Pleasant, N.J., and the late Patrick J. Bennett.
Jeanne Ellis-Laboissierre, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 26 years old, and the bridegroom, 31, are assistant professors of psychology at the University of Toronto and received doctorates in psychology from the University of California at Berkeley.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a graduate of Pomona College.
The bridegroom is a Tufts University graduate.


Fire Kills New Jersey Family of 5 Despite Apparent Escape Efforts
A family of five died early yesterday morning when a fire swept through their home in Bridgewater, N.J.
The victims were Warren Smarook, 36 years old, his wife, Anita, 33, and their three children, Angela, 8, Warren Jr., 7, and Jake, 7 months.
Fire officials said they believed the victims tried to escape but became disoriented in the dense smoke.


Ann Brust and David Nelson Goss Are Married
Ann Brust, the daughter of Dr.
Matilda B. Brust and Dr.
Manfred Brust of New York, was married yesterday to David Nelson Goss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
N.
Bryson Goss of Edgewater, Md.
Rabbi Henry Sosland performed the ceremony at the Stouffer Westchester Hotel in White Plains.
The bride, 27 years old, was until recently a social worker for the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation.
She graduated from Ithaca College and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
She is keeping her name.


Berlin and Bonn Partisans Square Off as Vote for Germany's Capital Nears
A national debate over the character of the new Germany is to be resolved this week when Parliament finally decides whether the federal Government should remain in Bonn or move to Berlin.
Partisans of both cities have spent the last several weeks making speeches and twisting arms.
They have rejected various compromises and are bracing themselves for a bruising debate and vote on Thursday.


Dana Flock Is Married To Lawrence J. Goode
Dana Magaziner Flock, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Manfred J. Flock of Wyndmoor, Pa., was married yesterday in Philadelphia to Lawrence J. Goode, a son of Dr.
Paul Goode and Dr.
Judith G. Goode of Melrose Park, Pa.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbis David H. Wice and Alan D. Fuchs at the Warwick Hotel.
The bride is a cum laude graduate of Dickinson College and a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at Widener University.


Sir W. Arthur Lewis, 76, Is Dead; Winner of Nobel Economics Prize
Sir W. Arthur Lewis, a Princeton University professor emeritus who was an adviser to several nations and won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science in 1979, died on Saturday at his home in Barbados.
He was 76 years old.
Sir Arthur was considered a leading authority on economic growth and political and social change in emerging nations.
He shared the economics prize with Theodore W. Schultz, a University of Chicago professor, for research into economic development "with particular consideration of the problems of developing countries."


3 Wounded by Hinckley in '81 Seek Damages
Three men wounded by John W. Hinckley Jr. in his attempt on the life of President Ronald Reagan 10 years ago are going to court this month to try to make him pay for his actions.
Mr.
Hinckley contends that his insanity at the time of the shooting should bar any claims for civil damages.
But Federal Judge John Garrett Penn has refused to dismiss the claims filed by the three men.
They are James S. Brady, the former White House press secretary; Thomas K. Delahanty, a former metropolitan police officer, and Timothy J. McCarthy, a Secret Service agent.
Judge Penn has set a trial date of June 24 in United States District Court, although lawyers are discussing an out-of-court settlement.
The trial could also be delayed because of difficulty in scheduling testimony by expert witnesses, lawyers said.
Acquitted on Insanity Grounds
Mr.
Hinckley has been confined to St.
Elizabeths Hospital in Washington since 1982, when he was found not guilty of criminal charges by reason of insanity.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF It's Thompson, at Last The frustration is over for Rocky Thompson.
The three-year veteran of the Senior PGA Tour notched his first victory yesterday when he captured the Mony Syracuse Senior Classic by sinking a short par putt on the 18th hole.
Two-time defending champion Jim Dent had a chance to finish in a tie with Thompson, but he three-putted the same hole for a bogey.
Thompson, whose previous best finish was a second place at this year's Vantage at Dominion, finished at 17-under-par 199 to win the $60,000 first prize. (AP)


Navy Looks On With Envy At Air Force Stealth Display
s lawmakers at Andrews Air Force Base looked on admiringly this week, President Bush clambered into the cockpit of an F-117 Stealth fighter, a B-2 Stealth bomber and an F-22 Stealth fighter, and hailed the planes as the aerial weaponry of tomorrow.
Navy officials, who are still trying to get their first radar-evading plane off the drawing board and onto aircraft carriers, could only wince in envy at the sleek, angular planes parked in a hangar for a weeklong $900,000 promotional campaign to tout the Air Force wares.


Rose Is Scored as a Big Hit For His Community Service
Pete Rose's supervisors at the Cincinnati public schools where he performed his court-ordered community service work have said in a letter to Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent that Rose was a model worker.
Cecil Good, the district's assistant superintendent, told Vincent that Rose had lived up to his old baseball nickname, Charlie Hustle.


Recovering From Wounds, Youth Is Slain by Stray Shot
A 17-year-old Brooklyn youth who friends said had been shot at a party three weeks ago was killed early yesterday morning by a stray bullet as he peered out the window of a friend's apartment, the police said.
The teen-ager, Tango Gillard, had gone to the window when he heard the sound of gunfire and a bullet struck him in the head at 2:20 A.M., the police said.


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater Metropolitan Opera House
When American Ballet Theater performed "Don Quixote" on Saturday afternoon, the result was a matinee of proud dancing.
Susan Jaffe and Julio Bocca once again starred as Kitri and Basil, and they had every reason to feel proud of their verve and brilliance.
Two dancers also made debuts in the roles of proud people.


PART-TIME HIRINGS BRING DEEP CHANGE IN U.S. WORKPLACES
In a slow but unmistakable erosion of the five-day, 40-hour week, more and more Americans are finding that the only work they can get is part time.
Throughout the economy, and particularly in retail businesses, companies are seeking to save money and gain flexibility by building their work forces around part-time workers, whose schedules can be lengthened, shortened or turned upside down each week to meet an employer's immediate needs.


McEnroe Beats Sanchez And Looks to Wimbledon
John McEnroe, his temper and his touch warming for greater tests ahead, beat Emilio Sanchez, 6-4, 3-6, 6-3, this afternoon as the United States completed a 4-1 victory over Spain in the Davis Cup quarterfinals.
Rick Leach, filling in for injured Brad Gilbert in the final match on the grass at Newport Casino, lost to Tomas Carbonell, 7-6, 5-7, 6-4.


Dismissed From Marine Corps
An officer who left his unit as it was being sent to the Persian Gulf was dismissed from the Marine Corps in a court-martial on Saturday.
Lieut.
Tony Moradian, 26 years old, of Los Angeles was convicted of conduct unbecoming an officer, said Cpl.
Ray Sears, a spokesman at Camp Pendleton.
He was expelled from the Corps and fined $3,000.


Data Service on Treasuries Challenges Dow Jones Unit
Prodded by the Federal Government, Wall Street is providing investors with a wealth of information on Government securities prices, data that most investment firms have for decades viewed as proprietary.
The move to greater disclosure has sparked a polite but intense war, with virtually all Wall Street on one side and Cantor Fitzgerald Inc. and Telerate Inc., a unit of Dow Jones &amp; Company, on the other.


Guinness Appeal Lost
A British businessman on Friday lost his appeal of a 12-month prison sentence and an $8.2 million fine imposed for his role in the case involving Guinness P.L.C.
Gerald Ronson, 51-year-old head of the Heron International conglomerate, was released from the Ford Open Prison in February after serving about half his sentence.


Stagnant Pay: A Delayed Impact
THE incomes of most American households have failed to gain ground on inflation since 1973.
That much-repeated economic statistic is now common wisdom.
What's just now coming to light is the impact that so many years of stagnant incomes is finally having on the American psyche.
Broadly speaking, the old psychology of affluence -- the confidence that homeownership and high levels of consumer spending are birthrights -- is breaking down, demographers and pollsters say.
Materialism endures; young Americans still value the good life.
But they pick their purchases to simulate affluence, not achieve it.
Thus, purchasing a BMW or an Armani suit might be out of reach, but not other stylish clothing or compact disk players or elegant food, and that is where the money goes.


INSIDE
Male-Only Policy Upheld
The Virginia Military Institute, which is state supported, may continue admitting only men, a Federal district judge ruled in a defeat for the United States Justice Department.
Page A10.


Four Officials Meet Privately On Schools
Four borough presidents yesterday injected themselves into the contest for the leadership of the Board of Education, meeting secretly to decide whether to support the Mayor's nominee and weigh what they could get from the Mayor if they did.
The board presidency is being contested by H. Carl McCall, who was appointed to the board last week by Mayor David N. Dinkins, and Ninfa Segarra, the Bronx representative.
Mr.
McCall has already lined up three votes but needs one more to seal his selection when the vote is held July 2.


Review/Music; A Turn to the Traditional by a Bigger St. Louis Opera
The Opera Theater of St.
Louis, which has developed a reputation as one of America's more adventuresome small opera companies, took a slightly conservative artistic turn this spring.
It also grew a bit larger physically.
The growth is permanent.
At a cost of some $200,000, the company enlarged the orchestra pit of its theater in the Loretto-Hilton Center on the campus of Webster University.
Though the pit remains small, with a capacity of perhaps 50 players, the expansion affords them greater comfort.


Isfahan Journal; The Shahs Are Dust, but Not This Jewel of Persia
Five decades after he chose it as the new capital of this country in 1598, Abbas I, the Shah of Persia, had transformed this oasis from a caravan stop into a thriving center of artisans, architects and spectacular monuments.
The city's culture was so refined that it became known in Persian as Nisf-e-Jahan: literally "half of the world."
Isfahan may not be quite that today, but as it dusts off 12 years of neglect after the Islamic revolution of 1979, this city 200 miles south of Teheran is shining again, its status reclaimed as one of the Middle East's most beautiful places.


Zachary Taylor's Remains Are Removed for Tests
The remains of Zachary Taylor, the 12th President of the United States, were delicately removed from the crypt in which he was entombed here almost 141 years ago.
There were no bugles blown or volleys fired in salute.
But four uniformed officers of the Department of Veterans Affairs stood guard as more than 200 people, many with young children at their sides, quietly looked on from 20 yards away as Taylor's flag-draped wooden coffin was wheeled to a hearse in the Zachary Taylor National Cemetery.


Ford Offering Credit Cards In Effort to Lure Car Buyers
In the latest skirmish in the credit card wars, the Ford Motor Company said yesterday that one of its financial services units would offer a credit card as a marketing tool to help retain old Ford customers and attract new ones.
But the Chrysler Corporation may also be planning to enter the credit card business, according to The American Banker, a trade publication.
Unlike the Ford program, Chrysler's effort would be for private-label cards that would not carry the Chrysler logo but rather the name of a furniture store or similar issuer, the publication said.


Newark Priest Wins a 'Genius' Award
Msgr.
William J. Linder is a parish priest with a mission to find creative ways of securing affordable housing, health care and better schools for people in one of Newark's poorest neighborhoods.
His income: $10,000 a year.
Monsignor Linder was named yesterday as one of 31 winners of fellowships from Chicago's MacArthur Foundation.
For this, he will receive $330,000 over the next five years.


Time to Make Way for CD-ROM?
A WAY of storing and retrieving vast collections of information may be moving into the mainstream: CD-ROM, the publishing of data on compact disks as read-only memory, which, as discussed here last week, can be read but not added to or altered.
Electronics manufacturers and publishers hope it is coming into general use, that is.
They sniff the possibility of being in on the ground floor of the next VCR or Walkman.


BRIEFS
*
American Stores Co., Salt Lake City, said it had completed the sale of stock in its Alpha Beta Stores Inc. unit to Food for Less Supermarkets Inc.
The price was $251 million. *
Bank of Boston said that a group led by Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of CBS Inc., had lowered its stake in the bank to 5.1 million common shares, or 6.8 percent of the total outstanding.


Now, an All-Video Game Network
A small computer-game company based in an abandoned gold mining town in the Sierra Nevada foothills in California hopes to succeed where a partnership between two of America's largest corporations has struggled for years.
"We think we can do something in a year and half that I.B.M. and Sears have not been able to do yet, and that is make money," said Michael Thornton, vice president of the Sierra Network, a telephone-linked computer network that its parent, Sierra On-Line Inc., says is the first devoted exclusively to games.


Anyone for the 'J,' 'O,' 'U,' 'X' or 'Z' Word?
To the Editor:
The vogue of initializing taboo or supposedly taboo words described in the "The ------ Word" (Topics of The Times, June 6) hasn't abated yet, but not because of the alphabetical gaps you list.
According to our citation files, most of the letters on your list have been co-opted as follows:
The "A" word is "abortion"; "G" is for gossip (a la Washington); "H" has been taken by "hostage," "I" by "Iran-contra," "K" by "killing" (as in capital punishment), "N" by an offensive six-letter racial epithet, "P" by "Palestine," "S" by "socialism" or "sex" and "Y" by yuppie.
That leaves only "J," "O," "U," "X" and "Z," which I am sure will find takers before this puerile euphemism runs its course.
SOL STEINMETZ  Executive Editor Random House Dictionaries New York, June 7, 1991


New York City Told Budget Gap May Increase
Despite plans for deep cuts in services and $1 billion in new taxes, New York City's budget gap for the coming fiscal year could be greater than the $3.5 billion now projected, and hundreds of millions of dollars in proposed solutions might not pan out, the State Comptroller warned yesterday.
With less than two weeks until the city's fiscal year begins on July 1, Comptroller Edward V. Regan warned that if the city failed to adopt a balanced budget on time, as required by law, it could have trouble managing its spending needs and meeting debt-service payments on its bonds.
That could trigger a takeover of the city's finances by the State Financial Control Board.


Caesars at the Justice Department
The Justice Department has an antitrust division, to ward off business monopolies, and a civil rights division, to help enforce our basic rights.
Who would have imagined that the department would try to create a monopoly over the gathering of information and try to prohibit the free trade in ideas about government?
Astonishingly, the department has undertaken just such an experiment in suppression.
Murray G. Dickman, an assistant to Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, has proclaimed that the American Bar Association "has
sole
responsibility for evaluating Federal judicial candidates." He declares that the department's policy "precludes any candidate  [ for a Federal judgeship ]  from appearing before the Bar Association of the City of New York," which candidates have been doing for no fewer than 70 years.


David Gates and His Exploring Of the Beauty Within the Bleak
The room is small and dark.
There are no windows.
A small lamp, the only light, hangs over a desk.
On a wall are photos.
Of Samuel Beckett.
And Franz Kafka.
And Beckett again.
Behind the desk is a man, his face in the light, the rest of him in shadow.
He is tall and thin; his hair, what there is of it, is turning gray.
He is wearing a dark shirt, dark jeans and wire-rimmed glasses.
He could almost be mistaken for Beckett.
Younger, American, but still Beckett.
His name is David Gates.
He is 44 years old and he has written a novel, his first.
It is called "Jernigan" and is published by Alfred A. Knopf.
The protagonist and narrator is Peter Jernigan, a cruel and irresponsible yet also humorous alcoholic in his late 30's who from the perspective of a recovery program looks back on the mess he has made of the last year and a half of his life, after his wife was killed in an automobile accident.
Michiko Kakutani in The New York Times called the book "astonishing" and said that Mr.
Gates had "established himself as a novelist of the first order."


Merger Will Create Big Baltimore Agency
VanSant Dugdale Advertising, one of the oldest agencies in Baltimore, will merge with Gray Kirk &amp; Evans of that city on July 1 to form one of the largest agencies in the mid-Atlantic region.
The new agency, called Gray Kirk/VanSant, will have billings of about $80 million.
The merger is expected to make the new firm the second largest in Baltimore, behind only W. B. Doner &amp; Company.


Big Bang Theory Makes Sense of Cosmic Facts
To the Editor:
Eric J. Lerner's obituary for the Big Bang theory of the universe's origins (Op-Ed, June 3) is premature.
He points to recent work on voids and filaments in the large-scale distribution of galaxies as a powerful challenge to understanding the history of the universe -- that is why my colleagues and I have devoted our efforts to observing these structures (and why the Arnold D. Frese Foundation has just given Harvard $3 million for a telescope to help study them).
But his conclusion that we should abandon the overall picture of a universe that has expanded from a dense, hot past some 20 billion years ago does not follow.


Fairness on Fifth Avenue
A little-noticed court decision is rapidly turning some of New York's more attractive commercial neighborhoods into congested flea markets.
Only the State Legislature can undo the harm.
Last year, State Supreme Court Justice Edward Lehner upheld a Civil War-era statute granting disabled veterans the right to peddle goods on any street.
The decision undercut city regulations barring vendors from peddling anything but food and printed matter in certain crowded areas.
The ruling, later upheld on appeal, dismissed as unrealistic the city's fear that opening forbidden territory to disabled vets would invite a peddler explosion, blocking pedestrian traffic on sidewalks already dense with shoppers.


6,000 New York City Workers Get Layoff Notices
Gregory Vann, a Brooklyn sanitation worker with three children, had fretted for weeks over the possibility of losing his job.
When he walked into a New York City sanitation garage yesterday morning, fellow workers told him he was "on the list," meaning that he was one of the thousands of city employees being laid off by the end of the month.
"I've got babies, man," Mr.
Vann said to an unmarried colleague who was also told he was being laid off but said he was not overly concerned.
"You never had a little kid come to you and say, 'I'm hungry.' "


Quick Profits Unlikely For New Franchises
When the owners of the new Miami and Denver baseball franchises begin money talks with TV stations and regional sports cable channels in the coming weeks and months, they will not be entirely in the catbird seat.
Yes, there is plenty of euphoria in the two cities whose efforts paid off in their selection as the newest National League teams (pending the approval of major league owners).
But euphoria is one of the worst moods in which to negotiate.


Westerbeke Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


Mets: We Won't Trade Viola
The only place Frank Viola is going is to the mound, for the Mets.
So says Al Harazin, the executive vice president of the team.
Harazin said yesterday that under no circumstance would the Mets consider trading the left-hander, who is in the final year of his contract and who has made clear his intentions to enter the free-agent market at the end of the season.
Viola, a former Cy Young Award winner, has a no-trade clause in his contract, but there has been speculation that if the Mets fell out of contention, Harazin might persuade him to accept a trade to a contending team.


CHRONICLE
Representative EDWARD J. MARKEY, Democrat of Massachusetts, and two United States Senators have developed the Management Corps, a project that sent 17 American business executives to Latvia for two weeks as consultants to entrepreneurs there.
Aides to the Senators, BILL BRADLEY, Democrat of New Jersey, and JOHN F. KERRY, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Mr.
Markey accompanied the executives.


Germans and Poles Pledge Mutual Help
The leaders of Poland and Germany signed a treaty of friendship and cooperation today that both men said would turn the two countries into long-term partners.
"We need the closest possible cooperation with united Germany," Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki of Poland said before signing the treaty.
"United Germany, our especially close neighbor, is Poland's most important partner in all areas."


Associates Corp. Yield at 8.713%
The Associates Corporation of North America yesterday priced $300 million in notes, due in 1997, through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.
The notes of the Ford Motor Company subsidiary have an 8 5/8 percent coupon and are priced at 99.591 to yield 8.713 percent, or about 66 basis points more than both the Treasury five-year and seven-year notes combined.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Market Place; Showboat Finds Winning Formula
AT long last, Showboat Inc.'s ship may have come in.
The modest casino company that operates, quite literally, in the shadow of showy Trump Taj Mahal, is finding that its formula of appealing to low rollers with a riverboat gambler theme is beginning to pay off.
The company's stock, lackluster for years, reached a recent 52-week high of $9.50 and closed yesterday at $9, down 12.5 cents.
Many analysts see a potential for ever higher levels.
"Showboat has shown very significant improvement in operating numbers," said David S. Leibowitz, an analyst with American Securities.
"And it appears that the improvement can continue as we go forward. Nineteen ninety-two could be a real eye opener."


Bird Species In Northwest 'Threatened'
The Fish and Wildlife Service proposed today that another bird, the marbled murrelet, join the northern spotted owl on the list of threatened species in the old-growth forests of the Pacific Northwest.
It was the latest development in a dispute among environmentalists, loggers and the timber industry over control of the region's oldest forests.


CHRONICLE
When a Japanese magazine noted that CROWN PRINCE NARUHITO, heir to the throne, could do with a hipper hairdo and illustrated its article with some make-over photos, the palace was not amused.
The article, which appeared last Friday in Shukan Bunshun, a weekly publication, suggested that the 31-year-old Prince might find a wife if he updated his hairdo.
The photographs showed the Prince in styles ranging from Beatles mod to Italian moussed, The Associated Press reported.
Normally he wears a style that is long, straight and parted.


Alomar Back on Roster
Catcher Sandy Alomar Jr. returned to the Cleveland Indians' roster yesterday after one month on the disabled list with an irritated right rotator cuff.


Offering Increased By Fleet/Norstar
Fleet/Norstar Financial Group is offering $175 million in subordinated notes, due in 2001, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Because of strong investor demand, the size of the offering was increased yesterday from the orginally planned $150 million.


Our Towns
This is a story about war and friendship and how the survival of two gnarled symbols has rekindled some warm feelngs even after all these years.
This is also the story of enduring cultural suspicions, good luck, a little detective work and a remarkable filing system that has nothing to do with floppy disks.
The latest chapter began early this spring in the principal's office at the Prospect Hill School.
Irene Mancuso, the school secretary, happened to overhear Ron Chidlow, a fifth-grade teacher, mention that his class favored planting a cherry tree as its graduation gift.


Trial Delayed for Palestinian In Bombing of Pan Am Plane
The trial of Mohammed Rashid, a Palestinian charged with involvement in the mid-flight bombing of a Pan Am jetliner in 1982, was postponed today until Oct. 7.
A judge attributed the delay to a defense lawyer's serving as a special prosecutor in the corruption trial of former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou.


I.B.F. to Review Use of Light Gloves
The president of the International Boxing Federation, responding to criticism of six-ounce gloves in a junior bantamweight title bout that left the challenger in a coma, said yesterday he would consider any recommendations calling for use of heavier gloves.
But the official, Bob Lee, said he knew of no previous cases where the six-ounce gloves could be cited as the cause of serious injury.


OPEC Output Declines
Crude oil production by members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries dropped to 22.1 million barrels a day last month, down 152,000 barrels a day from the previous month, the Middle East Economic Survey said today.
The weekly newsletter said the decline was mainly because of an output drop of 200,000 barrels a day by the United Arab Emirates.


Meat and Livestock Down; Ample Supplies Are Seen
Too much supply and sluggish demand combined to attract little investor interest in meat and livestock futures yesterday, sending prices lower on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
On other commodity markets, soybeans and grains futures prices slipped and energy futures were mixed.


British Study Lloyd's Tax Aid
The British Government said today that it would consider granting tax relief to Lloyd's of London underwriters who face potentially huge losses.
Lloyd's officials have lobbied the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont, and top Treasury ministers for more than $81 million in tax relief to help cover losses since 1988.


Narrow Trading in Dollar As Reports Are Awaited
The dollar closed mixed in narrow trading yesterday as currency specialists awaited the trade and economic reports scheduled for later this week.
Gold was higher.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold gained $1.10 an ounce, closing at $368.20.
A late bid at the Republic National Bank in New York placed gold at $367.60 an ounce, up 85 cents from late on Friday.


W.H.O. Says 40 Million Will Be Infected With AIDS Virus by 2000
Although rates of AIDS infection appear to be slowing in industrialized countries, they are rising rapidly in many developing countries.
In those areas, AIDS is likely to become the leading killer of adults in their most productive years by the turn of the century, the 8,000 participants at an international AIDS meeting here were told today.
By the year 2000, 40 million people are expected to be infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, up from an earlier estimate of 25 million to 30 million, said a World Health Organization official, Dr.
James Chin.
There are now an estimated 10 million infected adults, and more than 366,000 cases have been reported in 162 countries.


Mordecai Savitsky; Rabbi, 80
Rabbi Mordecai Savitsky, an authority on the Talmud and Jewish law, died on June 8 at the Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.
He was 80 years old and lived in Monsey, N.Y.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his brother-in-law, Rabbi Bernard Poupko.


Ames Says Insolvency Is Almost Over
Ames Department Stores Inc., a leading discounter that filed for voluntary bankruptcy last year, told creditors yesterday that its fortunes had brightened sufficiently so that it could emerge from insolvency by the first half of 1992.
Ames said it expected to report a profit before taxes this year, compared with a loss for 1990.


Stewart Captures Open as Simpson Falters Again
Payne Stewart broke the pattern of a nip-and-tuck battle, and Scott Simpson's back as well, with a 20-foot birdie putt on the 16th hole today as he won an 18-hole playoff for the 91st United States Open.
Stewart shot a three-over-par 75 to Simpson's 77 on a windblown and extremely firm Hazeltine National Golf Club course.
Stewart's score was the highest to win an 18-hole playoff for the national championship since Tommy Armour shot 76 to beat Harry Cooper's 79 at the 1927 Open at Oakmont.


Crack Sellers Moving to Heroin, Report Says
As summer approaches, heroin dealers, who began to make new inroads into New York City's illicit drug market a little more than a year ago, are becoming more pervasive, supplanting once ubiquitous crack dealers at a time when the smokable form of cocaine continues to wane in popularity, a report on the drug trade has found.
Some middle-level cocaine dealers have switched to selling heroin, according to the report, which was issued yesterday by the New York State Division of Substance Abuse Services.
And on many street corners around the city, experts say, heroin dealers have replaced crack dealers.


David Gates and His Exploring Of the Beauty Within the Bleak
The room is small and dark.
There are no windows.
A small lamp, the only light, hangs over a desk.
On a wall are photos.
Of Samuel Beckett.
And Franz Kafka.
And Beckett again.
Behind the desk is a man, his face in the light, the rest of him in shadow.
He is tall and thin; his hair, what there is of it, is turning gray.
He is wearing a dark shirt, dark jeans and wire-rimmed glasses.
He could almost be mistaken for Beckett.
Younger, American, but still Beckett.
His name is David Gates.
He is 44 years old and he has written a novel, his first.
It is called "Jernigan" and is published by Alfred A. Knopf.
The protagonist and narrator is Peter Jernigan, a cruel and irresponsible yet also humorous alcoholic in his late 30's who from the perspective of a recovery program looks back on the mess he has made of the last year and a half of his life, after his wife was killed in an automobile accident.
Michiko Kakutani in The New York Times called the book "astonishing" and said that Mr.
Gates had "established himself as a novelist of the first order."


Battle Over S.I. Homeport Goes to Washington Panel


Lotus Settles Suit With Santa Cruz
The Lotus Development Corporation said it had reached an out-of-court settlement in its software copyright-infringement lawsuit against Santa Cruz Operation Inc.
Under the settlement, Lotus would drop its suit against Santa Cruz, and Santa Cruz would stop manufacturing, distributing and licensing all versions of SCO Professional, the company's spreadsheet software, by August.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary yesterday about William D. Ogdon, a former editorial writer for The New York Times, misstated his retirement year.
It was 1966, not 1955.


Dow Drops 6.49, to 2,993.96; Trading Lags
Stock prices moved narrowly yesterday in listless trading.
With no significant news for traders to feed on, volume on the New York Stock Stock Exchange shrank to 134.2 million shares, from 169.3 million on Friday.
Because of the low volume, small losses among some blue-chip stocks were enough to trim the Dow Jones industrial average by 6.49 points, to 2,993.96.


Disgruntled India; The Voters Make Clear Their Discontent, Giving No Party a Majority in Low Turnout
The political map of India has been redrawn in the turbulent election of 1991, geographically and demographically.
Traditional voting patterns have been upset as fewer voters than ever cast ballots in what is the world's most populous democracy and also one of the poorest of nations.
"I do not think our electorate is very clear about what it wants," said Ashis Nandy, a political scientist at the Center for the Study of Developing Societies in Delhi.
"But the lesson of this election is that any party that has been in power has paid for it."  Congress Fares Badly in North
By early this morning, with 320 of the 511 contested Parliament seats decided, the Congress Party had won 168 and was projected to win 210 to 215, well shy of the 256 it would need to form a government without a coalition partner.
The Bharatiya Janata Party, the surging Hindu nationalist party, had won 73 seats and was projected to win 120.
In third place, the Janata Dal coalition, which stirred controversy in championing Government affirmative action for lower castes, had won 24 seats.
The rest of the decided seats went to smaller parties.


Wentworth Brown, 86, Retired Paper Executive
Wentworth Brown, a retired executive in the pulp and paper industry, died on Thursday at his home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
He was 86 years old.
He died of cancer, his son, Kevin, said.


PATTERNS
For Dinner, the Economy
The fashions were glorious at the annual Fashion Institute of Technology dinner last week at the Waldorf-Astoria (lots of black, lots of Lacroix and tons of Geoffrey Beene), where about 1,200 industry executives gathered to honor Conde Nast Magazines.
But the word in the aisles was one of cautious optimism.


Clio Awards, Round Two, Canceled
The second ceremony for the 1991 Clio Awards for advertising was canceled yesterday, just hours before the event was scheduled to begin at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
The cancellation, announced by the privately held Clio Awards organization, was the first that anyone could recall in the 31-year history of the ad industry's equivalent of the Academy Awards.
Organizers had expected 1,500 people to attend the ceremony for awards for creative achievement in television commercials and in-theater advertising.


Healthier Reds With Healthier Outlook
Call it a sixth sense, ESP or simply the accumulation of 23 years of major league experience, but Lou Piniella knew.
From the moment the Cincinnati Reds regrouped in spring training, four months after winning the World Series, the manager of the defending champions sensed that 1991 would not be as wondrous as the year before.
"It's just a little different after you win," Piniella said.
"It takes a while to get everything flowing again. I felt from the start that we'd have to come from behind. I just sensed that there wasn't a sense of urgency."


CHRONICLE
Rabbi ARTHUR SCHNEIER is to be sworn in tomorrow as chairman of the United States Commission for Preservation of America's Heritage Abroad.
Vice President DAN QUAYLE is to preside over the ceremony.
PRESIDENT BUSH appointed Rabbi Schneier to the unsalaried job as head of the 21-member commission, created by Congress, to preserve monuments and historic sites associated with the heritage of Americans.


New Algerian Prime Minister Names Transitional Cabinet
Algerian Prime Minister Sid Ahmed Ghozali named a new Government today to replace one that was dismissed June 5 after violent clashes between Muslim fundamentalists and security forces.
President Chadli Benjedid, in a statement read on television, accepted the new administration, which is to run the country, now under a state of siege, until general elections later this year.
Mr.
Ghozali, who had promised to form a nonpartisan government of independent personalities, brought one woman into his cabinet, in charge of health, and created a new ministry for human rights.


Topics of The Times; A Down-to-Earth Economist
Unlike many Nobel Prize winners in economics, Sir W. Arthur Lewis, who died Saturday at 76, immersed himself in the messy problems of actual economies.
Fellow laureates wrote mathematical equations; Sir Arthur wrote compelling English.
Fellow laureates won for theoretical breakthroughs; Sir Arthur won for work that affected policy all through the third world.
Any scholar can wallow in infinite complexity.
But it took Sir Arthur's insight to identify common paths to economic development.
In his simple model, a sprawling, backward agricultural sector feeds low-paid workers to a nascent industrial sector.
This uncomplicated idea spawned refinements by generations of scholars and became a powerful vehicle for policy analysis.
Sir Arthur devoted his life to advising governments throughout Africa and the Caribbean.
Development economics has not been popular among American economists.
The subject is inconveniently intertwined with political considerations that do not lend themselves to mathematical certainty.
But this native of the West Indies -- the only black economics laureate -- never forgot that economics is foremost about people.


Vigoro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Yanks' Latest Shock Difficult to Shake Off
It was past midnight.
Players packed bags, changed into street clothes and boarded another bus to the airport for another long flight.
But the Yankees weren't able to leave the game behind.
Six games into a trip that they all have agreed is important, the Yankees are struggling to relocate the consistency they apparently left in New York.
They are 0-6 and tumbling.


Observer; I Knew Him, Horatio
The Associated Press reports that a man known only as Rashid, who looked like Stalin, died the other day at age 92 in Krasnodar.
So closely did Rashid resemble the Soviet dictator, The Associated Press reports, that he was employed to sit in for Stalin at meetings and banquets.
I knew Rashid slightly, and rather liked him, for despite his astounding resemblance to the murderous dictator one could not help noticing that he was decidedly timid.


David Gates and His Exploring Of the Beauty Within the Bleak
The room is small and dark.
There are no windows.
A small lamp, the only light, hangs over a desk.
On a wall are photos.
Of Samuel Beckett.
And Franz Kafka.
And Beckett again.
Behind the desk is a man, his face in the light, the rest of him in shadow.
He is tall and thin; his hair, what there is of it, is turning gray.
He is wearing a dark shirt, dark jeans and wire-rimmed glasses.
He could almost be mistaken for Beckett.
Younger, American, but still Beckett.
His name is David Gates.
He is 44 years old and he has written a novel, his first.
It is called "Jernigan" and is published by Alfred A. Knopf.
The protagonist and narrator is Peter Jernigan, a cruel and irresponsible yet also humorous alcoholic in his late 30's who from the perspective of a recovery program looks back on the mess he has made of the last year and a half of his life, after his wife was killed in an automobile accident.
Michiko Kakutani in The New York Times called the book "astonishing" and said that Mr.
Gates had "established himself as a novelist of the first order."


Scowcroft Sold Military Holdings Months Before Persian Gulf War
Brent Scowcroft, President Bush's national security adviser, sold off his shares of stock in a number of military contractors last November, two months before the start of the war with Iraq, according to his financial disclosure report.
The report, made public today, showed that the sales included shares in the General Electric Company, which Mr.
Scowcroft valued from $500,000 to $1 million, and stock valued from $15,000 to $50,000 in DBA Systems Inc., a Florida-based military contractor where Mr.
Scowcroft served as a director before he joined the Bush Administration.


Big Bang Theory Makes Sense of Cosmic Facts; Matter Into Energy
To the Editor:
In "For Whom the Bang Tolls" (Op-Ed, June 3), Eric J. Lerner raises more questions than he answers.
Though he fails to address the evidence supporting the Big Bang theory, his supposition that at least 100 billion years would have been required for such gigantic structures as galactic clusters to form sounds more plausible than the orthodox estimate of 10 billion to 20 billion years.


Volcano's Refugees Describe Horror of Ash and Mudslides
Beby Tolentino said today that she had crossed herself and frantically brought her hands together in prayer as the mudslide began to carry off the neighborhood church.
"People think that maybe God was trying to punish us," said Mrs.
Tolentino, her hands and face coated with the talc-like volcanic ash that has saturated the air since Mount Pinatubo began erupting last week.
"I hope it was not God."


Lebanon Returns to Precolonial Heritage
To the Editor:
Youssef S. Hitti expresses concern about Lebanon's sovereignty, fearing that the teaching of Arabic in Lebanese schools and the dismantling of a confessional, colonial heritage will throw Lebanon into "A Syrian Dark Age" (letter, May 30).
As an Arab woman, I am dismayed to find an Arab man so contemptuous of his people's history, language and culture, and so proud of the imprints of a colonial past that almost drove the country to its demise.
I fail to see how Mr.
Hitti connects Arabization with "an educational dark age." Does Arabic for him mean "dark" and French mean "white"?


Zachary Taylor's Remains Are Removed for Tests
The remains of Zachary Taylor, the 12th President of the United States, were delicately removed from the crypt in which he was entombed here almost 141 years ago.
There were no bugles blown or volleys fired in salute.
But four uniformed officers of the Department of Veterans Affairs stood guard as more than 200 people, many with young children at their sides, quietly looked on from 20 yards away as Taylor's flag-draped wooden coffin was wheeled to a hearse in the Zachary Taylor National Cemetery.


24 Florida Politicians Charged With Hiding Gifts of Lobbyists
Six weeks ago, leaders of the Florida Legislature boasted that they had enacted one of the toughest government ethics laws in the nation.
Now, some of those same lawmakers are facing misdemeanor criminal charges, accused of ethical lapses under a law that predated the new measures.
Prosecutors here have filed complaints against 24 current and former state legislators, charging that the lawmakers failed to disclose gifts from lobbyists from 1985 to 1988, including paid trips to France, Mexico and the Bahamas and to hunting, fishing and skiing resorts in several states.


Asteroids, a Menace to Early Life, Could Still Destroy Earth; There's a 'Doomsday Rock,' But When Will It Strike?
SOMEWHERE in space at this moment, hurtling toward Earth at roughly 16 miles a second, is the doomsday rock.
The question of growing interest to scientists and engineers is exactly when it will approach the planet and whether anything can be done to avoid a catastrophic collision, such as nudging the rock off course with a nuclear blast or two.
The doomsday rock is an asteroid large enough to severely disrupt life on Earth upon impact, lofting pulverized rock and dust that blocks most sunlight.
Agriculture would virtually end, and civilization could wither and die, just as the dinosaurs and many other forms of life are thought by some to have been wiped out by a massive object from outer space 65 million years ago.


South Africa Scraps Law Defining People by Race
The law that laid the legal foundation of apartheid by classifying all South Africans by race from birth, with resulting privileges or handicaps, was scrapped today by Parliament, more than four decades after it was enacted.
The Population Registration Act, enacted first in 1950 and periodically refined since, became the final pillar of statutory apartheid to be pulled down by President F. W. de Klerk, after the repeal of the three other discriminatory laws that underpinned white domination of other South Africans.


Mets Take the Humor Out of a Laugher
A 10-1 lead had shrunk to 10-6, and the Reds still had men on base in the seventh inning.
John Franco, the closer for the Mets, stood on the mound in the bullpen and tried to warm up.
The test was declared a failure minutes later.
Franco's back is still bad, and that's why last night's 10-6 victory over the Reds at Shea Stadium was not all good.


First Union Studies Southeast Assets
The First Union Corporation confirmed that it was interested in buying branches of the troubled Southeast Banking Corporation of Miami, but said it would not consider buying the entire bank without Federal assistance.


Zachary Taylor's Remains Are Removed for Tests
The remains of Zachary Taylor, the 12th President of the United States, were delicately removed from the crypt in which he was entombed here almost 141 years ago.
There were no bugles blown or volleys fired in salute.
But four uniformed officers of the Department of Veterans Affairs stood guard as more than 200 people, many with young children at their sides, quietly looked on from 20 yards away as Taylor's flag-draped wooden coffin was wheeled to a hearse in the Zachary Taylor National Cemetery.


Martha Stewart Magazine
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that it would begin regular publication of Martha Stewart Living magazine and produce television programming, videos and books derived mainly from the magazine.
The deal includes production of regular weekly segments to be shown on NBC-TV's "Today" show, starting in July.


EXECUTIVES
*
Creditanstalt-Bankverein A.G., Vienna, named Max Kothbauer deputy chairman and deputy chief executive. *
Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, appointed Carl F. Kohrt company vice president.


Gulf Victory: An Energy Defeat?
While the allied victory in the Persian Gulf eliminated for now the threat to Western access to Mideast oil, there is widespread agreement in the oil industry that the United States' long-term energy security may have been set back.
The quick war brought oil prices back down near prewar levels, and those lower prices provide little incentive for energy conservation or new drilling in the United States.


Corrections
A front-page article on May 22, about the scene when former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India was assassinated, misstated the time between the bombing and the departure of Mr.
Gandhi's driver and three reporters for Madras.
It was about 30 minutes, not "a few minutes."


Oppenheimer Executive Is Promoted to President
Bridget A. Macaskill was named president yesterday of the Oppenheimer Management Corporation in a move intended to strengthen the balance of talents at the top of the mutual fund management company.
Ms.
Macaskill, 42, had been executive vice president and chief operating officer before her promotion and will continue as chief operating officer.
She succeeds Jon S. Fossel as president; Mr.
Fossel remains as chairman and chief executive.


Bank Lobbying Is Studied
Campaign contributions from banking lobbies are pushing on members of Congress to support changes in banking laws that threaten a repeat of the savings and loan crisis, consumer groups said today.
The groups, Public Citizen and the Financial Democracy Campaign, said their study showed a strong correlation between the level of contributions by banking lobby groups and votes for the banking bill.


Woman Tells St. John's Jury of Attack
Anxious and exasperated at some moments, determined and assertive at others, a 22-year-old woman took the witness stand in a Queens courtroom yesterday and testified in graphic detail that she was repeatedly sodomized and sexually degraded last year by a group of male schoolmates near St.
John's University.
Testifying for more than four hours in a case that has rocked St.
John's, the nation's largest Roman Catholic university, the woman said she was sexually abused after she was pressured to drink nearly three cups of vodka and orange soda, which made her ill and caused her to slip in and out of consciousness.


Corrections
An article in the Media Business pages yesterday about foreign financing of Eastern European publications misstated the involvement of The New York Times Company Foundation.
The foundation does not help finance the International Media Fund, which is affiliated with the United States Government.
It does support the Independent Journalists Initiative, a privately financed group of volunteers from newspaper, television and radio organizations that conducts journalism workshops in Eastern Europe.


U.S. to Support Albanian Reform With Aid
The United States, moving quickly to encourage Albania's tentative steps toward democracy, plans to offer the country economic aid if it will continue its democratic and free market reforms, officials traveling with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today.
On Friday Mr.
Baker will make the first visit by an American Secretary of State to Albania.
He arrived in Berlin today to take part in a foreign ministers' meeting of the 34-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the organization responsible for monitoring the Helsinki accords on human rights.


Unisys Sued On Pensions
About 3,000 retirees and employees have sued the Unisys Corporation for investing pension money in the Executive Life Insurance Company, which was seized by California regulators earlier this year, lawyers for the plaintiffs said.
The suit, filed in the Federal District Court in Philadelphia, contends that the manufacturer of business information and data processing systems invested retirement money in a company "well known for its investment in risky junk bonds." Lawyers said union officials at Unisys advised the company in 1988 that the Executive Life investments were risky.


Books of The Times; Jean Renoir: Tidbits of a Life in Film
Jean Renoir A Life in Pictures By Celia Bertin Translated by Mireille Muellner and Leonard Muellner.
Illustrated. 403 pages.
Johns Hopkins University Press. $29.95.
"You see, in this world, there is one awful thing, and that is that everyone has his reasons." These lines, spoken by Jean Renoir, playing the role of Octave in his masterpiece, "The Rules of the Game," sum up the director's own humanistic vision of the world -- his sympathy, his curiosity, his melancholy appreciation of the boundless ambiguities of life.


More Details Released In Trump Refinancing
More details emerged yesterday about the effort by Donald J. Trump to reorganize the finances of two of his Atlantic City casino companies.
In testimony at a hearing of the New Jersey Casino Control Commission into Mr.
Trump's financial stability, representatives of two creditor groups testified that the restructuring of the debt of the Taj Mahal and Trump Castle casinos was nearly complete.


Bridge
When a partnership has the values for game but cannot find a fit, it usually settles in three no-trump.
Such contracts can be tricky to play, especially when one hand is short of entries.
On the diagramed deal, played last month in the U.J.A.-Federation Pro-Am game at the Harmonie Club in Manhattan, most South players landed in three no-trump after the sequence shown.
As it happened, the heart situation was very favorable and any road was likely to lead to at least nine tricks.





Murdoch Sale Is Completed
An affiliate of Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company said yesterday that it had completed its purchase of nine publications belonging to Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation. for $650 million.
Under terms of the deal, the News Corporation received a cash payment of $600 million and it will receive deferred payments of $50 million, according to a statement by the affiliate, K-III Holdings.


Cary Packs Up 1-6 Record And Heads to Columbus
Yankee pitcher Chuck Cary, who this spring was projected as a possible 20-game winner, took a sizable fall today when the club said it was sending him to its Columbus farm team.
The Yankees demoted the 31-year-old Cary to make room for rookie pitcher Scott Kamieniecki, who will make his first start in the big leagues Tuesday night against the Toronto Blue Jays.


Poles Report G.M. Venture
The General Motors Corporation plans to announce a venture with the Polish state-owned car maker FSO, an FSO spokesman said today.
But an official at G.M. of Europe denied that a deal was imminent.
The FSO spokesman, Andrzej Smolinski, said the plan was to be announced on Tuesday and would be presented to Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki, who is also considering a competing offer from Fiat S.p.A. of Italy.


Irving Rossi, 101; Perfected Machines For Casting of Steel
Irving Rossi, a financier and metallurgical engineer who perfected continuous casting machines for steel, died Friday at his home in Harding Township, N.J.
He was 101 years old.
He died of heart failure, a funeral home representative said.


U.S. Raises Objections To Antarctica Pact
An attempt by the United States to keep its options open on mining has clouded hopes of early agreement on a pact to safeguard Antarctica.
Ecologists had hoped the 39 members of the Antarctic Treaty would sign an agreement banning mineral exploitation for at least 50 years and probably much longer.
They hoped it would be signed Sunday, the 30th anniversary of the treaty that limits activities of signatory nations in Antarctica to scientific research.


Health Care for Poor Defies Easy Solution in New Jersey
As the Legislature moves toward summer adjournment, a problem evident at the start of the year is resisting easy solution: how to contain health-care costs and provide care to those who cannot pay.
In January the Legislature allowed the expiration of a system that raised money to pay for poor patients through a 19.7 percent surcharge on all hospital bills.


Amputation in Doubt
Former San Francisco Giant pitcher Dave Dravecky is scheduled to have surgery today for the fourth time since cancer was diagnosed in his left -- pitching -- arm in 1988, and he is resigned to having the arm amputated.
But yesterday, it was still not determined whether amputation would be necessary.
"Amputation is very likely, but there is a slight possibility that it won't happen," Sealy Yates, Dravecky's agent, said.


Swedes Back Europe Entry
Swedish companies favor the decision of the country's Social Democratic Government to apply for membership in the 12-nation European Community, a business executive said today.
"Swedish entrepreneurs, big and small, are looking forward to E.C. membership," said Stig Rindborg, the chairman of Foretagarna, a business group that promotes the interests of entrepreneurs.


Quake Shakes 3 States, Causing No Damage
An earthquake shook parts of New York, Massachusetts and Connecticut early yesterday, but there were no reports of damage or injuries.
The earthquake, which was centered in Schoharie County, 40 miles west of Albany, measured 3.9 in a Richter-scale reading taken by the national earthquake center in Golden, Colo., and 4.4 in a reading taken by the Weston Observatory at Boston College in Weston, Mass.


Bird Update
Larry Bird's pain is finally gone, and for the first time in a year the Boston Celtic star really feels like running.
But he can't.
Bird is recovering from surgery on his back, and he'll be laid up for several months.


Quotation of the Day
"People think that maybe God was trying to punish us. I hope it was not God." -- Beby Tolentino, whose neighborhood was leveled by the Philippine volcano eruption.  [ A1:1. ]


Shots Feared Near Carter at Housing Project
Gunshots ripped through a construction site where former President Jimmy Carter and hundreds of volunteers were building low-income housing today, leaving one man slightly wounded.
Mr. Carter was a block from the shooting site and was unhurt.


Can't Get to the Track? Just Pick Up and Dial
People bet about $12 billion a year on horse races in this country and maybe $200 billion on everything else that moves, including roulette wheels, dice and dogs.
They bet at race tracks, dog tracks, offtrack parlors, offtrack lounges, casinos and swanky places called teletheaters.


International Paper To Acquire Leslie
The International Paper Company agreed to buy the Leslie Paper Company in a move to expand the paper giant's distribution network.
International has 250 wholesale and retail distribution operations nationally.
International, based in Purchase, did not disclose terms of the deal, which it expects to be completed before September.


Methane Gas Buildup Appears to Be Slowing
Methane gas in the atmosphere, a contributor to global warming, is building up more slowly than it was nine years ago, scientists from the University of California at Irvine say.
From 1978 to 1982, atmospheric methane was increasing at a rate of 18 parts per billion a year, but the increase has slowed to slightly less than 1 percent a year at 12 to 13 parts per billion, the scientists said.
They estimate that methane concentrations in the atmosphere are now 1.72 parts per million, which is 14 percent higher than measurements taken in January 1978.


SCIENCE WATCH
Throughout most, if not all, of the earth's history, its magnetic field has reversed itself at irregular intervals of thousands of years.
While the magnetism is believed to be generated by motions of the earth's liquid core, the reason for reversals is mysterious.
But now analyses of 48 reversals that occurred in the past few million years have revealed a pattern common to most of them.
It should provide an important clue to their cause.


United Air Seeks New British Route
United Airlines asked the Transportation Department for approval to fly daily nonstop flights from Chicago to Stansted Airport, 26 miles northeast of London.
If approved, service could begin in October, said the airline, a unit of the UAL Corporation.
"Stansted is a very attractive location for us," UAL's chairman, Stephen M. Wolf, said.


Q&amp;A
Falling Out of Bed
Q.
Why don't we fall out of bed when we're asleep?


Bank Commercials In the Style of Joyce
Alan Levine, a copywriter at TBWA Advertising Inc., was a little skeptical when he was told several months ago to write bank commercials in the style of James Joyce.
The six spots, for the People's Bank of Bridgeport, Conn., are inspired by the Joyce novel "Ulysses" and follow the question-and-answer format used in the book's 17th chapter.


Gay Executive Wins $5.3 Million Judgment
A Superior Court judge has returned a $5.3 million judgment against the Shell Oil Company and a subsidiary, ruling that Shell violated its own procedures and broke state law in dismissing an executive "solely because he was a sexually active homosexual."
"This case presents the relatively new issue of how far a corporation may go in demanding that its managerial staff, in their respective private lives, deport and conduct themselves in a manner acceptable to and meeting the corporation's concept of propriety," the judge, Jacqueline Taber, of Alameda County Superior Court, said in her decision on Thursday.


Court Won't Review Mail-Order Tax Ban
The Supreme Court today rejected a request by Connecticut that it re-examine a 24-year-old ruling that has effectively barred states from collecting sales taxes on many mail-order purchases.
Connecticut had been trying for four years to require SFA Folio Collections Inc., a catalogue subsidiary of the company that owns the Saks Fifth Avenue retail chain, to collect sales tax on purchases made by Connecticut consumers.


Reviews/Fashion; For Adolfo, Variety's the Answer
Sensing a certain sameness about fashion, with knee-baring hemlines dominating collections by designers all over the world, Adolfo experimented with longer lengths when he began working on his fall collection a few months ago.
He believed the longer hems would offer women an alternative and add diversity to their wardrobes.
But he quickly became dissatisfied as he worked with the longer clothes.
Everything tended to look heavy and old.
The plan did not jell until he came upon the idea of dividing the skirt, making it into culottes.
Matching Shirt
"It began to look elegant," Adolfo recalled.
"When I started to pleat the legs, it began to look lighter and more graceful."


Martin P. O'Connell; Sanitation Official, 81
Martin P. O'Connell, retired chief of staff and director of operations of the New York City Sanitation Department, died on Saturday at Amsterdam Memorial Hospital in Amsterdam, N.Y.
He was 81 years old and lived in Broadalbin, N.Y.
He died of pnuemonia, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Texas Executes Man After 17 Years on Death Row
A killer who had been on death row for 17 years was put to death by lethal injection early today for the murder of an antique-gun collector.
The inmate, Jerry Joe Bird, 54 years old, was pronounced dead at 12:21 A.M., about 12 minutes after the lethal drugs began to flow.
He was put to death for the 1974 slaying of a gun collector during a burglary at the man's house in the Rio Grande Valley.


SPORTS PEOPLE: TENNIS An Olympic Exile For 2 Top Women
Martina Navratilova, the defending Wimbledon champion, who is ranked No. 4 in the world, and Gabriela Sabatini, the No. 3-ranked woman, have effectively ruled themselves out of next year's Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
Navratilova, a Czechoslovak-born citizen of the United States, and Sabatini, an Argentine, have snubbed the Federation Cup world team championship in Nottingham, England, July 21-28.
That bars them from participation in the Games, according to the requirements of the Olympics and the International Tennis Federation.


By Design; Shorts Settle In at Work
This summer, shorts are replacing pants and skirts as a major fashion force in the workplace.
Available in every fabric and at every price (ranging from astronomical Armani to down-to-earth Liz Claiborne), shorts have taken hold.
The wearer can be young, old or in between; conservative, moderate or avant-garde; short, tall, thin or pudgy.
All types have found a way to include shorts in their business wardrobe.
Interestingly, shorts that are cut full and end a couple of inches above the knee look neat and nice on everyone -- if you accept that they make all but the thinnest and trimmest appear broad in the beam.
But when these shorts are teamed with a loose jacket and T-shirtlike top or a tailored shirt, the effect is chic, cool and quite right for the office.


New Orleans Journal; Where the Gentle Rain Brings a Sea of Troubles
It doesn't take a hurricane to send tremors of dread through this low-slung city in a saucer.
A simple rain will do.
And there has been a lot of it lately.
It rained today.
It rained Sunday.
It rained last week.
And thereby hang a thousand tales.


Review/Television; Those With AIDS Virus Tell Their Own Stories
"P.O.V.," public television's series of independently made documentaries, begins its new season tonight at 10 on Channels 13 and 49 with "Absolutely Positive," the stories of 12 people who have the AIDS virus; one of those whose blood has tested HIV positive has already come down with AIDS, the others remain at risk.
The program is no ground-breaker, but, alas, the subject continues to demand attention. (On July 12, PBS stations are to carry a similar report, "Living With AIDS.")
Peter Adair, the director, narrator and one of tonight's subjects, notes that the "new sexual awakening in America" that enabled many homosexuals to come out of their closets also opened up opportunities to get the disease.
When Mr.
Adair is not fully on camera, the back of his head sometimes occupies a bit of the screen, and in one set of interviews, there he is in a mirror behind the man being interviewed.


Mitsubishi Sues A.T.&amp; T.
The Mitsubishi International Corporation is suing A.T.&amp; T. over a telephone system that was broken into by hackers who made thousands of illegal calls to Pakistan, Egypt and other places.
The lawsuit, filed late on Friday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, contends that the American Telephone and Telegraph Company failed to provide a secure system and failed to warn Mitsubishi of the potential for unauthorized use.


Stocks Dip in Tokyo
Tokyo stocks closed lower today as the lack of fresh data and the approaching release of Japan's money-supply report kept most investors sidelined.
The 225-issue Nikkei stock average was down 257.62 points, or 1.03 percent, to 24,685.47.
On Monday, the index lost 150.80 points.


2 Police Cadets Settle Suits Over Injuries From Training
Two police cadets injured while training at a regional police academy in 1988 have reached settlements with the state.
Last week a Superior Court judge approved settlements of $35,000 for Officer William D. Baker of North Adams and $32,500 for Officer Jeffrey J. Kemp of Pittsfield, court records show.


2 Major Ethiopian Rebel Groups Appear to Have a Big Falling Out
Separatist rebels are blocking fuel supplies at a vital Red Sea port, apparently in an effort to strengthen their hand at a conference to decide Ethiopia's political future after the ouster of its authoritarian Government last month, senior Western diplomats say.
The recent action at the port of Assab in Eritrea, a province entirely under the control of Eritrean separatists, has caused intermittent blackouts in the capital, Addis Ababa, and produced traffic tie-ups as lines form at gasoline pumps.


Florio Adds Budget Item: 6,000 Layoffs
The Florio administration is preparing to lay off an additional 6,000 state workers, as the Democratic Governor and legislative leaders grope for ways to fill a $1.5 billion budget gap before a June 30 deadline, an administration official said today.
The layoffs are just one element in a package of proposals that Governor Jim Florio says will balance the $14.3 billion budget without new taxes.
The plan includes deep program cuts, widespread layoffs and accounting techniques that officials admit are really one-time solutions.


Japan Vehicle Drop
The export of vehicles in Japan fell 5.9 percent last month, to 418,583, industry officials said today.
The exports consisted of 325,420 passenger cars, down 3.6 percent from a year ago, and 93,163 commercial vehicles, down 13 percent.
Vehicle production fell 3.6 percent, to slightly more than a million units in May, the third straight monthly decline.
Output in May totaled 771,766 cars, down 3.5 percent from a year ago, and 281,903 commercial vehicles, down 3.7 percent, the officials said.


Farm Credits for Soviets
Officials of the Agriculture Department and the Soviet Union met today to discuss the allocation of the first instalment of $1.5 billion in export credits, American officials said.
The value of the export credits under discussion, the first of three instalments set for this year, is $600 million, much of which is expected to be used for corn.


Boats Collide, Spilling Chemical in Waterway
More than 20,000 gallons of acetone spilled into the waters of the Kill van Kull between Staten Island and New Jersey last night after two vessels collided, the Coast Guard said.
The highly volatile chemical, which is lighter than water, began to evaporate upon release, and easterly winds helped to dissipate the fumes and reduce the possibilty of an explosion or a fire, said Lieut.
Comdr.
Paul Milligan, a spokesman for the Coast Guard.


Electronic Arts To Buy Distinctive
Electronic Arts Inc. of San Mateo, Calif., said it had reached an agreement to acquire Distinctive Software Inc., a creator of electronic-game software, for about $10 million in stock and cash.
Analysts said the deal would solidify Electronics Arts' position as one of the leading publishers of software for computer and video games.
The purchase is expected to close in about a month.


Highway Bill Stalls in Senate On Use of $8 Billion Surplus
A dispute among senators over how to divide $8.2 billion in surplus Federal transportation money stalled Senate action today on a huge highway and mass transit package.
It was the continuation of several days of arguing among Senators seeking to get the most transportation money for their states.
The differences have overshadowed debate over basics of the bill, which would cost more than $100 billion over five years and fundamentally shift the nation's transportation priorities, funneling more money to mass transit programs and giving states more flexibility in spending Federal funds.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 18


Jets Name Paddock
The Winnipeg Jets of the National Hockey League yesterday named John Paddock, who coached the Rangers' farm team in Binghamton, N.Y., last season, as their new head coach.
Paddock, 37 years old, spent seven seasons coaching in the American Hockey League, where his teams won two championships.
He was also the assistant general manager of the Philadelphia Flyers for the 1989-90 season.


In One Park, Children Climb Along With Humidity


Careers; Deans Try New Courses For M.B.A.'s
DEANS and faculty of graduate business schools all over the country are scrambling to keep up with the fast-changing world.
That means changing programs, adding courses, deleting courses, hiring different types of faculty and arranging internships here and abroad, among other developments to meet the needs of future managers.
For example, at Southern Methodist University in Dallas an entirely new program is being put into place this fall.
The former intensive 12-month M.B.A. program is being replaced with a more typical two-year program, like those at Harvard and Columbia.


Kuwait Picks Airbus to Rebuild Fleet
Kuwait's national airline announced today that it had decided to rebuild its fleet by awarding orders to Airbus Industrie for 15 aircraft and by taking options on nine more Airbus planes, a deal that analysts said was worth almost $2 billion.
At a news conference at the Paris Air Show, Ahmed al-Mishari, chairman of the Kuwaiti Airways Corporation, also announced that his company would soon order three Boeing 747-400 aircraft.


John Sununu, Limousine Conservative
Seneca said it 19 centuries ago: "He is most powerful who has power over himself." John Sununu, President Bush's much-traveled chief of staff, dilutes his own vast power by his consummate lack of self-control.
Mr.
Sununu embarrassed his boss -- and, one can only hope, himself -- with his misuse of Air Force jets for trips to ski resorts and his Boston dentist.
In the six weeks since those abuses were disclosed, he's been on a leash, sort of.
New rules require than he clear his flight plans with White House counsel Boyden Gray in advance.
So what does Mr.
Sununu do for his personal trips now?
He finds a loophole.


Samuel Reis; Lawyer, 93
Samuel H. Reis, a former lawyer with the United States Department of Justice in Manhattan and in Washington, died yesterday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 93 years old.
He died of complications from a stroke, said his son, Dr. Donald J. Reis.


More Than Mammography, Self-Examination Detects Cancers; Counseling Needed
To the Editor:
Why don't women go for mammograms (Personal Health, June 5)?
As a woman and public health professional, I find this an intriguing and challenging question.
I do not believe the answer is cost or fear of radiation.


Value Merchants Inc. reports earnings for 16wks to May 25


Beware The Ailing Golfer
ABOUT an hour before yesterday's United States Open playoff began, Payne Stewart was lying face down on a bench in Hazeltine National's locker room.
From his waist to his thighs he was wearing what resembled a black scuba suit as Dr.
Keith Ungar rubbed the touring pro's lower lumbar region where he has three degenerative disks.
"Oooh, oooh," Stewart grunted as Ungar's fingers probed his back. "Oooh."


Books of The Times; Jean Renoir: Tidbits of a Life in Film
Jean Renoir A Life in Pictures By Celia Bertin Translated by Mireille Muellner and Leonard Muellner.
Illustrated. 403 pages.
Johns Hopkins University Press. $29.95.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Activated Sandy Alomar Jr., catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Eric King, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.


Topics of The Times; Cleaning Albany's Air
New York State's fiscal crisis has yielded one cheerful item.
If the proposed budget is approved, the state will reap a $17 million windfall by selling Albany's garbage incinerator to the State Power Authority.
That would help clear Albany's air, fiscally and literally.
The 10-year-old incinerator is owned and operated by the state.
But the city profits handsomely; local governments pay the city $65 a ton to take their solid waste and resell it to the state, for an additional $15 a ton, to be burned in the incinerator.
The deal once seemed fair; Albany does not collect taxes on the state's substantial real estate.
But the inefficient incinerator increases air pollution and discourages recycling.
If the sale goes through, the Power Authority will rebuild it and use natural gas to generate power.
Albany's experience does not disprove the merits of modern incineration, but what the city needs now is to convert the present monstrosity.


Pepsi to Spend More in Poland
Matching an earlier investment by the Coca-Cola Company, Pepsico said yesterday that it had opened a $10 million soft- drink plant in Warsaw and it would spend an additional $50 million in the Poland over five years.
The investment would bring to more than $110 million the amount Pepsico has spent in Poland, where the company first established operations in 1972 and now has eight soft- drink plants.


More Than Mammography, Self-Examination Detects Cancers
To the Editor:
Jane Brody's June 5 Personal Health column on women and mammography missed an opportunity to alert younger women to their risks.
This is the population in which breast cancer is the leading cause of death.
Mammography is vital, and insurance companies should certainly pay for this routine screening, if only to save themselves the $20,000 average treatment cost for younger women's cancers of the breast.


U.N. Punishes Iraq Further for Kuwait Invasion
The Security Council tightened its sanctions against Iraq today by unanimously approving a detailed plan for denying Baghdad military supplies and declaring that it must pay for the destruction of its most dangerous weapons itself.
At the same time, the special commission set up by the Council to supervise the destruction of the weapons announced that it would send inspectors back to Iraq later this week to look for evidence that the Government of President Saddam Hussein is secretly trying to build nuclear warheads.


Banning of Women at Military College Is Upheld
A Federal district judge has ruled that Virginia's state-supported military college may continue admitting only men, saying that the benefits of a single-sex education justify the college's 152-year-old policy of excluding women.
In ruling on Friday against the Justice Department, which brought the sex-discrimination case against the Virginia Military Institute 15 months ago, Judge Jackson L. Kiser wrote that the college had "decided that providing a distinctive, single-sex educational opportunity is more important than providing an education equally available to all.


6 Are Killed and 33 Are Hurt In S. Carolina Plant Explosion
An explosion at a chemical plant today killed six workers and injured 33 others, four of them critically, the authorities said.
The explosion at the Albright &amp; Wilson Americas Inc. plant north of here occurred shortly before noon as workers began mixing chemicals to make a flame retardant, said Terry Martin, the company's employee relations manager.
It also sparked a fire, which was quickly brought under control.


Apple May Expand Its Copyright Suit
A Federal District Court judge granted Apple Computer Inc.'s request to add two software packages to the list of products that Apple contends infringe the copyrights for the company's Macintosh personal computer.
The additional products in Apple's three-year-old copyright suit are Windows 3.0 by the Microsoft Corporation and the Hewlett-Packard Company's New Wave 3.0.
The suit had applied to Windows 2.03 and New Wave.


Big Bang Theory Makes Sense of Cosmic Facts; No Contradiction
To the Editor:
The sizes of the vast ribbons of galaxies that Eric J. Lerner refers to (Op-Ed, June 3) come straight out of the Big Bang model itself.
Astronomers infer the distance to each galaxy by measuring its velocity and asking the question, "How far has that object traveled in 18 billion years?" For example, when astronomers measure a particular galaxy to be moving away from us at one-tenth the speed of light, they report its distance to be 1.8 billion light years. (Had they based their calculation on a 15 trillion-year-old universe instead, that same galaxy would get a distance of 1.5 billion light years assigned to it.)


McDonald's Roofs
First it was the wrapper, then the hamburger.
Now the McDonald's Corporation wants to make its restaurant roofs environmentally correct.
The fast-food chain, in the middle of a $100 million campaign called McRecycle U.S.A., is installing roof shingles made from recycled computer housings at two Chicago-area restaurants.
It may also use them at other locations.
The General Electric Company's plastics division grinds up old computer-terminal housings from the Digital Equipment Corporation, and then the Nailite Corporation of Miami reformulates the plastic into shingles.


Music in Review
Jerusalem New Music Ensemble Merkin Concert Hall
One can only speculate as to why a country rich with musicians and enlightened audiences does not create a substantial and identifiable music of its own.
But as yet Israel has had only occasional success.
Perhaps the people and the place have yet to reconcile their differences, for certainly Israel began with a largely European culture and with each generation becomes, in mind and heart, more a part of the Middle East.


No Payment By Airline
America West Airlines Inc. said today that it would not make an interest payment of nearly $6 million due July 1 on some of its bonds because it had not made aircraft-lease payments.
The financially troubled airline said terms of the $100 million bond issue barred payment of the interest while the company was behind on the aircraft-lease payments.
The 11.5 percent bonds are due to mature in 2009.


Morris Ettenberg, 75, Engineering Professor
Morris Ettenberg, an educator and professor emeritus of electrical engineering at City College, died on Friday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a ruptured aorta, a family spokesman said.


Lawyer Is Suspended Over Bogus Divorces
The Wisconsin Supreme Court has suspended a lawyer who arranged bogus divorces around the world using advertisements in supermarket newspapers to attract customers.
The lawyer, 64-year-old Davis Donnelly of Eau Claire, a former state senator who is the owner of a company that markets frozen pizza, acknowledged that he had filed the mail-order divorces in the Dominican Republic for couples in "many, many, many countries, and I did not inquire or clutter my mind with what the law was."


Accounts
*
Bank Leumi Trust Company of New York to Taylor-Gordon, Aarons &amp; Co.
Inc., New York.
The previous agency was Partners &amp; Shevack, New York.
Billings have not been determined.


PC Tools and Norton, Updated
THE Microsoft Corporation MS-DOS 5.0 upgrade kit, which updates the operating system software used in tens of millions of I.B.M.
PC's and compatibles, includes several new features that used to be found only in specialized utility packages like PC Tools Deluxe or the Norton Utilities.
For example, MS-DOS 5.0 now has a better system of formating diskettes and hard disks, a new system for searching for misplaced files, a better graphical "shell" for simplifying DOS operations and preparing users to move to Windows, an improved on-line help system, and an "undelete" command that restores accidentally erased files and directories.


Millions of Elderly Poor Paying Too Much for Medicare Coverage
The Government is overcharging poor, elderly people more than a billion dollars a year by deducting $30 a month more than it should from their Social Security checks and failing to reimburse them for some medical expenses, an advocacy group reported today.
Social Security officials acknowledged today that a problem existed involving the deduction, which covers certain Medicare costs.
But they said that without spending millions of dollars they had been unable to reach everyone who should be exempt from the $30 monthly charge and were entitled to more reimbursements.


Editors' Note
An article on June 6 discussed newly issued transcripts of conversations secretly tape-recorded in the White House under President Richard M. Nixon.
The article said: "Some of the new tapes amplify on dark aspects of Mr. Nixon's personality that have led some critics to accuse him of vindictiveness and anti-Semitism. These unguarded remarks tend to cloud the image Mr. Nixon has tried to cultivate in recent years of an elder statesman."
But two of the transcript passages that prompted those comments were not new disclosures; they had been published earlier.


Twins' Streak: Party's Over As Loss Column Grows by One
No matter how people talked of the level of competition, the Minnesota Twins still had the longest winning streak in the majors this season: 15 games.
It came to an end on Monday night when the Baltimore Orioles rallied for three runs in the bottom of the ninth for a 6-5 victory, the first loss the Twins endured in the month of June.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9
The final pillar of statutory apartheid was scrapped by the South African Parliament 41 years after it was enacted.
The law laid the legal foundation of apartheid by classifying all South Africans by race.
Page A1


Maxus Suit On Kidder Set for Texas
The Supreme Court refused yesterday to block a $1.7 billion lawsuit filed in a Texas state court against Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.
The suit, filed by the Maxus Energy Corporation, a former Kidder client, charges that the Dallas-based oil and gas company was damaged by Kidder's links to insider trading activity.
With the ruling, Kidder, a unit of the General Electric Company, will once again be haunted by the legacy of Martin A. Siegel, the former investment banker who illegally leaked inside information about the activities of some of his clients to Ivan F. Boesky, the former stock speculator.


Music in Review
Victoria Bond 'Molly Manybloom' Symphony Space 2537 Broadway (at 95th Street)
The place for James Joyce fans to be on Sunday evening was either at Symphony Space, where the 10th annual "Bloomsday on Broadway" program was presented, or near a radio, to hear the live broadcast of the event on WNYC-FM.
For six hours, Isaiah Sheffer directed several dozen actors and actresses in readings of excerpts from Joyce's works, and of works about Joyce by Frank McCourt and Aviva Davidson.
Then, starting just past midnight, Molly Bloom had the last words -- 45 minutes worth of them -- in the New York premiere of Victoria Bond's "Molly Manybloom."


Treasuries Show Slight Losses
Prices of Treasury securities dipped in light, trendless trading yesterday as market participants continued to grope for a sense of where the economy is going.
Data released last week seemed to reassure traders that for now an apparent upturn in the economy was not feeding inflationary pressures.
Indeed, to some analysts, the increase of five-tenths of 1 percent in industrial production in May provided evidence that growth has not turned positive at all.


Chess
Larry Christiansen considers his victory in the Schweizerische Kreditanstalt Tournament, which began May 2 and ended in mid-month in Munich, his greatest in the last 10 years.
One might add that it is also one of the greatest by any American in this period.
The Queens grandmaster, who originally came from Modesto, Calif., took first prize with a convincing 9 1/2-3 1/2 score.
He recently moved to Germany to be close to what he calls the "easy money" of league team play and frequent simultaneous exhibitions there.
Second place was shared by the grandmasters Aleksandr Belyavsky and Boris Gelfand of the Soviet Union and Robert Huebner of Germany and by Gerald Hertneck, also of Germany, who, by achieving the 8-5 tally, completed the requirements for his grandmaster title.
FINAL STANDINGS
Player
W.
L.
D.
Pts.
Christiansen
6
0
7
9 1/2
Belyavsky
5
2
6
8
Hertneck
5
2
6
8
Huebner
4
1
8
8
Gelfand
5
2
6
8
Nunn
5
3
5
7 1/2
Anand
5
4
4
7
Polgar, J.
5
5
3
6 1/2
Hort
1
2
10
6
Lobron
4
6
3
5 1/2
Polgar, Zsu.
2
5
6
5
Yudasin
3
6
4
5
Kindermann
0
6
7
3 1/2
Wahls
2
8
3
3 1/2
Christiansen, known for his inclination toward risky attacks, did not disappoint his fans, as can be told from his speculative gambit against the German grandmaster, Stefan Kindermann, in the fifth round.


Media Buyers Are Quarry Of Discovery Channel Drive
THE Discovery Channel, the cable television network that specializes in adventure programs, is embarking on an adventure of its own: its largest effort yet to stalk elusive advertising dollars.
In a new campaign called "That's the Thrill of Discovery," the nation's fifth-largest basic cable network, which reaches more than 55 million households, is touting its virtures to media directors and other executives who decide where to place advertising.
Print, transit and telephone kiosk ads are appearing in New York and Chicago; Detroit and Los Angeles will follow.


General Dynamics
The United Automobile Workers union and the General Dynamics Corporation's land systems division reached a tentative agreement on a three-year contract covering about 4,000 workers in Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania.
Details were not released, but a U.A.W. official, who insisted he not be identified, said the pact included improvements in wages and benefits.
A typical worker covered by the previous three-year contract, which expired Sunday at midnight, was paid $14.57 an hour.


Grand Met Names Pair To Run Food Business
Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. said yesterday that it had named two executives, Peter M. Thompson and Paul S. Walsh, to be joint chief operating officers of the company's Minneapolis-based food sector.
The move could put either man in line to succeed Ian A. Martin at the helm of that operation.
The company announced in February that Mr.
Martin, a Scot who led Grand Met's 1989 takeover of the Pillsbury Company, would move to London next January to assume the No. 2 post at the parent company behind Allen J. G. Sheppard.
The parent company also has beverage and retailing operations.


Music in Review
Accademia del Santo Spirito Merkin Concert Hall
To this battle-scarred veteran of the First New York International Festival of the Arts in 1988, an initial encounter with the new, second edition came fraught with trepidation.
But the performance of Banchieri's madrigal comedy "La Pazzia Senile" on Thursday evening by the Accademia del Santo Spirito of Turin, Italy, offered balm and delight.


University Patents reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


4,300 Prairie Dogs Go Unsung
Nearly 100 hunters killed more than 4,300 prairie dogs in the second annual Top Dog World Championship Prairie Dog Shoot over the weekend.
Unlike the first year, no protesters showed up.
Entrants competed for $10,000 worth of prizes.
The event was sponsored by the Ten Ring Gun Club of Nucla.
Last year protesters and members of the news media nearly outnumbered the 100 contestants.


Four Parties in Northern Ireland Begin Talks
After seven weeks of haggling over procedural issues, leaders of four parties in Northern Ireland began negotiations today aimed at agreeing on a form of regional government for the strife-torn British province, which has been ruled largely from London since 1972.
The talks began in Belfast after the politicians agreed to the selection of Sir Ninian M. Stephen, a prominent Australian judge who has championed the plight of Aborigines, as chairman of a planned second phase of the talks.


Experts Debate if AIDS Epidemic Has at Last Crested in U.S.
IS the AIDS epidemic in the United States reaching its peak?
Although only a few experts are willing to say it has, quite a number believe the question is at least worth discussing.
Ten years after the first cases were recognized, the disease is still untamed and has yet to do its worst in the rest of the world.
But in the United States, it could be possible in the foreseeable future to declare the deadly tide on the ebb.


Bill Is Passed to Forbid Naming Rape Victims
The police and other public officials in New York State would be prohibited from disclosing the names of rape victims under a bill given final legislative approval today and sent to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
Current state law prohibits public officials from disclosing names of rape victims under 18 years old.
The new bill, approved 136 to 0 today in the Assembly and earlier in the Senate, would extend that prohibition to all reported victims in cases of rape and other sex crimes.
But the legislation does not provide for sanctions against news organizations that use such names, the bill's sponsors said.


William S. Fishman, 75, Is Dead; Philanthropist and Ex-Executive
William S. Fishman, a philanthropist who was co-founder and former chief executive of ARA Services, a service management company, died Saturday.
He was 75 years old and lived in Merion.
The cause of death was not immediately available, said a funeral home spokesman.


Hong Kong No. 1 in Rents
Storekeepers in Hong Kong pay steeper rents than merchants anywhere else in the world, according to a survey published today.
At $690 a square foot, rents in the colony's central shopping district supplanted the Ginza in Tokyo as the world leader.


JUSTICES RESTRICT SUITS CHALLENGING PRISON CONDITIONS
The Supreme Court ruled today that hardships of life in prison like overcrowding, poor sanitation and exposure to violence do not violate the Constitution unless prisoners can show that the prison administration has acted with "deliberate indifference" to basic human needs.
The 5-to-4 decision, in a case from Ohio, is likely to make it more difficult for prisoners to prevail in lawsuits contending that inadequate prison conditions violate the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment.
Meeting a New Standard
Just how difficult it will be for prisoners to prevail will depend on how the lower courts interpret the requirement of proving deliberate indifference, a phrase that Justice Antonin Scalia's majority opinion left largely undefined.
Prison lawsuits have been quite successful, with prisons in 38 states now operating under Federal court orders to remedy unconstitutional conditions.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Navratilova Coasts to Victory Top-seeded Martina Navratilova easily won in the first round of a grass-court tournament yesterday at Eastbourne, England, beating Amanda Coetzer, 6-0, 6-1.
Fifth-seeded Zina Garrison pulled out with an injury and eighth-seeded Amy Frazier was beaten by Jo Durie of Britain, 6-2, 6-3.
Second-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario defeated Claudia Porwik, 6-1, 6-4, but third-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez needed three sets to defeat Nathalie Herreman, 6-3, 2-6, 6-1. (AP)


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.61
5.71
8.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.61
5.59
7.74
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.79
5.78
7.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.17
8.13
8.52
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.49
8.45
8.45
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.50
9.50
9.58
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.27
7.30
7.51
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Broward County Health Facilities Authority, Fla., is offering $25.4 million in revenue bonds initially priced to yield a maximum of about 7.16 percent for an issue due in 2011, through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
For shorter maturities, yields range from 4.75 percent in 1992 to 6.65 percent in 2001.
Another long maturity is priced to yield about 7.13 percent.
The financing is insured by the Municipal Bond Investors Assurance Corp. and rated trible-A by both Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Parretti Ousted At MGM-Pathe
The MGM-Pathe Communications Company and its bankers today removed Giancarlo Parretti, the company's former chairman, and two others from the board.
The company also filed a complaint in Delaware Chancery Court seeking to bar Mr.
Parretti from interfering with MGM-Pathe's management.
It sought similar relief from the two other board members, Maria Cecconi, whom MGM- Pathe identified as Mr.
Parretti's wife, and Yoram Globus.


Florio Readies More Layoffs
The New Jersey Governor is preparing to lay off 6,000 more state workers to help close a budget gap without new taxes.
Page B1.


Reviews/Fashion; Ungaro's Casual Mood
Emanuel Ungaro is one of the French couturiers who doesn't shy away from the kind of sportswear associated with American ready-to-wear.
His Emanuel collection, introduced just a few months ago for the fall season, made a point of separate styles that could be worn together in different ways.
Details like the draped skirt that has become an Ungaro trademark were included.
While it won't be introduced to customers until July, the Emanuel line seems to be a a success with buyers.
It has been ordered by 225 stores, including Saks Fifth Avenue, Neiman Marcus and Marshall Field's, a spokeswoman said.
The resort collection continues the casual mood with more authority.
Carnival colors, details like whimsical watermelon slices for jacket pockets or industrial-size steel clips for closing, and stretch fabrics mark the clothes that will be in stores from late October to January 1992.


Foundation to Help New York Distribute Condoms in High Schools
The money to help distribute condoms in New York City high schools will come from a private foundation that quietly supports controversial or unpopular causes most philanthropies prefer to shun.
"Very big foundations fund pretty things like buildings and museums; we do the not-so-pretty things," said Irene Diamond, the 81-year-old president of the Aaron Diamond Foundation, which is also the country's largest private supporter of AIDS research.


Reviews/Fashion; Karan's Styles for Beach or Slope
When Donna Karan showed her first DKNY collection two years ago, she struck a popular chord.
While her regular collection is beamed at women who are not afraid to look stylish on the job, DKNY has a more casual air, emphasizing clothes for weekends and after-work hours.
It caught on immediately, and $160 million in sales is projected for 1991.
The newest edition, for the resort season, explores the casual theme in new ways.
It is being presented in her showroom starting this week.


Quayle's Kind Word for Cuomo
In a demonstration of political incongruity, Vice President Dan Quayle, one of President Bush's most loyal defenders, paid a courtesy call today on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, one of the President's most willing critics.
Mr.
Quayle and his wife, Marilyn, stopped by the Governor's office this afternoon for 10 minutes of conversation and photographs with Mr.
Cuomo and his wife, Matilda, while the Quayles were in town for a Republican fund-raiser at the Capitol.


Amateur Video on TV: Verite of the Ordinary
As the number of people armed with their own video cameras has grown on both sides of the Atlantic, so have the possibilities for television producers, looking for drama and profit in the raw tape of amateurs.
In the United States, the phenomenon has spawned "America's Funniest Home Videos" and provided newscasts with a new source of powerful video verite, like the grainy scenes of Los Angeles police officers brutally beating a black motorist recorded by a man testing his new video camera.


Corrections
An obituary by The Associated Press in some editions on Sunday about A. B. (Happy) Chandler, the former baseball commissioner, misstated the reason he gave in 1947 for suspending Leo Durocher, the Brooklyn Dodgers' manager.
It was "the accumulation of unpleasant incidents" resulting in conduct detrimental to baseball, not association with gamblers.


Higher Tax Suggested On Tobacco and Alcohol
Suggesting that additional revenues would be needed to resolve the state's continuing budget dispute, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that increased alcohol and tobacco taxes could be used to restore some of the spending he vetoed last week.
In each of the last two years, the Governor and the Legislature have increased tobacco and alcohol taxes to fill the state's budget gap.
Still, Mr.
Cuomo said today of the legislators, that "they didn't do all that you could do with tobacco and alcohol, frankly."


First U.S. Refuge for Plants Sought in Florida
PARTS of Florida are dry sandy flats full of scruffy, stunted plants, straggly trees, bothersome insects and assorted reptiles.
When viewed next to neat rows of green, sculptured orange trees, the prospect of developing this land with its scraggly vegetation into citrus groves almost seems like doing nature a favor.
But the rough exterior of this scrub land, characterized by sandy soil and little year-round moisture, belies its importance as the host for many species of plants and animals that do not exist anywhere else in the world.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
A furious political battle broke out in California over the future of the state's public-employee pension fund, with the fund's leaders charging that Gov.
Pete Wilson is trying to pack its board and squash its shareholder-rights campaign.  [ Page D1. ]
The Supreme Court rejected a request by Connecticut that it re-examine a 24-year-old ruling that has effectively barred states from collecting sales taxes on many mail-order purchases.  [ D1. ]


Fast Start Replaces a Limp In Some Views of Recovery
The economic recovery that almost everyone thought would start with a crawl could begin with a dash instead, according to a growing minority of forecasters, including Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.
But a fast start -- which Fed officials now describe as a reasonable, albeit an unlikely, possibility -- would not presage a sustained boom.


Members of U.S. Panel at Odds Over Health Insurance for Children
Dissent has boiled up inside a Federal commission investigating the condition of children in America, with Bush Administration officials and other Republicans assailing Democratic proposals to extend health insurance coverage to more than eight million uninsured children.
The Republican attack, which came in a dissenting chapter of a report to be issued next week, suggested that it would be almost impossible for Congress and the Administration to reach agreement soon on any comprehensive revision of the nation's health care system.


People
*
Bob Sarlin has been named senior vice president and creative director at Laurence, Charles, Free &amp; Lawson, New York. *
Mitchell J. Brooks has joined Hal Riney &amp; Partners, New York, as senior vice president and group account director.
He was senior vice president and account director at J. Walter Thompson New York.


The U.N. Today
Security Council Meets at 10:30 A.M. on Iraq and Kuwait.


Little Rise in P.R. Pay
The sixth annual salary survey by a public relations trade publication showed almost no increase last year in the median pay for public relations professionals compared with 1989.
The survey by the Public Relations Journal shows the 1990 median salary, at $43,718, rose 1.2 percent from 1989.
The slow rate of growth came in a year of many layoffs and early retirements in the industry.
The survey also showed that salaries for women in public relations lagged behind men's by 43 percent, a narrowing of the previous year's gap of 49 percent.


Poll Finds AIDS Causes Single People to Alter Behavior
HALF of American adults who are single and under 45 years of age say they have changed their sexual behavior because of fear of getting AIDS, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The poll also found signs of increased acquaintance with people with AIDS and of heightened public knowledge about AIDS over the past six years.


Among Those Let Go, the Pink Slip Itself
Pink slips are no longer the rosy hue they used to be.
Six thousand New York City municipal employees are getting "pink slips" this week.
In other words, they are being laid off.
But none will literally receive a pink slip.
Uniformed sanitation workers have been getting their notices through a teletype in the garages around the city where they are assigned.
Anne Canty, a Sanitation Department aide, said that while termination by telex might seem insensitive, it is the traditional way to send messages to the department's uniformed workers.


Review/Theater; A Contemporary 'Macbeth' Without Changing a Word
Ambition, greed, lust for power and ultimately paranoia -- in short, all the things that make politics so exciting -- are not the exclusive properties of history.
In a vibrant production put together by a group of black actors from Britain, Shakespeare's "Tragedy of Macbeth" has been transported from 11th-century Scotland to 20th-century Africa.
Adroitly directed by Stephen Rayne and well acted by the cast of 13, this staging at St.
Bartholomew's Church (which runs through Sunday as part of the New York International Festival of the Arts) transforms what is too often regarded as a jinxed period piece that many actors refuse even to call by name into a modern political play.
This "Macbeth" is as timely as today's headlines.


Kremlin Divided Over Economic Plan
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev was reported today to have welcomed an unofficial plan by Soviet and American economists to integrate the country into the world market, while his Prime Minister dismissed it as a distraction.
Grigory A. Yavlinsky, the 39-year-old economist who brought the plan back from Harvard University over the weekend, presented it to Mr.
Gorbachev today and found his reaction "fairly positive," he told the Soviet press agency, Tass.


Charles Lipkin; Accountant, 98
Charles Lipkin, a certified public accountant in Manhattan for several decades, died yesterday at his home in the Bronx.
He was 98 years old.
Mr.
Lipkin maintained a full-time practice until five years ago and at his death was a principal of the firm of Lipkin &amp; Lipkin with his son Henry.
He was born in Manhattan and was a graduate of City College.
He is survived by his wife, the former Gertrude Hillman; three sons, Henry, of Manhattan, Daniel, of Dresher, Pa., and Russell, of the Bronx; a daughter, Gilda, of the Bronx; four grandchildren and three great-grandchildren.


Nationwide Search Is Begun For Bank Thief Who Killed 4
The authorities were conducting a nationwide search today for a silver-haired bandit who worked his way through an electronic security system at a Denver bank over the weekend and killed four guards.
The authorities said the man carefully picked his way through several layers of security measures at the United Bank of Denver early Sunday, eventually getting to the vault.
At about 10 A.M., he walked in on a small crew of employees who were counting receipts, the police said.
Witnesses told the authorities that the man scooped up some of the money.
The police said the man later went to another level of the bank where he killed four guards.


California Battle Over State Fund
A furious political battle broke out in California today over the future of the state's huge public-employee pension fund, with the fund's leaders charging that Gov.
Pete Wilson was trying to pack its board and squash its highly visible shareholder-rights campaign.
The fight broke out after Governor Wilson, a Republican, proposed legislation over the weekend that would enable him to tap the fund for $1.6 billion to help close the state's $14.3 billion budget deficit.


Anyone for the 'J,' 'O,' 'U,' 'X' or 'Z' Word?
To the Editor:
Re your June 6 Topic: Aw, come on guys!
Every single woman in New York (and elsewhere) knows that the "M" word is the most frightening word she can ever say to a man.
Meltdown?
No way! MEREDITH BERNSTEIN New York, June 7, 1991


Asteroids, a Menace to Early Life, Could Still Destroy Earth; High Heat and Asteroids Flavored Primordial Soup
LIFE on Earth may have sprung into existence during a period so brief -- and so hostile to life as we know it today -- that scientists will have to reconsider traditional ideas about the chemical antecedents of all living things, several new studies suggest.
Contradicting the widely held supposition that life arose from a relatively simple soup of amino acids, Dr.
Norman R. Pace, a biologist at Indiana University, says that at the time life began to appear around 3.5 billion years ago, the surface of the Earth was probably scalding hot, possibly as hot as 300degrees Fahrenheit.
Moreover, he believes, water might have been as destructive to the earliest forms of life as it proved to be for the wicked witch in "The Wizard of Oz."


Victorious Yeltsin Due in U.S. Today
Boris N. Yeltsin begins a three-day visit to Washington on Tuesday that confronts President Bush with basic questions about American attitudes toward the rapidly changing Soviet Union, which has been the focus of United States foreign policy for 45 years.
The root question is this: Can Washington find some way to support Mr.
Yeltsin and rapid change without undermining President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and stability?
Andrei Kozyrev, one of Mr.
Yeltsin's close associates, suggested at a news conference last week that Mr.
Yeltsin would tell Mr.
Bush that Russia was ready to pursue both goals at once, "to achieve stability through broadening radical economic reforms."


On My Mind; Fighting in the Streets
This fellow, a New Yorker in his 50's, was telling his son that he didn't understand all those stories about drug peddling in the streets -- nobody ever offered to sell him any.
"Dad," the son said, "take off your tie."


Navratilova Is Upset Over No. 4 Seeding
She has won the tournament a record nine times and is the defending champion.
But Martina Navratilova won't be the top-seeded woman at Wimbledon.
"I wonder how many times I have to win it," said Navratilova, seeded fourth by Wimbledon officials, who strictly followed the world rankings.


Disarming the Soviets, With Aid
There's a big reason for the West to think hard about giving economic assistance to the Soviet Union: Moscow's military spending.
Even as the Soviets seek billions in aid, they maintain the largest army in the world, devote an extravagant share of their shrinking gross national product to defense and continue to modernize nuclear forces.
That's why Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and others would condition aid on deep cuts.
But that might well do more harm than good.
Most likely, it would undercut pressures inside the Soviet Union that are already forcing military cutbacks and would strengthen the hand of hard-liners who oppose East-West cooperation.


Xeta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Mugger in Car Drags Woman To Her Death
A 60-year-old Brooklyn woman was killed last night when a purse snatcher grabbed her from a passing car and dragged her at least 30 feet, witnesses told the police.
The attack, which occurred at 5:40 P.M., was the third mugging in two weeks in the quiet, residential Flatlands community of single-family homes just north of Marine Park, said shocked residents who saw the incident.


Topics of The Times; Can Can
By noon, all the 1,058 men with numbers pinned to their singlets had left.
So had all the spectators who had crowded around at 90th Street and Park Avenue in Manhattan for the finish of the Four-Mile Father's Day Race.
The only sign that remained, on the nearby Central Park Reservoir track, was a striking can of trash.
The can was full -- more than full -- of soda cans.
They bulged up like foam in a beer glass. spectators had painstakingly positioned their empties into the pyramid.
It was hard to imagine adding even one more can to the stack.
Still, not one can lay on the ground.
The sight offered two obvious lessons.
One, New Yorkers care about their parks and try to keep them clean.
Two, they need help.
The Parks Department, in a time of deep budget cuts, must struggle to find funds for personnel.
Even so, there is an expedient alternative here, and elsewhere in the parks.
Not another worker; just another trash can.


A Livable City? Newark. Yes, Newark.
This sounds like monologue material for Johnny or Dave or Arsenio: Newark, once a symbol of old-fashioned industrial might and later of urban unrest and disintegration, won an award yesterday in a competition to choose America's most livable cities.
Newark. Livable. Really.


Despite the Delay by Devils, It's McVie They Want as Coach
The Devils announced yesterday that Tom McVie, who piloted the team for the last 13 games of the season, will return as their coach.
John McMullen, the owner and chairman of the Devils, said that despite the delay in the announcement, there was never any consideration that McVie would not return.


White House Hopes to Lift Sanctions
After the South African Parliament's repeal of the last legal pillar of apartheid, senior Bush Administration officials said today that they would move ahead with plans to lift a five-year-old set of economic sanctions against South Africa by the end of the summer.
Mr.
Bush's efforts to lift the sanctions are almost certain to set off an effort in Congress to retain them by several lawmakers, who say that South Africa has not yet earned their repeal.


Books of The Times; Jean Renoir: Tidbits of a Life in Film
Jean Renoir A Life in Pictures By Celia Bertin Translated by Mireille Muellner and Leonard Muellner.
Illustrated. 403 pages.
Johns Hopkins University Press. $29.95.


Dismissed From Marine Corps
An officer who left his unit as it was being sent to the Persian Gulf was dismissed from the Marine Corps in a court-martial on Saturday.
Lieut.
Tony Moradian, 26 years old, of Los Angeles was convicted of conduct unbecoming an officer, said Cpl.
Ray Sears, a spokesman at Camp Pendleton.
He was expelled from the Corps and fined $3,000.


Advance in CD's Starts a New Battle
When the compact disk emerged from the laboratory as a consumer product in the mid-1980's, recording companies hated it.
It would confuse consumers and ruin the recording business, they said.
Today, records are indeed near extinction, but the recording business has doubled since CD's, with their scratch-free, hiss-free digital clarity, went on sale eight years ago.
Now the battle is about to be fought again -- this time over compact disks that record.
The industry is choosing sides over a new technology called MD, for mini disk, a variant of the compact disk that the Sony Corporation is betting will make its own Walkman obsolete.


A Knife Sharpener Is Now Even Better
SIX years ago I wrote about an extraordinary new knife sharpener, the Chef's Choice Diamond Hone Sharpener, manufactured by Edgecraft .
The machine has three pairs of angled slots that guide a knife blade over rotating stones embedded with tiny diamond particles.
The first set of slots presharpen the blade, preparing it for finer honing down the line.
For its ease of use and nearly foolproof design, the Chef's Choice sharpener has become a tremendous success.
After I used it for a while, one minor design flaw became apparent.
The sharpening slots did not accommodate a small section of blade close to the handle.
That section of blade is rarely used; nonetheless, it caused some complaints from consumers.
Edgecraft went back to the drawing board and produced a modified machine, the Professional Model 110, which corrects the problem.
This one sharpens the entire blade of anything from a paring knife to a 12-inch chef's knife.


Personal Health
SUNSHINE is two-faced: beautifying but blemishing, soul-restoring but health-robbing, life-giving but potentially deadly.
Americans addicted to it have been slow to show more respect for its power.
As a result, the addition of "too tan" to the Duchess of Windsor's byword "You can't be too rich or too thin" is exacting an ever-worsening toll.
About 600,000 cases of skin cancer, 90 percent of them caused by sun exposure, will be diagnosed this year in the United States alone.


Pet Cemetery Broke Hearts In Burial Fraud, F.B.I. Says
When their Old English sheepdog, Wooley, fell ill and died, Catherine and Robert Grzymala entrusted his body to the Long Island Pet Cemetery for what they were assured would be a dignified private cremation.
Afterward, Mrs.
Grzymala put up a headstone and buried Wooley's ashes in a small, sad ceremony in the backyard.
But today the Grzymalas learned that the ashes in the grave might not be Wooley's, or even any dog's in particular.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation charged that the cemetery's owners had indiscriminately disposed of up to a quarter of a million pets since 1984, either by burning them in mass incinerations and then doling out the ashes to unsuspecting owners, or by throwing them into huge open pits in the woods.  3 Charged With Mail Fraud
At the same time, the Suffolk County District Attorney, James Catterson, said he expected to file environmental charges against the owners.
He said that the piles of dead animals had turned four wooded acres of land behind the cemetery into black ooze, suffusing the air with a putrefying smell and drawing rats as large as opossums.
County officials said they were testing to determine whether the contamination had reached the aquifer, which provides the area with water.
"There are dead bodies strewn all over the facility," said James Fox, assistant director in charge of the F.B.I.'s New York office.
He said that people examining the site had to wear protective gear and gas masks.
This morning, the bureau arrested one of the cemetery's owners, Alan Strauss, and two workers, Kathy Drago and Paul Halverson.
The three were charged with violating Federal mail fraud statutes by misrepresenting their services to hundreds of pet owners.
They were released after their arraignment in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
They declined to talk to reporters.
The other owner, Sam Strauss, Alan Strauss's father, is still being sought.
Andrew J. Maloney, United States Attorney for the District including Long Island, said that the defendants could find themselves charged with hundreds of counts, each carrying a maximum penalty of five years in prison and a $1,000 fine.  'I Placed My Faith in This Company'
For customers like the Grzymalas, who treated Wooley as if he were a member of the family, the pet cemetery's apparent deception is a shocking betrayal.
"I think it's an atrocity that they did this," said Mrs.
Grzymala.
She told how, wanting a fitting end for a dog she described as "my first baby," she had searched for a reputable company and then had paid the Long Island Pet Cemetery about $300 to have Wooley privately cremated.
"I placed my faith in this company, that they would treat my dog with respect," she said.
But Mr.
Fox said it was unlikely that that happened.
"The pets were thrown in massive pits, mass burial grounds," he said at a news conference.
"The ones that were cremated were normally cremated with many pets at the same time in the same oven, and where the contract called for returning ashes to the owner they would send any available ashes to the owner," Mr.
Fox said.
"It was a rare instance when the ashes in the box were those of the actual pet."
At the Long Island Pet Cemetery, next to a small shopping center here, gates marked by the silhouette of a huge German Shepherd lead to peaceful burial sites with soothing and descriptive names (Tranquil Forest, Sleepy Meadow, Kitty Corner, Feathered Friends).
Officials said today that the problems at the cemetery were not with burial sites, for which customers paid up to $5,000 and usually were present while the pets were buried.
Ex-Employees Recount Burnings
They said the illegal activities behind the cemetery were brought to their attention by a former employee.
They confirmed his account in interviews with another former worker, they said.
In affidavits released today, the former employees, who were not identified, told how, when animals were brought in for cremation, they would cram as many bodies as they could into the incinerators and then throw the rest into the woods.
From 1984 to 1986, one former employee said, most animals were simply dumped outside.
Workers, who were not told of the practice until they had been at the cemetery for some time and were thought to be trustworthy, referred to the mass burials as "going south," one former employee told Federal officials.
Sam Strauss, one of the owners, called them "farm burials" and instructed one former employee to dig pits 10 feet long, 10 feet wide, and 10 feet deep.
The former workers also said that one defendant, Kathy Drago, falsified records and signed certificates falsely asserting that ashes sent to pet owners were the ashes of their own pets.
When people complained that they had not received any ashes, one former worker told the officials, Ms.
Drago instructed him to take an appropriate amount of ashes and send them out.
"If it was a big dog, the boss, Alan Strauss, would say, 'I need ashes for a 70-pound German Shepherd,' " Mr.
Fox said.
Such an image is not lost on David Pokress, whose sheepdog, Kodak, died a year ago and who buried what he thought were her ashes in his yard.
"They could have cremated a whole group of dogs and said, 'Pokress -- two scoops,' " said Mr.
Pokress, a photographer for Newsday.
He and other customers of Long Island Pet Cemetery were angry and sad today, emotions that people who study the relationships between humans and their pets said could be expected.
Susan Cohen, the director of counseling at the Animal Medical Center in Manhattan, said that for many people, a pet is like a member of a family.
People use places like the Long Island Pet Cemetery to try to find some way to deal with their pet's death, she said.  'Dumped Like Garbage'
"Your worst nightmare has come true," she said.
"You have either not gotten your pet's ashes back, but some conglomeration of ashes, or you think you have left your pet in good faith. To find out that someone you loved was dumped like garbage is incredibly upsetting for most people."
Today, as investigators unearthed dozens of dogs, Paula and Sheldon Klein came to the Long Island Pet Cemetery to visit their two deceased miniature Schnauzers, Muffy and Becky.
But investigators barred them at the gates.
"We put them here so we could feel especially close to them," said a distraught Mrs.
Klein.
"We didn't want to lose touch with them. We wanted to know, emotionally, that they were at rest."


Recipe Writers' Worst Nightmares Haunt Their Days
MISSTATED quantities are to the recipe writer what a flawed mirror is to the designers of the Hubble Space Telescope.
Or worse.
Intimate imperfection always seems to surpass the colossal.
Especially when it comes to dinner.
Recipe writers are therefore warriors against the vicissitudes of nature, human and otherwise.
They tie on their aprons like armor and do battle with the hazy, the impressionistic, the imprecise.
Their mission is to wipe out the "Take a little of this, and mix it up with a little of that, and cook it till it's done" impulse.


SOVIET AID PLANS OUTLINED BY BAKER
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d outlined a series of proposals today under which the United States and its allies could begin to help the Soviet Union out of its economic morass without the infusion of vast amounts of cash.
Although Mr.
Baker did not explicitly rule out the large-scale cash aid sought by Moscow, his remarks suggested that the Administration would lobby with its Western allies not to rush into cash aid programs.


Carl Gronquist, 87, An Engineer Known For Work on Bridges
Carl Harry Gronquist, a civil engineer who helped design some major bridges in the United States, died on Sunday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 87 years old and lived in Murray Hill, N.J.
He died of heart and lung congestion, a family spokesman said.


Market Place; Differing Views On Video Games
IS Electronic Arts Inc. a glorified toy company subject to the whims and allowances of 12-year- olds, or is it a leading maker of entertainment software that is shrewdly positioning itself to take advantage of the next generation of electronic games?
The stock market has not decided yet.
Short-sellers have recently focused their unwelcome gaze on the San Mateo, Calif., company, pointing at the boom-and-bust cycles of the electronic game market.
Raising the ghost of Atari, the shorts are betting that sales in the $4.7 billion video game business are about to screech to a halt.


Wine Talk
THIS is a story about some French wines that most of us will never drink.
Wines from, for example, the Cotes de Toul.
And the wines from Entraygues et du Fel.
There are Chautagne, Costieres de Nimes, Moussette d'Astree and Pacherenc de Vic-Bihl.
Oh, and the vins de pays; there are 133 of them and occasionally one turns up on a restaurant list.
The Vin de Pays des Coteaux des Fenouilledes, the Vin de Pays des Sables du Golfe du Lion and the Vin de Pays de l'Ile de Beaute are unlikely to be among them.
In all that is spoken and written about the wines of France, there is a tendency to forget the immense diversity of the country's vineyards.


Public Clinics Found to Lack Children's Vaccines
A SURVEY of some of the nation's community health centers found that many were short of vaccines to prevent serious childhood diseases.
The survey, by the Children's Defense Fund, involved 94 of the nation's 540 community health centers; 71 percent were short of Government-supplied vaccines for measles, mumps, rubella, pertussis and haemophilus influenza.


Wang Joins I.B.M. in a Marketing Alliance
Wang Laboratories, the struggling computer maker, appeared to move toward ending its role as a hardware manufacturer yesterday when it sought shelter in an unusual marketing alliance with its archrival, I.B.M.
As part of a deal in which Wang will sell I.B.M. personal computers, work stations and minicomputers, the International Business Machines Corporation agreed to invest up to $100 million in Wang.
The Lowell, Mass., company has been among I.B.M.'s biggest rivals for the largest corporate accounts.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.84
5.61
8.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.62
5.61
7.74
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.80
5.79
7.65
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.18
8.17
8.53
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.51
8.49
8.47
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.50
9.50
9.61
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.26
7.27
7.52
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
A whiff of 1992 wafted through New York last night as local Democrats turned out to honor PAMELA HARRIMAN.
Mrs.
Harriman, the widow of W. Averell Harriman and a member of the Democratic National Committee, remains a major league fund-raiser and seems about the only thing Democratic leaders agree on.
Last weekend, they met at her country house in Middleburg, Va., to ponder strategy for the national elections.
At a reception at Tavern on the Green in Manhattan last night, New Democratic Dimensions gave her its Citizens Achievement Award.
The group, founded in 1981, presents educational forums, sponsors cable television political debates and programs and has registered nearly 12,000 voters.
Just about every prominent Democratic politician in New York (and some not so prominent) was invited.
Among those who showed up were Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS, former Mayor JOHN V. LINDSAY, City Comptroller ELIZABETH HOLTZMAN, MARIETTA TREE and KITTY CARLISLE HART, a friend of more than 30 years.


Miscellany
*
Greenstone Roberts Advertising/ Florida, Coconut Creek, Fla., has acquired Kaplan, Marsh &amp; Fisher Inc., a public relations firm with offices in Tampa and Fort Lauderdale. *
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, is forming an alliance with Mars Advertising, Southfield, Mich., which specializes in programs that coordinate advertising for retailers and grocery-product marketers.
The alliance, called the Retail Connection, will be directed by two managing directors, Michael Donahue, Saatchi's executive vice president and director of account management, and Kenneth Barnett, vice president and general manager of Mars.


Twins Repay Streak-Breakers With Erickson in 9-2 Victory
Scott Erickson won his 11th game and lowered his earned run average to 1.51, both best in the majors, as the Minnesota Twins rebounded tonight to beat the Baltimore Orioles, 9-2.
Erickson (11-2) gave up a leadoff double to Mike Devereaux in the first inning and did not allow another hit before being replaced by Carl Willis at the start of the seventh.
Erickson walked five and struck out three in winning his 11th consecutive decision, a franchise record.
Willis got his first save since 1985.


Review/Rock; Guns 'n' Roses and Personal Thorns
The best parts of the Guns 'n' Roses show at the Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, L.I., on Monday night weren't musical.
Rock shows are about drama, and Axl Rose, the band's charismatic lead singer, knows a thing or two about drama.
Where bands on this sort of elevated pop level can coast through the concert ritual, Mr.
Rose loves to get angry and rant.
Unpredictable and contradictory, his rants have enough aggression to fuel a few more wars; the band was several hours late to its performance, and Mr.
Rose was finding scapegoats in just about everybody except himself.
Authority everywhere was corrupt and meddling, not letting the people get what they want; this was the politics of resentment, pop music-style.


Police Officers Receive Awards for Valor


Chevron to Import Iranian Crude Oil
The Chevron Corporation said it had received approval from the Treasury Department to import Iranian crude oil to the United States.
The company, based in San Francisco, reached an agreement with the National Iranian Oil Company last week pending Treasury Department approval.
A Chevron spokeswoman declined to say how large the imports would be or when they would arrive in the United States.
The United States banned Iranian oil imports in 1987 after the country attacked ships in the Persian Gulf during its eight-year war with Iraq.
Last week, the Treasury Department approved the Coastal Corporation's application to import 2.5 million barrels of Iranian oil.
Chevron's stock fell 25 cents yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, closing at $69.50.


Iran's Oil Output Goal
Iran is likely to fall short of its target of expanding oil production to five million barrels a day by 1993, the Middle East Economic Survey said on Monday.
The weekly's editor, Ian Seymour, quoted offcials at the National Iranian Oil Company as saying that the level of sustainable production by then would more likely be about 4.6 million barrels a day.


CHRONICLE
Last week, PRINCE CHARLES announced that he was giving up polo temporarily because of severe back pain.
Yesterday, he canceled virtually all his public engagements for at least the next two weeks.
DR.
JOHN WEBB, the orthopedic surgeon who operated on the Prince's fractured arm after a polo accident last year, said his patient suffers from a degenerative disk.
"He must rest," Dr.
Webb said.
"If he ignores it he may need surgery."
The Prince has cleared his calendar except for a parade, scheduled on Friday in London, for soldiers who fought in the Persian Gulf war.


Court Ruling Sets Back Insurers
A Federal appeals court ruled today that insurers could be sued for certain price-fixing activities, setting back the insurance industry, which has long contended that it is exempt from antitrust law.
Ruling in a case brought by 19 states against 32 American and foreign insurance companies, the United States Court of Appeals in San Francisco found that a lower court had erred in dismissing the case largely on the ground that the insurers were exempt from antitrust suits under the McCarran-Ferguson Act, which Congress passed in 1945.
The act provided what had been considered sweeping exemptions to the insurance industry from antitrust law.


Peter James Prince; Interior Designer, 63
Peter James Prince, an interior designer, died on Monday at his home in Locust Valley, L.I.
He was 63 years old.
He died of lung cancer, his daughter, Pamela, of Los Angeles, said.


Rocket Carrying Scientific Experiments Is Destroyed After Veering


Changing the Face of China, One Face at a Time
After developing a taste for Coca-Cola, rock music, blue jeans, break dancing and eyebrow liner, some Chinese appear to be taking their enthusiasm for the Western look one step further: they are undergoing surgery to achieve rounder eyes and bigger noses.
Some dispute that the aim of such surgery is a more Western look, but in any case cosmetic surgery is booming in Chinese cities.


People
*
Larry Chiagouris has been named executive vice president and director of strategic planning and research at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York.
He had previously been senior vice president and director of strategic planning at Bozell Inc., New York. *
Robert K. Horne has been appointed senior vice president and group director at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc., New York.
He had previously been a group management supervisor at Chiat/Day/Mojo's New York office. *
Lawrence B. Taishoff has been promoted to chairman of Broadcasting magazine, which was recently acquired by the Cahners Publishing Company.
He had been president and publisher.
David Persson, formerly senior vice president-group publisher of Act III Publishing, succeeds Mr.
Taishoff as publisher.


CHRONICLE
A California appeals court upheld a $5.5 million award on Monday to MARC CHRISTIAN, who was Rock Hudson's lover for two years.
In 1989, a jury awarded him $21.75 million in damages from the Hudson estate because Mr.
Hudson had concealed the fact that he had AIDS.
A Superior Court judge later cut the damage award to $5.5 million.
"We deal with the ultimate in personal horror: the fear of a slow, agonizing, certain death," Judge ROBERT DEVICH of the California Second District Court of Appeal in Los Angeles wrote in upholding the $5.5 million award.
Mr.
Christian has tested negative for the AIDS virus.
He has said that he did not learn of Mr.
Hudson's illness until a few months before the actor died on Oct. 2, 1985, at the age of 59.
ELLIS HORVITZ, an lawyer for the estate, said he might appeal the decision to the California Supreme Court.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Arkansas Development Finance Authority is offering $38.3 million in tax-exempt waste-water refunding revenue bonds initially priced to yield a maximum 7.132 percent in 2014 through Prudential Securities.
Serial bond yields range from 5.6 percent in 1994 to 6.95 percent in 2006.
The issue is insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp. and rated Aaa by Moody's and AAA by S.&amp; P. *
Ford Motor Credit Corp. is offering $250 million of 9 1/4 notes due in 1998 priced at 99.938 to yield 9.261 percent, through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., the lead underwriter.
The rating is A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.


About New York
A late summer afternoon is oozing into a sultry evening, and people on 45th Avenue between 21st and 23rd Streets in Long Island City are performing their nightly ballet.
Some scurry home from work, some bounce balls, some chat with neighbors, some walk dogs.
All are living city lives in the truest sense.
It was Jane Jacobs, the writer who changed the way many Americans think about their cities, who most persuasively preached the importance of sidewalks.
In her 1961 book, "The Death and Life of Great American Cities," she called them "active participants in the drama of civilization versus barbarism in cities."


United Asks Anonymity In Frequent-Flier Deal
American Express's ballyhooed frequent-flier program has hit a snag, at least for United Airlines.
One of the country's two largest carriers, United is not officially part of the program and yet it is.
And United is not happy about it.


Car Buyers Subsidize The Rental Fleets
To the Editor:
Your May 28 front-page article on sales of nearly new autos accurately outlines the impact on the market of cars recycled from rental fleets.
But you conclude that the manufacturers got themselves into this position inadvertently, and that dealers and consumers are pleased with the almost-new cars.


In the Nation; Here We Go Again
They're off, at last.
Leading Democrats took 21 major contributors and a gaggle of real and imagined Presidential contenders to a "strategy" session in the Virginia hunt country last week.
Then the Wisconsin Democratic convention staged the first candidate "cattle show" of the 1992 campaign.
Answering the siren song in Milwaukee were former Senator Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts, who has confessed his candidacy, plus three possibles: Senators John D. Rockefeller 4th of West Virginia and Tom Harkin of Iowa, and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
Attending in Virginia were all of the above and Senators Bill Bradley of New Jersey, Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and George Mitchell of Maine, and Representative Richard Gephardt of Missouri.
Notably absent were Govs.
Mario Cuomo of New York and Douglas Wilder of Virginia, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, and Jesse Jackson.


Brazil Debt Plan Advances
The Brazilian Senate's Economic Affairs Committee has voted in favor of an agreement to pay foreign bank creditors $8.5 billion in interest arrears, a Senate spokesman said today.
The postponement of the vote to this week from last week marred President Fernando Collor de Mello's four-day visit to the United States, bankers said.
Mr.
Collor's visit started on Monday night in Washington.
Bush Administration officials indicated today that part of Brazil's foreign debt, which totals $120 billion worldwide, was eligible for relief, not forgiveness.


A Message Campaign By Adult Entertainment
A new nonprofit organization led by people in the adult entertainment industry is starting a campaign against what the group calls government censorship.
The campaign begins today with a full-page advertisement in the West Coast editions of The New York Times.
A spokesman for the group, the Free Speech Legal Defense Fund Inc. of Woodland Hills, Calif., said the campaign might also involve commercials placed at the start of adult-entertainment videocassettes and the use of donated space in adult magazines.


Stewart Banishes 2d-Place Image
Walter Hagen once said that anyone can win one major championship, but it takes a great player to win two.
The flamboyant Hagen would have been glad to apply that criterion to a fellow knicker-wearer, Payne Stewart, after the Missourian showed everyone he is emerging as a great player by winning the 91st United States Open on Monday.


Bridgestone Leaving Akron
Bridgestone-Firestone Inc., the heavily indebted tire company, said it would move its headquarters to Nashville from Akron, Ohio, by the end of the year.
The move will consolidate the company's American operations, but it deals an unexpected blow to Akron, also headquarters to the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company and long regarded as the tire capital of the world.


Treasury Criticizes Plan to Limit Bank Insurance
The Administration today sharply criticized a last-minute proposal that would limit Federal deposit insurance to banks that are restricted to traditional banking activities and deny it for riskier ventures.
The proposal, drafted by Representative Charles E. Schumer, a Brooklyn Democrat, is being considered just as the House Banking Committee is scheduled to begin its final consideration of the Treasury Department's proposed changes in banking laws, the most sweeping overhaul of the banking system since the 1930's.


Yeltsin Comes to U.S. With Aura and New Power
Boris N. Yeltsin left for the United States today as the Soviet man of the hour, adorned with the mantle of the first popularly elected Russian President and champion of a rapid transition to private enterprise.
His trip, and especially the invitation to the White House, was a notable achievement for a politician who was dumped from the Soviet Communist Party Politburo by Mikhail S. Gorbachev three years earlier and snubbed by Washington two years ago.


Growth Hormone Suit Ends
Genentech Inc. said today that it had reached an agreement with Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. and the Hormone Research Foundation to drop litigation over a patent dispute involving human growth hormone.
The foundation, based in Seattle, had licensed a patent on the hormone to Roche, which in 1986 sued Genentech, contending that Genentech's Protropin brand of genetically engineered growth hormone infringed the patent.
But the suit was made moot when Roche Holding Ltd., the Swiss parent company of Hoffmann-La Roche, acquired a majority interest in Genentech in February 1990.


Networks Having Trouble Peddling Fall's Prime Time
USUALLY at this time of the year, the broadcast television networks are merrily ringing up hefty price increases on the commercials they sell for the coming fall season's prime-time programs.
But now the bells sound as if they are tolling, not ringing.
As the annual advance sales process -- known to the advertising, marketing and media communities as the up-front market -- continues, earlier expectations that prices would fall are proving true.
The reason that ABC, CBS, Fox and NBC are cutting prices in the up-front market is the slack demand for commercial time from marketers that are reducing or postponing ad spending in response to the recession.


Parcells Lands an NBC Studio Job
Former Giants coach Bill Parcells is heading for television, having signed on yesterday as a studio analyst for "The N.F.L. Live," an NBC Sports program.
His three-year contract is worth $250,000 this season and will escalate to at least $400,000 if he stays through its duration, said people in television familiar with the deal.
In addition to appearing on "N.F.L. Live," NBC's Sunday pre-game program, Parcells may handle game analysis for a few late-season National Football League games.
He will also preview N.F.L. games along with Will McDonough after NBC's six broadcasts of Notre Dame football games, and contribute to the weekend "Prudential Updates" if necessary.


Strawberry Put On Disabled List
LOS ANGELES, June 18
Darryl Strawberry, still bothered by a shoulder injury sustained more than a month ago, was placed on the 15-day disabled list today by the Los Angeles Dodgers.
The injury was originally diagnosed as a mild separation of the left shoulder.
He now suffers from inflammation in the shoulder, said Dr.
Frank Jobe, the Dodgers' team physician.


Bridge
A communications mixup between the Paris organizers of the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest and the American Contract Bridge League headquarters in Memphis led to the winners of the Epson contest, played on June 7, being reported incorrectly by the league and in this column.
The world winners of the Epson contest were two Polish players, Miroslaw Kopowski and Wieslaw Maczkowski.
They scored 1,910, or 79.58 percent, with the East-West cards.


Learning in the Real World of a Boston School
After testimony and deliberation by a jury of his peers, Miguel Rivera stood tugging at his T-shirt, intently awaiting a verdict.
"Your honor, the jury finds the defendant, Miguel Rivera, guilty as charged," the jury foreman told the judge as she pushed aside her ponytail.
Miguel glanced at his 12-year-old lawyer, Mark Lynch, with a look of dismay.


Men. Women. Talk. Talk. Talk. Talk. Talk. Hear? No.
WHEN Dr.
Deborah Tannen sat down to write "You Just Don't Understand: Women and Men in Conversation," she had no inkling it would end up on the best-seller lists for months and be hailed by scores of couples as having "saved our marriage."
Dr.
Tannen, a 45-year-old Brooklyn native who teaches in the School of Languages and Linguistics at Georgetown University in Washington, has written 11 books about the problems of communication across cultural, class and ethnic divides.
But it is the subject of conversational differences between the sexes that has stimulated the most sparks.


Wrong Gray Line
The Virginia Military Institute's rigorous martial training program is "unique in all the world." So said Judge Jackson Kiser in United States District Court at Roanoke as he ruled that V.M.I. may bestow this special education on men but deny it to women.
"V.M.I. truly marches to a different drummer," the judge said, "and I will permit it to continue to do so."
It is Judge Kiser who's out of step -- with the Constitution.
The Judge argues that the 152-year-old college has special strengths, derived partly from its boot camp traditions of hazing, humiliation and group bonding.
That's no reason to deny women the experience.
The Justice Department is right to challenge the constitutionality of discrimination by a nominally private college that draws $9 million yearly, one-third of its budget, from the state.


Filipinos, Assessing Cost, Begin Volcano Cleanup
Cities and villages across thousands of square miles of the Philippines began today to dig out from a thick blanket of volcanic ash released in a week of eruptions by Mount Pinatubo.
The nearly 300,000 residents of Olongapo, a city adjoining the United States Navy base at Subic Bay, continued to be plagued by food and water shortages resulting from the eruptions, and there were reports of looting.


Food Notes
Where to Find Ware
Many cities have well-stocked stores for well-priced cooking equipment.
But where such shops are not conveniently situated, there are new mail-order sources for equipment at a discount.


Sandinista Militants Seize Managua Buildings
Militants seized control of a radio station and the city hall today to protest a move to revoke laws that gave thousands of Sandinistas free property in the final months of their decade of rule.
No one was seriously hurt in the takeovers of the capital's city hall and Radio Corporacion, a rightist station.
In both cases masked men identifying themselves as Sandinistas forced their way into the buildings and vowed to remain inside.


Theater in Review
Twelfth Night or What You Will  Playhouse 125 125 West 22d Street Manhattan Through June 23  By William Shakespeare; directed by Peter Royston; musical direction and composition by Peter Nissen; costumes, Elizabeth Royston; lighting, David Kramer; choreography, Kathleen Dempsey.
Presented by the Royston Company.
WITH: Joanne Comerford, James Corbett, Charls Hall, Michele Remsen and John Steber.
Twelfth Night is to winter what Midsummer Night is to its season, and there are few jollier merriments around for this summer's solstice than the Royston Company's production of Shakespeare's "Twelfth Night."


I.B.M.'s Chief Criticizes Staff Again
John F. Akers, the chairman of I.B.M., wants all his employees to know that he meant it in April when he vented his frustrations about the company's poor performance to a group of managers.
On Friday, in an electronic message to employees, Mr.
Akers punched home his original point that some of them were not working hard enough.  [ Text of message, page D5. ]


Algerian Leader Fills Cabinet Mostly With Party Outsiders
After two weeks of intense deliberations, Algeria's new Prime Minister picked a Cabinet today largely composed of technocrats not closely associated with the National Liberation Front, which has governed Algeria since independence from France 29 years ago.
The new Cabinet includes two women and the new post of Human Rights Minister.
The appointments are seen as something of a challenge to the Islamic fundamentalist opposition, whose leaders have often spoken of a strictly limited role for women in Islamic societies and expressed contempt for democracy, which they characterize as an alien Western phenomenon.


The First Black Mayor Of Denver Is Elected
Wellington Webb was elected the first black mayor of Denver today.
With 96 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr.
Webb had 57 percent of the vote to the 43 percent of his opponent, District Attorney Norm Early, who conceded the race.


The Pop Life
Bonnie Raitt in Love
If Bonnie Raitt's new album, "Luck of the Draw" (Capitol), sounds a lot like her 1989 album, "Nick of Time," which sold two million copies and which won three Grammys, that's because it was made with the same producer, Don Was, and has a similar blend of sparsely arranged blues, soul and rock songs.
Emotionally, however, the tone of the new record is subtly different.


Noted Japanese Retailer Plans Ritz Tower Store
Mitsukoshi, Japan's oldest and one of its more prestigious department stores, plans to open its doors in the spring of 1993 in the Ritz Tower Hotel at 57th Street and Park Avenue, in one of the world's most fashionable retail districts.
To succeed in the heart of New York's highly competitive but financially beleaguered retail market, Mitsukoshi officials said, the store will have to emphasize Japanese retail principles, which are based on the premise that customers should shop in an entertaining and enlightening atmosphere.


Study Finds Job Complaints Widespread at F.B.I.
More than two-thirds of white, black and Hispanic employees at the Federal Bureau of Investigation who were queried in a recent survey said promotions were unfair.
The survey of 3,000 agents, support personnel and non-agent professional staff members found widespread dissatisfaction with the agency's personnel practices.
It showed that 70 percent of blacks, 68 percent of whites and 69 percent of Hispanic employees felt that the bureau does not select the most qualified applicants for reassignments and promotions.


Dorothy B. Strong; Lawyer, 86
Dorothy B. Strong, a lawyer who was admitted to the bar in the late 1920's, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 86 years old.
She died of heart failure, a family spokesman said.


Honors
*
Richard D. O'Connor, chairman and chief executive of Lintas Campbell-Ewald and vice chairman of Lintas U.S.A., was honored yesterday as the Advertising Club of New York's man of the year. *
DDB Needham Worldwide, New York, won 12 gold medals -- more than any other agency -- at Friday night's 34th annual New York Festivals print and radio advertising award ceremony.
Leo Burnett Company, Chicago, won the best consumer print advertisement award for its "12 Days of Christmas" ad for Pepto-Bismol.
Paul &amp; Walt Worldwide, Los Angeles, won for best consumer radio spot for promoting the "Matlock" reruns broadcast on WCBS-TV, New York.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 19


CHRONICLE
For the last two days, MARTIN SHEEN has been filming a public-service movie on domestic violence.
The film, "Children of the Lie," was shot in Bethlehem, Pa., the location of Turning Point, a shelter for abuse victims.
The center houses about 30 children and their mothers every month.
"Many have behavior problems already and are likely to grow up and repeat the patterns of violence in their own families," BONNIE McDONALD, the shelter's executive director, told The Bethlehem Globe-Times.
The film was financed by a coalition of lawyers' groups.
One of Mr.
Sheen's lawyers is from Wilkes-Barre, Pa., and asked the actor to participate, The Associated Press reported.


Notaries Certify That Inflation Has Arrived
The 30-year wait is over.
Alfred E. Piombino and the 244,383 men and women represented by the New York State Association of Notaries Public -- of which he is president -- are finally getting some justice.
Since 1961, the state's notaries public have been allowed to charge no more than 25 cents every time they certify a deed, deposition, affidavit, contract or complaint.
That is the lowest fee, along with those in Iowa and Massachusetts, of any state in the nation.


What They Now Call The Catch of the Day
THESE are some of the more unusual fish now being served and sold in the United States.
Finfish


Books of The Times; A Hero's Son Tells of Another Kind of Heroism
Fortunate Son The Autobiography of Lewis B. Puller Jr. 389 pages.
Grove Weidenfeld. $21.95.
That Friday in 1971, feelings of betrayal and disillusionment about the Vietnam War emerged for Lewis B. Puller Jr., a former Marine lieutenant living in a wheelchair.
He felt bitterness toward the leadership of the Nixon Administration, which had failed to conclude the war, but a kinship with the men still doing the fighting and dying in the rice paddies and jungles of Southeast Asia.
Although


INSIDE
Ruling Sets Back Insurers
A Federal appeals court allowed certain price-fixing cases against insurers.
The industry claims exemption from antitrust law.
Page D1.
Danger: Petrochemicals


DDB Quits Competition For Weight Watchers
DDB Needham Worldwide said yesterday that it had withdrawn from the review being conducted by its client Weight Watchers International for its weight-loss instructional programs.
The agency issued a staff memo attributing the withdrawal to the "pressure of other business." Estimates on the account's size vary; it is believed the national portion is worth about $12 million in billings, with another $20 million in the local portion.


Tests for Valenzuela
California Angels left-hander FERNANDO VALENZUELA underwent an angiogram yesterday which revealed no narrowing or hardening of the arteries in his heart and indicated he won't need surgery.
Dr.
LARRY SANTORA, who performed the procedure at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Orange, Calif., described Valenzuela's rare condition as a myocardio bridging of the left descending artery that supplies blood to the heart muscle.
"When the heart muscle contracts, the vessel is 'crimped' periodically," the Angels said in a statement.
"This condition explains the changes in previous cardiograms and treadmill findings." Santora said that Valenzuela's condition would be re-evaluated "from time to time." (AP)


Camden Fights Sewer Tax as Bill From Unwanted Guest
On a warm day the stench from a sewage-treatment plant hangs like a foul blanket over the modest row houses and abandoned factories here by the Delaware River.
Driven by both the smell and their own sense of powerlessness, nearly one of every three property owners in Camden is refusing to pay an annual $275 sewer assessment, prompting threats of liens and foreclosures.


Texas Instruments In Dynamics Pact
The General Dynamics Corporation will award a $47 million contract to Texas Instruments Inc. to produce a computer upgrade for the F-16 fighter jet, the companies said.
The computer would replace three on the F-16 now and would allow the addition of new avionics systems, including forward-looking infrared radar, more easily.
Texas Instruments said it was informed of the news last week; General Dynamics is expected to award the contract in November.
Texas Instruments said the contract could produce more than $150 million for its Defense System and Electronics Group over 10 years, although it is not expected to add more jobs.
The company has trimmed hundreds of jobs in the last year because of the shrinking Pentagon budget.
Texas Instruments' stock slid 37.5 cents today on the New York Stock Exchange, closing at $35.375.
General Dynamics gained $1, to $40.


Quotation of the Day
"I hope President Gorbachev now brings forward a new effort at serious market reform. The door to the Euro-Atlantic community is open. But only the Soviets can decide to step over the threshold." -- Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.  [ A1:5. ]


A Big Letdown From the Clios
Not just the longtime professionals of the advertising industry were affected by the abrupt cancellation of the Clio Awards ceremony on Monday.
Three students from Portland State University in Oregon -- the winners of the first Citibank/Clio College Advertising Awards -- had been brought to New York to attend the ceremony, which was called off because of financial and organizational problems at Clio Awards Inc.


Herbert B. Woodman Dies at 87; Led Major Printing Ink Company
Herbert B. Woodman, retired chairman of the Inmont Corporation, once one of the world's largest manufacturers of printing inks, died on Monday at his home in West Arlington, Vt.
He was 87 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, his niece, Jean B. Angell, a Manhattan lawyer, said.


Eating Well
NUTRITION reporters can write themselves and their readers into a stupor with the latest information on fat and cholesterol, sodium and beta carotene, calcium and vitamin C. At a certain point readers say: "Enough. Just give me some practical advice."
Most questions to the Eating Well column are not about the validity of scientific research but about how to make a dish, where to buy a product or how to eat more healthfully.


Ex-Computerland Executive Will Lead Hair Care Chain
Edward E. Faber, the founding president of Computerland Inc., has come out of retirement to be president and chief executive officer of Supercuts Inc.
Based in San Rafael, Calif., Supercuts is a nationwide franchised hair care chain with 633 stores in 36 states.
Mr.
Faber, who is 58, succeeds Betsy Burton, who left the company to pursue personal interests.
Ms.
Burton joined Supercuts in 1987 when it was purchased by Knightsbridge Inc., a Chicago-based investors group.
Mr.
Faber was also elected a director of the company and is the deputy chairman.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about a meeting of Democratic leaders to plan 1992 campaign strategy misidentified the man who was third from the left and omitted the identity of the woman.
He was Robert Farmer, treasurer of the Democratic National Committee; she was Pamela Harriman, at whose home the meeting was held.


Yeltsin Arrives in Washington With Conciliatory Words About Gorbachev
Fresh from his impressive victory as the first popularly elected president of the Russian republic, Boris N. Yeltsin arrived here today and sounded a conciliatory note about his political rival, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Speaking at a hot and crowded reception at the Soviet Embassy tonight, Mr.
Yeltsin said that "the fact that the people of Russia have had an opportunity to elect directly and for the first time ever by popular vote a President is first of all due to the initiative of the pro-democracy movement launched by President Gorbachev in 1985."


Iraq Releases a Briton Imprisoned for Spying
Iraq freed a British engineer today who had been sentenced to life in prison for spying, but Britain said Baghdad must do much more if it expected economic sanctions to be relaxed.
The release of the 51-year-old engineer, Douglas Brand, was the latest concession by President Saddam Hussein to try to end the sanctions, which were applied after Iraq invaded Kuwait in August.
The allies drove Baghdad out of Kuwait in February.


Text of Chairman's Message To the Employees at I.B.M.
Following is the text of the message that John F. Akers, I.B.M.'s chairman, circulated to employees on the company's electronic communications system:
In recent days, we have had a great deal of experience with communications, unfiltered and otherwise, especially concerning what I said to a small group at the Advanced Management School in Armonk.
Here is the gist of what I want to communicate to everyone in the company.


New Braniff Airline To Start Flying July 1
Braniff International Airlines, the successor to Braniff Inc., the bankrupt carrier that suspended operations in November 1989, said yesterday that it would start service on four routes beginning on July 1.
Its introductory fares, effective through July 15 without restrictions, include a $69 one-way coach fare from Islip Mac Arthur Airport on Long Island to Orlando and Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and a $79 fare between Dallas and Newark and Dallas and Los Angeles.


Review/Film; The Children's Problem: Supervising Mother
Nicole Garcia's "Every Other Weekend" is an elegant portrait of inarticulate decision and emotional disorder, about a woman who, having left her husband and two children to search for herself, finds no one there.
That's just one way to read the new French film, opening today at the Cinema Third Avenue.
"Every Other Weekend" may also be seen as some kind of feminist statement about a woman who seeks definition no matter what the cost to herself or to those around her.


High-Tech View of Sinus Offers Answer to Chronic Problems
IN the past, doctors have had few satisfying answers for people with chronic sinus problems: antihistamines when allergies flare, antibiotics at the time of infection.
In desperate cases maybe surgery to clean out the sinuses, often a major ordeal.
But, because sinus problems are rarely dangerous, the refrain was, "Live with it."
These days, as doctors are perfecting less invasive sinus surgery techniques, that advice is changing, promising relief to the thousands of Americans who suffer from the grinding headaches, eye pressure and frequent bouts of infection that leave sinus patients generally miserable.


Senate in Accord on Highway Funds
The Senate today settled on a way to distribute surplus Federal highway funds, breaking an impasse that had held up approval of a bill that calls for spending $123 billion for transportation programs over the next five years.
After intensive negotiations among lawmakers that delayed action on the overall package for days, the Senate approved an amendment that gives a financial bonus to states that contended they had contributed more in Federal gasoline taxes to transportation programs than they received for their own transportation needs.


Mudslide in Chile Inundates Slums In Desert Area, Killing at Least 64
A mudslide inundated hillside slums of this northern desert city early today, sweeping away scores of wooden shacks and killing at least 64 people, officials said.
Another 48 people were missing and feared dead.
About 750 people were injured in the slide, which was caused by five hours of rare, torrential rains in this port in the Atacama desert region, considered one of the most arid areas of the world.


Dibble Displays His New Courtly Reserve
No more Mr. Nasty Guy.
That is how Rob Dibble chooses to present himself these days, a season removed from the year of The Nasty Boys, the persona that made the bullpen of the Cincinnati Reds as distinctive as it was effective.


Theater in Review
Encore  Jewish Repertory Theater 344 East 14th Street A revue of songs and scenes from Jewish Repertory Theater musicals.
Conceived by Ran Avni and Raphael Crystal; directed by Mr.
Avni; sets, Jeffrey Schneider; costumes, Gail Cooper-Hecht; lights, Brian Nason; musical director, Andrew Howard; production stage manager, D. C. Rosenberg; musical supervision, Mr.
Crystal; musical staging and choreography, Helen Butleroff.
Presented by Jewish Repertory Theater, 344 East 14th Street, Manhattan, Mr.
Avni, artistic director; Edward M. Cohen, associate director.
WITH: Adam Heller, Michele Ragusa, Susan Friedman Schrott, Steve Sterner and Stuart Zagnit.
In every way, the opening of "Encore" -- the season finale for the Jewish Repertory Theater -- was music to the ears, tuned to the past and to the future.


Gray May Quit House to Lead Negro College Fund
Representative William H. Gray 3d of Pennsylvania, the third-ranking Democrat in the House of Representatives, is expected to resign from Congress on Thursday to become president of the United Negro College Fund.
Rumors about his decision swept through the House this evening, as members speculated over why Mr.
Gray, who serves as majority whip, would want to leave a job from which he might expect to advance to Speaker of the House.


This AIDS Ban Invites Ridicule
The American policy to block visits or permanent immigration by foreigners infected with the AIDS virus came under justifiable criticism at the international AIDS conference in Italy this week.
The policy has very little public health value.
Its chief effect is to make the United States a laughingstock in world medical circles.
The policy should be abandoned, quickly.
The U.S. currently bans entry to foreigners infected with several diseases, including syphilis, gonorrhea, leprosy, tuberculosis -- and the virus that causes AIDS.
But the Department of Health and Human Services has proposed to eliminate all but infectious tuberculosis from the list.


U.S. Seeks Reversal Of Ruling That Iraq Must Pay Company
The Bush Administration has asked a court to reverse a $64.1 million judgment against the Iraqi Government in a case involving custom-built industrial furnaces that were never delivered because of the Persian Gulf war.
The Administration contends that the judgment, won by Consarc Corporation of Rancocas, N.J., conflicts with the President's order establishing economic sanctions against Iraq.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE North Atlantic cod, one of the most abundant of local species and a staple for this continent's settlers, is extremely versatile for the home cook.
Its firm, white flesh stands up to all kinds of cooking and sauces.
The only risk is overcooking, because it is lean.
Technically, the cod family embraces pollack, haddock and a variety of hake.
For this recipe, though, we are using the common Atlantic cod.


Guerrillas Raid U.S. Anti-Drug Base in Peru
Guerrillas in the coca-growing Upper Huallaga Valley of Peru raided an American-built anti-drug base on Sunday with rocket-propelled grenades and small arms fire, officials said today.
Repelling the first attack in 14 months on Santa Lucia base, joint pilot teams of American civilians and Peruvian national policemen flew four UH-1H Huey helicopters in pursuit.
Illuminating the battlefield with searchlights, Peruvian helicopters fired machine guns at the guerrillas.


President Quits At Torchmark
Jon W. Rotenstreich, a former partner at Salomon Brothers and treasurer of I.B.M., resigned on Monday as president, chief financial officer and board member of the Torchmark Corporation, the insurance company said.
Mr.
Rotenstreich, 48 years old, headed Torchmark's unsuccessful effort last year to acquire control of a larger rival, the American General Corporation, in what would have been one of the largest takeovers in the industry.
Mr.
Rotenstreich, who lives in Manhattan, declined to comment on his resignation or discuss his future plans.


Smoking by Parents Is Found Harmful to Children
Two new studies add to the mounting evidence that smoking by parents is harmful to the children's health and perhaps even dulls the intelligence.
A Government report made public yesterday found that children who live in households with smokers are almost twice as likely to be in fair or poor health than children never exposed to cigarette smoke.
But the authors said the results should be cautiously interpreted because other possible factors like poverty could not be ruled out.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Placed Mark Davis, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Hector Wagner, pitcher, from Omaha of the American Association.
Basketball World Basketball League
FLORIDA JADES -- Acquired Ricky Wilson, forward, from the Memphis Rockers for future considerations, and Tony Martin, forward, from the Nashville Stars, as part of an earlier trade involving Sydney Grider.
Waived Clinton Ransey and Winston Morgan, forwards.
Football National Football League
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Paul Glonek, defensive tackle; Louie Aguiar, punter; Mark Hayes, tackle; Mark Gunn, defensive end; and Dannie Lockett, linebacker.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Richard Shelton, cornerback-punt returner, and Bob Kula, guard.
Named John Norwig head trainer.
College
WEST COAST CONFERENCE -- Named Jana Steel public relations assistant.
BALL STATE -- Announced the resignation of Beth Kirchner, women's assistant softball coach.
BUTLER -- Named Thad Matta athletic assistant for academic counseling and event management.
PACIFIC -- Named Ardie McInelly women's assistant basketball coach.
PRINCETON -- Named Lisa Brown women's ice hockey coach.
Named Moira Buckley women's soccer coach.


Congress Party Leader Faces Challenge for India's Top Post
With the dominant Congress Party set to form a new government, a major power struggle erupted today over the Prime Minister's job that pits the frail party president against a younger, influential regional leader from the business capital, Bombay.
Meeting through the day and this evening in closed sessions at party headquarters and at various hotels, party officials were faced tonight with a potentially bruising clash between P. V. Narasimha Rao, the 70-year-old former Cabinet minister who stepped into the party's presidency after the assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, and Sharad Pawar, the tough, pragmatic, 51-year-old Chief Minister of India's key industrial state, Maharashtra.
Although Mr.
Rao is favored, Mr.
Pawar is staging a dogged fight.


400 Jobs to Be Cut At Crum &amp; Forster
Crum &amp; Forster Inc. said it would eliminate about 400 jobs at its headquarters in Basking Ridge, N.J.
The company, an insurance holding concern that is a unit of Xerox Financial Services Inc., said the cuts would affect its management-services group and its insurance subsidiary.
The company said a consolidation in those operations had made the cuts necessary.
Crum &amp; Forster said about 100 of the cuts had already been made through attrition, with the rest to come from layoffs.
All the laid-off employees will receive severance benefits and outplacement services, the company said.
Robert J. Vairo, chairman and chief executive, said that he expected the cuts to improve the company's earnings in the long term.


Kamieniecki to the Rescue in Debut as Yanks End Skid
In his wildest dreams, Scott Kamieniecki envisioned something different.
"I dreamed that I'd sail a little bit, strike out a few guys," he said.
"But I didn't have a one-two-three inning tonight."


Saatchi Is Picking Up Spic &amp; Span Account
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said yesterday that it was shifting the account for its Spic &amp; Span household cleaner line to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising from Wells Rich Greene BDDP Inc., both of New York.
While a spokeswoman would not discuss billings, estimates place them in excess of $10 million.
At Saatchi, Spic &amp; Span joins other P.&amp;G. products including Tide detergent and Comet cleanser.
Wells Rich retains other P.&amp;G. brands including Oil of Olay beauty products and Gain detergent.


Corrections
The Bridge column on June 11 included erroneous identifications of the winners of the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest, supplied by the American Contract Bridge League.
The winners were Miroslaw Kopowski and Wieslaw Maczkowski of Poland.
A corrective column appears today on page C12.


Joseph A. Minicucci; Furnishings Designer, 53
Joseph A. Minicucci, a designer of home furnishings and vice president of the Q.E.F.
Corporation, an interior and commercial design firm in Manhattan, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 53 years old.
He died of cancer, his partner, Jerome Curie Hanauer, said.


Losses Ease At Federated And Allied
Federated Department Stores and the Allied Stores Corporation, which have been in voluntary bankruptcy since January 1990, said yesterday that they had lower losses for their first fiscal quarter, ended May 4, compared with the period a year earlier.
The companies also said cash flow for the period had been better than expected.
The companies, operators of Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and Stern's, based in the New York area, Burdines in Miami and Jordan Marsh in Boston, also said they plan to file an amended plan of reorganization with the bankruptcy court on July 1.
The altered plan will reflect recent agreements with several major creditors and the expected results of negotiations with other creditors.
Trimming Losses
Federated reported a $35.9 million loss in the latest period, compared with a loss of $57.6 million in the period a year earlier.
Allied's loss was $28.3 million, compared with a loss of $41.9 million.
Both companies' losses "were substantially less than planned and significantly below year-ago levels," the companies said.


Women Only, Chatham Votes
Chatham College, a small liberal arts college for women that has been the subject of a yearlong debate on the benefits of single-sex education, has announced that it will continue to restrict admission to women.
"There is an important place for institutions of higher learning devoted to the education and personal development of women," said Jane Coulter Burger, chairwoman of the college's board of trustees, which made the decision in a vote on Monday.


Foreign Affairs; Mideast Con Game
President Bush and Secretary of State Baker have secretly offered Israel a de facto veto over Palestinian participants in a Mideast peace conference, and promised Israel that the U.S. would veto any United Nations efforts to dictate terms to the conference.
With such procedural assurances and a pot of tantalizing goodies, even Saudi aid (no kidding -- see below), the Bush-Baker duo has been trying to entice Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to the negotiating table.
So far they have been unsuccessful.
Nor have they fared better with secret hints to Syria and Jordan of U.S. sympathy for Arab goals once talks begin.


7 Industrial Nations Plan Meeting On Soviet Aid and Rise of Dollar
The Finance Ministers and central bank presidents of the Group of Seven industrial democracies are hastily trying to arrange a meeting for this weekend, perhaps in New York, to discuss aid to the Soviet Union and what to do about the sharply rising American dollar.
A Treasury Department spokeswoman said yesterday afternoon that "active discussions" concerning such a meeting were under way, but that a final decision had not been made.
The issue was not whether to hold the meeting -- that has already been decided, by all accounts -- but whether the session can be scheduled on short notice.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 14
June 7
June 15
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.1
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.8
3.0
Gasoline stocks
218.2
215.6
216.6
Distillate stocks
111.3
108.3
107.4
Crude imports, daily
6.2
7.1
7.0
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.7
2.3
Crude stocks
352.3
353.2
384.4
Crude production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
90.4
88.4
88.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Brazilian Routes Sought by United
United Airlines asked the Transportation Department for authority to fly daily between Los Angeles and Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro.
The flights would begin in January, the carrier, a unit of the UAL Corporation, said.
Southbound flights would originate at San Francisco International Airport and stop in Los Angeles.
The company said recent talks between United States and Brazilian officials provided an opportunity to increase air service between the countries.
United said it would use Boeing 747's for the routes.
Earlier this week, United sought permission to fly to Stansted Airport near London, which opened in March.
UAL's stock fell $1.375 today, closing at $151 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Hispanic Group Is Rebuffed In Council Election Challenge
A three-judge Federal panel yesterday rebuffed a move by a Hispanic advocacy group to delay a New York City Council election while the Justice Department reviews the new Council districts.
The Hispanic group's move, a suit filed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, could be the first in a series of legal challenges to the November election for an expanded City Council.


Schizophrenia Drug Not Suitable for the Homeless Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
Today's proliferation of new medications and technological procedures have made us prey to false hopes of miracle cures.


Edward F. McSweeney 3d; Investment Banker, 53
Edward F. McSweeney 3d, an international investment banker, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 53 years old and also had a home in Northeast Harbor, Me.
He died of a gunshot wound to the head, apparently self-inflicted, the police said.


Construction Of Homes Up 0.1% in May
Construction of new homes and apartments inched up by a tenth of a percent in May, the Commerce Department said today in a report that supported forecasts by analysts of a slower-than-normal housing recovery.
"We're not expecting an increase in housing starts at the torrid pace of past recoveries," said Richard Peach, an economist at the Mortgage Bankers Association.


U.S. Is Said to Offer to Back Israel With Veto in U.N.
The Bush Administration has assured Israel that the United States would veto any United Nations Security Council resolution affecting the Middle Eastern peace process as long as peace talks were under way, people close to efforts to convene such talks say.
The proposal is aimed at breaking the deadlock over efforts to convene an international peace conference on the Middle East.
It was made in a letter to the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, which was given to the Israeli Foreign Minister, David Levy.


New Jersey Utility Raises $300 Million
The Public Service Electric and Gas Company of Newark is offering a total of $300 million in first and refunding bonds through competitive bidding.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company led an underwriting group that was awarded $150 million of the bonds, due 2003.
The bonds were then reoffered to the public with a coupon of 8 7/8 percent at a price of 99.807 to yield 8.90 percent, or about 60 basis points more than a 10-year Treasury note.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Jordanian King Names Palestinian Prime Minister
King Hussein has dismissed the Jordanian Cabinet and asked the Foreign Minister, a Palestinian who favors a negotiated settlement with Israel, to form a new administration, senior officials said here today.
The selection of the Palestinian, Taher Masri, who is well liked in Washington, is viewed as an effort to regain favor in the United States and bring Jordan out of the diplomatic isolation into which it fell for its support of Iraq during the Persian Gulf crisis.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The recession may already have ended but no measurable expansion of the economy has yet begun, the Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, told the House Ways and Means Committee.  [ Page A1. ]


Theater in Review
New One-Act Plays Marathon 1991 Series C Ensemble Studio Theater 549 West 52d Street.
Through June 23 Producer, Kate Baggott; associate producer, Margaret Mancinelli; set design, Ann Waugh; light design, Greg MacPherson; sound design, One Dream; costume design, Patricia Sarnutaro; production supervisor, Craig T. Raisner; production stage manager, Carol Avery.
Presented by the Ensemble Studio Theater, Curt Dempster, artistic director; Dominick Balletta, managing director.
THE WORLD AT ABSOLUTE ZERO, by Sherry Kramer; directed by Jason McConnell Buzas.
SALAAM, HUEY NEWTON, SALAAM, by Ed Bullins; directed by Woodie King Jr.
THE LAST YANKEE, by Arthur Miller; directed by Gordon Edelstein.
BIG AL, by Bryan Goluboff; directed by Peter Maloney.
WITH: Debra Cole, Michael Countryman, Evan Handler, John Heard, Biff McGuire, Ramon Melindez Moses, Mansoor Najeeulla, Gus Rogerson and Charles Welton.


Nation's Strictest Abortion Law Enacted in Louisiana Over Veto
A law that prohibits virtually all abortions in Louisiana was adopted last night as both houses of the Legislature overrode a veto by Gov.
Buddy Roemer.
Many proponents of the Louisiana law are looking well beyond the state's borders.
They hope it will give the United States Supreme Court an opportunity to overturn Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 High Court decision that guaranteed a woman's constitutional right to choose an abortion.


Eye on High Finance When Talking Trade
The Knicks are among 11 National Basketball Association teams who may have to swallow the "poison pill" provision of the salary cap under the collective bargaining agreement.
The term is usually associated with corporations trying to prevent hostile takeovers, but in the context of the N.B.A., it makes a player whose contract has been extended much more difficult to trade.
A player is subject to the "poison pill" provision for a one-year period when his contract is extended at a higher salary.
In that period, the player counts against his team's cap at his current salary.


Dollar Stages an Advance On Greenspan's Comments
The dollar advanced yesterday after Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said the economy is likely to bottom out during the current quarter.
Gold prices closed higher, edging up in New York after posting larger gains overseas.


John J. Jordan; Coach, 80
John J. Jordan, the Notre Dame basketball coach who led the Fighting Irish to their first six National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament appearances, died last Thursday.
He was 80 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
Jordan was the Notre Dame coach from 1951-64, and his teams compiled a 199-131 record.
In his third season, his team won 18 straight games.
Among the players coached at Notre Dame by Mr.
Jordan were the school's current president, the Rev.
Edward A. Malloy, and its athletic director, Dick Rosenthal.


Corrections
A music review yesterday about four productions by the Opera Theater of St.
Louis misidentified the composer of another work, "The Vanishing Bridegroom," which is to be performed next season.
She is Judith Weir, not Gillian Weir.


Gunmen Kill Judge in Trial of Bhutto's Husband
Masked men armed with automatic weapons today ambushed and killed the Pakistani judge who was trying former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's husband.
Ms.
Bhutto's political foes blamed her followers for the attack, which killed Judge Nabi Sher Junejo as well as his driver and a police guard while the judge was being driven from a court complex in Karachi, Pakistan's largest city.


Carl Stursberg Jr., Food Executive, 71, And Finance Expert
Carl W. Stursberg Jr., an executive in the food industry and a specialist in venture-capital financing, died on Monday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 71 years old and lived in Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Silicon Graphics In Diasonics Deal
Diasonics Inc., a maker of medical imaging equipment, and Silicon Graphics Inc., a computer graphics company, agreed to jointly develop medical imaging systems.
Under the accord, Diasonics, based in South San Francisco, Calif., will incorporate Silicon Graphics' technology into its development process and its imaging and other products.
The companies said the alliance was a result of parallel developments in the medical imaging and technical work station markets.
Silicon Graphics provides three-dimensional graphics, color and motion technologies for medical imaging.
In trading on the American Stock Exchange today, Diasonics shares rose 6.25 cents, closing at $4.1875.
Silicon Graphics rose 50 cents, to $32.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


De Klerk's New Task: Starting Talks
In scrapping the last apartheid laws, President F. W. de Klerk has completed the comparatively simple stage of his plan for political change and now confronts the more complex task of persuading the African National Congress and its allies to help negotiate a new constitution that will expunge the vestiges of white supremacy.
Parliament's repeal on Monday of the Population Registration Act, which classified every South African according to race, removed the last basic law of apartheid.
While Mr. de Klerk has been credited with courage in doing it, this step was relatively easy compared to what must follow because it required nothing more than action by a Parliament controlled for the last 43 years by his National Party.


Our Planet Can't Afford More Such Wars; Iraq and Vietnam
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb, in "Best and Brightest" (column May 26), has trouble understanding why the victory in the Persian Gulf earns honor for those who fought in Vietnam, even though Bernard Trainor, George Bush and many patriotic Americans have little trouble in making this connection.
The Persian Gulf victory shows what the American military can do when allowed to do so.


Weight-Loss Rule Passes
The Wisconsin Interscholastic Athletic Association today adopted what it calls the nation's strictest rule governing weight loss for high school wrestlers.
A form of the rule was voluntarily used in the 1990-91 season by 150 public schools.
The new rule by the association's nine-member board is aimed at making wrestlers maintain a minimum of 7 percent body fat in their total weight.


Vatican Restorers Are Ready for 'Last Judgment'
Behind scaffolding and tarpaulins that seal off an entire wall of the Sistine Chapel, Vatican restorers are beginning to clean Michelangelo's apocalyptic painting of the "Last Judgment." It has taken them a year of tests and study to decide how to go about it.
When the Sistine ceiling was stripped of the dirt of five centuries, Michelangelo's leaping, shining colors amazed the art world.
The Vatican team says that peeling the thick, grimy layers from the "Last Judgment" covering the altar wall may well produce an even more astonishing result.





Invisibility of Women Scientists Isn't New; Don't Get Messy
To the Editor:
Discrimination affects women and girls at every stage of their development in science, math and technology (Science Times, May 21).
Girls face formidable barriers long before they start their careers.


Help Families Choose, Everywhere
Thirty years ago, barely a tenth of the people in developing countries used some kind of birth control.
Today more than half do -- in large part because of America's pioneering efforts to help people choose the size of their families.
That choice is important not only for individuals but for countries, some of which are so devastated and deforested they cannot feed and house their own.
Seven years ago, at the 1984 World Population Conference in Mexico City, the United States trashed its position as a wise world leader on this issue.
It announced it would try to end financial aid to any agency that so much as mentioned abortion.
The Agency for International Development, aided and abetted by Congress, then withdrew financing from the United Nations Fund for Population Activities and the International Planned Parenthood Federation.


Corrections
A brief report on the Credit Markets page of Business Day yesterday about a note offering by the Fleet/Norstar Financial Group misstated the amount by which the yield exceeds that of the 10-year Treasury note.
It is 162 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point.


Seidman Will Seek $80 Billion
The nation's senior banking regulator will call for $80 billion to keep the costly savings and loan bailout going into next year and will also seek an overhaul of the way the rescue is managed.
The proposals are to be delivered to a Congressional committee on Thursday by L. William Seidman, chairman of both the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which insures bank deposits, and the Resolution Trust Corporation, which is overseeing the savings and loan bailout.
Mr.
Seidman is facing mounting criticism, both for the costs of the savings rescue and for the increasing problems at the banks.


Book Notes
Maggie Joins Norman
Until a few months ago, Marvin Josephson, who owns the International Creative Management agency, had the most exclusive coterie of clients in town.
It consisted of just two people: Barbara Walters and Henry Kissinger.
But the list has now doubled in size.


Schizophrenia Drug Not Suitable for the Homeless Mentally Ill; High Cost of Lawsuits
To the Editor:
"Clozapine's Price, and Value" (editorial, June 3), on the schizophrenia drug, notes that the manufacturer, Sandoz Pharmaceuticals, sells it in Europe for much less, and criticizes Sandoz's "profiteering."


The U.N. Today
General Assembly ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council SOCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, STANDING COMMITTEE ON PROGRAM MATTERS -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, BUDGETARY AND FINANCE COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Many Gay-Bias Incidents Unreported, Survey Says
Mayor David N. Dinkins released an anecdotal report yesterday that he said shows that thousands of crimes against gay men and women are not reported to the police.
Mr.
Dinkins said the report, compiled by the city's Commission on Human Rights, was further support for his case that the State Senate should pass legislation that would outlaw discrimination against homosexuals and increase the penalties against bias-related violence.
The Senate has objected to provisions of the measure on bias-related violence aimed at protecting homosexuals.


Another 1-2 Finish?
SUZY FAVOR-HAMILTON and PATTISUE PLUMER, the close 1-2 finishers in the women's 1,500 meters last weekend at the Mobil national championships, will have a quick rematch.


In Promotions, Cuomo Names A Chief of Staff
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced a series of long-anticipated changes in his administration today by promoting three top aides to new positions, including naming Andrew J. Zambelli as his chief of staff.
As secretary to the Governor, the 42-year-old Mr.
Zambelli will become the central figure in Mr.
Cuomo's tightly knit administration, leading its negotiations with the Legislature and acting as its top envoy to local governments.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Bank of Tokyo Trust Co., New York, a subsidiary of Bank of Tokyo Ltd., named Kazuteru Tanaka vice chairman.
He replaces Yukio Yoshido, who returns to Tokyo as director and general manager of the bank's Overseas division. *
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Group, Princeton, N.J., a unit of Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., named John D. Borgia senior vice president-human resources and administration.


Finley P. Dunne, 87, A Writer and Editor
Finley P. Dunne Jr., a writer and editor who later became director of the Temple of Understanding , died Monday at George Washington Hospital in Washington.
He was 87 years old and lived in Washington.
He died of prostate cancer and pneumonia, his family said.


A's Take Steady Route To Stay Near the Top
Certainly any time a baseball team wins 14 consecutive games or 15 in a row, it has performed a remarkable feat.
Give the Texas Rangers (14) and the Minnesota Twins (15) the credit due them.
But double the credit due the Oakland Athletics.
Try as the other teams in the American League's Western Division might, they haven't been able to shake the defending three-time champions.


Bavaro Won't Start
MARK BAVARO, the Giant tight end who underwent knee surgery after the Super Bowl, won't be in the starting lineup when the new season opens this fall, Coach RAY HANDLEY said last night.
"I don't see any way he would be able to play until midseason," the new coach added.
Handley, who had not previously commented on the condition of the 28-year-old player, who has been a starter since his rookie season in 1985, made the remark while continuing a tradition begun by his predecessor, BILL PARCELLS: attending the annual meet-the-coach gathering at Manny's restaurant in Moonachie, N.J.
"He's still involved in the early stages of rehabilitation," Handley said of Bavaro.
"He's not running yet. He's not sure what his status will be. He doesn't know how soon or if he will ever play again."


A Motley Procession of Fish Finds Its Way to the Table
POUT, the noun, is not just a grimace; it's also a fish.
Those who have never eaten pout might settle for the grimace.
But last year some people in Gloucester, Mass., found it worth a smile -- and second helpings.
Pout, or eelfish, baked in a creole sauce and other dishes made with relatively uncommon fish were featured at Gloucester's fifth annual New Fish Festival, which is intended to broaden the piscatory palates of consumers.


Dow Drops 7.15; Rise in Bond Yields Cited
The stock market continued its downward course yesterday on rising volume, as the yield on the Treasury's benchmark 30-year bonds rose to 8.5 percent and traders saw little likelihood that the Federal Reserve would move to ease credit.
By comparison, the average dividend yield is roughly 3 percent on the 30 stocks in the Dow Jones industrial average and on the issues in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index.


BRIEFS
*
Boeing Co., Seattle, is expected to announce that Thai International Airways will buy 12 of its 777-model jets, industry officials said.
The companies declined to comment on the deal, which is expected to include options on more jets and have a value of $1.4 billion. *
Ford Motor Co., Dearborn, Mich., raised prices on its 1991 U.S. light-truck model line by 1 percent, or an average of $175 a vehicle.


Economic Scene; Greenhouse Gamblers
IF the experts don't really know how fast the atmosphere is warming or what the consequences of warming could be, what should Washington do to slow it down?
To the Environmental Defense Fund, the answer seems obvious: Buy some insurance against catastrophe, and buy it as cheaply as possible.
The defense fund wants electric utilities to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases at least to the extent that their new plants are adding them.
And it wants Uncle Sam to keep the cost down by creating a market for greenhouse gas "offsets," allowing a utility in, say, Virginia or Texas to meet its obligation by paying to plant trees in Costa Rica or to trap methane from garbage dumps in Ohio.


The Rise and Fall Of Norwegian Salmon
THANKS to cultivation, salmon has become one of the more widely available and popular fish.
Statistics for total salmon consumption are not available, but in 1989 Americans ate an estimated 64 million pounds of fresh whole salmon, about two-thirds of it farm-raised.
No farmed salmon were on the market before 1981.
The Norwegians have led the way.
As a result of their aggressive marketing, demand for salmon of all kinds, including the wild Pacific catch, expanded in the United States.
In the mid-1980's, before countries like Canada, Chile and the United States began cultivating Atlantic salmon, nearly 80 percent of all fresh salmon sold on the American market was Norwegian.


Close Friends Say Bush Is Upset Over Sununu's Travel Practices
As the travel practices of the White House chief of staff, John H. Sununu, once again flared into a public debate, several close friends of President Bush's said today that Mr.
Bush was upset by the problem but was not sure how to handle it.
"It makes the Administration look crummy," said a Cabinet member who is close to the President.
"The President really shrinks from this kind of thing. I think he'd accept Sununu's resignation if it was offered, but he won't ask for it." Report on Plane Trips
Others close to the President agreed that Mr.
Bush had tried to head off the problem quickly by stringently cutting back on Mr.
Sununu's travel practices, and that he was upset to see that Mr.
Sununu continued to use Government limousines and corporate air transportation as if no issue about his travel existed.


A Top Citibank Officer Will Join Fannie Mae
Lawrence M. Small, a key executive at Citibank for more than 10 years, and once regarded as a possible successor to John S. Reed as chairman, has agreed to join the Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, as president and chief operating officer in September.
At Fannie Mae, the nation's largest investor in home mortgages, Mr.
Small is part of a changing of the guard that started early this year when David Maxwell retired as chief executive officer and was replaced by James A. Johnson.


BIG INSURER OFFERS POLICIES TO COVER MEDICAL SCREENING
In a departure from longstanding practice in the health insurance industry, which has emphasized the treatment and cure of disease without paying for much preventive care, Blue Cross and Blue Shield offered today to provide insurance for periodic tests to detect medical problems in people with no symptoms of an ailment.
The Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association issued guidelines for a lifetime schedule of medical tests to detect adult diseases, including cancer and heart disease, and said it would offer coverage for these services.
The United States Public Health Service expressed support for the guidelines, giving insurers an additional incentive to adopt them.


Lake Lurleen Journal; In Death, as in Life, Still in Shadows
Those who come to Lake Lurleen State Park here rarely have Alabama political history on their minds.
They come to fish for largemouth bass, crappie and catfish, to swim at the makeshift man-made beach, to canoe on the 250-acre lake.
Most seem only dimly aware of the woman for whom the lake is named: Lurleen B. Wallace, the first and only woman to become the state's Governor.
In death as in life, she is thought of primarily as an appendage to her husband, George, who was Governor before and after she held office.
For them, what was once known simply as Tuscaloosa County Public Fishing Lake probably should have been renamed Lake George, but that moniker was already taken.


Met Opera Is a Force in Recordings Again
After a hiatus of more than three decades, the Metropolitan Opera is not only recording regularly again, but it is also at the center of a battle between two rival record companies, Deutsche Grammophon and Sony Classical, with others waiting in the wings.


Micro Technology Is Sued by Digital
The Digital Equipment Corporation filed a lawsuit against Micro Technology Inc. of Anaheim, Calif., asserting it infringed on four Digital patents for storing and retrieving computer information.
Micro Technology, which makes products designed to enhance the performance of Digital's computers, accused Digital of trying to force out competition.
Charles F. Christ, Digital's vice president for mass storage systems, said the technology at issue "was developed at great expense to Digital and represented a significant advance in the state of the art." Tom Raimondi, director of product marketing for Micro Technology, said that the lawsuit conflicted with Digital's message that it was committed to "open systems," where products from different companies can work together.
"We don't feel we've infringed, period," he said.


FEUDING VIRGINIANS DECLARE A TRUCE
Senator Charles S. Robb and Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia held a 30-minute face-to-face peace parley here today, emerging to declare that the verbal feuding between them in the past few weeks never really existed and that there was no need to worry about its effect on their once-shiny futures in Democratic politics.
"We came here as friends, and so you will find very little grist for the mill that this is a personal feud," Mr.
Robb, smiling broadly, said at a news conference after the two met in an office in the Capitol.


Parretti Fights MGM Ouster
Giancarlo Parretti, who was removed on Monday from the board of the MGM-Pathe Communications Company, said today that he would use the court system to regain his seat.
His ouster, he said in a statement, violates operating agreements signed in April with MGM-Pathe and its banker, Credit Lyonnais.
A spokeswoman for Mr.
Parretti's company, the Pathe Communications Corporation, said he was out of the country and unavailable for further comment.


Ban on Women in Combat Divides Four Service Chiefs
In what is rapidly emerging as one of the Pentagon's most anguished debates in years, the military's four service chiefs today offered opposing views on expanding combat roles for women.
Gen.
Carl E. Vuono of the Army and Gen.
Alfred M. Gray Jr. of the Marine Corps told a Senate panel that they opposed repealing a ban on female soldiers serving in combat with infantry, armor and other ground-combat units.
Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d of the Navy and Gen.
Merrill A. McPeak of the Air Force said that while personally reluctant, they would support greater roles for women if existing law was changed to permit that.


Editorial Notebook; Pride in Boston
At 8:30 on a pristine June morning here, commuters crisscross the open plaza, mostly oblivious to the 70 young men and women doing calisthenics in the shadow of the Federal Reserve Bank.
The exercisers wear white T-shirts with the words "City Year" written across the red, black and gold emblems on their chests.
These young people -- City Year corps members -- are celebrated in Boston for their work with the homeless, the indigent and people who suffer from AIDS.
They have rehabilitated a small playground for Irish-American children in South Boston and helped to save the Berkeley Street Garden, a public space vital to the South End's Chinese community.
At the Blackstone Elementary School, with its heavily Caribbean population, visitors find City Year volunteers tutoring troubled students while grateful teachers press ahead with the day's lessons.


Corrections
A brief article in some editions yesterday about the term "pink slip," in connection with impending New York City layoffs, misidentified a novel by Thomas Pynchon.
It is "The Crying of Lot 49."


Greenspan Asserts the Recession May Be at an End, or Nearly So
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said today that the recession might already have ended but that no measurable expansion of the nation's economy had yet begun.
"Clearly we have data which are subject to revision and are likely to be revised one way or the other," Mr.
Greenspan told the House Ways and Means Committee.
"But it's very difficult to get around the data of the last several weeks, which are strongly suggestive that the bottom is somewhere in the second quarter."


Again, Grim Shelters House a Rising Number of Families
New York City's emergency shelter system for families is growing more crowded again, and advocates say conditions are harsher than ever.
Despite hopeful signs early last summer that the Dinkins administration might do what the Koch administration had never accomplished -- move all families out of welfare hotels and other emergency shelters and into permanent housing -- the trend now is in the other direction.


Invisibility of Women Scientists Isn't New
To the Editor:
"Women Join the Ranks of Science but Remain Invisible at the Top" (Science Times, May 21), otherwise excellent, neglects to mention Margaret Rossiter's pioneering study "Women Scientists in America: Struggles and Strategies to 1940." This study shows that women scientists are far from a new phenomenon.
Beginning in the 1870's, when higher education became available to women, they sought positions in various fields.
Nor is male establishment resistance to women's progress new.


INFANTS' AIDS TEST IS CALLED RELIABLE
A rapid new test can reliably detect the AIDS virus in infants as young as three to six months and cost less than existing tests, scientists reported at an international meeting on AIDS here today.
The test should lead to earlier treatment of infected infants and potentially longer survival, said Dr.
Thomas C. Quinn, who reported on a study by his team from the National Institutes of Health and Johns Hopkins University on babies born in Baltimore and in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.


Security Pacific Shift
Completing a long-planned succession, the Security Pacific Corporation said today that Richard J. Flamson 3d had stepped aside as chairman and been replaced by Robert H. Smith, the chief executive who is also chairman of the company's main banking subsidiary.
Mr.
Flamson, 62 years old, becomes the chairman of the board's executive committee, replacing George F. Moody, 60, who is retiring.


Invisibility of Women Scientists Isn't New; Who Presents Research
To the Editor:
You quote Prof.
Margaret Davis's observations on the invisibility of women scientists (Science Times, May 21).
Unfortunately, she is right on the mark.
In a study published in 1988, I examined how often women were invited to speak in symposiums at the annual meetings of the Ecological Society of America, of which I am a member and Dr.
Davis is past president.
These invitations reflect the acceptance and importance of women scientists in the field and determine whose voice is heard.


McEnroe in 3-D: Opponents Beware
Can a man in search of his organic past find it by consulting the technological future?
John McEnroe, once a powerful testament to athletic spontaneity, instinct and passion, may soon enlist the aid of a cold-hearted computer to help re-create the quality of tennis he last achieved more than a half-decade ago.


Dravecky's Left Arm Amputated, Giants Say
DAVE DRAVECKY, the pitcher who made a brief, dramatic comeback after surgery for cancer in his left arm, yesterday had the arm amputated, according to AL ROSEN, president of Dravecky's former team, the San Francisco Giants.
The surgery was performed in New York at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
The hospital said it was withholding comment until today.
Rosen, speaking from San Francisco, said that Dravecky was in surgery about four hours and that the Giants' chaplain and at least eight friends and relatives were at the hospital.


Prices Slip and Rates Edge Up
Bond prices slipped again in thin, choppy trading yesterday and long-term interest rates inched higher, as traders began to position themselves for auctions next week of new two-year and five-year Treasury notes.
The size of the coming auctions is expected to be announced today by the Treasury.
Taking on the fresh supply of shorter-term maturities generally forces traders to pare positions in intermediate and long-term issues.


Corrections
A caption with the Chronicle column yesterday misidentified the picture at the right.
It showed Rabbi Arthur Schneier, who received a Presidential appointment, not Representative Edward J. Markey.


Rising Verbal Attacks Shake Romania's Jews
In late April, on the eve of the 45th anniversary of his execution as a war criminal, Marshal Ion Antonescu, the dictator who led his country in joining Hitler's invasion of the Soviet Union, was honored by the Romanian Parliament as it rose in a minute of silent tribute.
The dictator ordered pogroms and deportations to death camps that took the lives of at least 250,000 Jews.
The homage was the most formal action in a rising of nationalist and anti-Semitic propaganda that has caused deep apprehension among the 18,000 Jews remaining in Romania and other minorities, but it provoked no significant internal opposition.


Corrections
A picture in some copies on Sunday, with an article about the art of being photographed with the President of the United States, was published in error.
The man shown with President Ford and Walter Cronkite was Ron Nessen, the White House press secretary, not Helmut Sonnenfeldt, a National Security Council official.


5 People Held in Stolen Credit Card Scheme
Five people who bought credit cards that had been stolen from the mail by Postal Service employees were arrested yesterday and charged with grand larceny, the police said.
The arrests were in connection with a five-month investigation of a scheme in which the suspects bought expensive items with the stolen cards, then sold the cards for $1,000 each, a police spokesman, Officer Hugh Barry, said.
He said he expected a "number of arrests" of postal workers soon.


Metropolitan Diary
SCENE: Northbound No. 7 bus crawling along Central Park South in rush-hour traffic on a recent Thursday afternoon.


Irwin Leibowitz; Lawyer, 84
Irwin Leibowitz, a lawyer and former administrative law judge, died on Sunday at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 84 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of complications from diabetes, said his wife, Ruth.


Summer School Cuts Create Private Boom
These are boom times at the New York Military Academy.
Despite the recession and the $2,200 cost for six weeks of private summer school, the academy in Cornwall-on-Hudson expects to enroll 150 students this year, up from about 80 students in the past several years.


New York City Schools Show Big Gains in Math Test Scores
New York City's public-school students, often maligned as unable to add and subtract, have shown a startling improvement in mathematics over the last year: 60.6 percent of those who took the annual achievement test in April performed above the national average.
That figure was an increase of 4.9 percentage points over the test's results in 1990, the largest one-year gain in at least 20 years, City Board of Education officials said.
The scores in individual districts were almost as surprising as the citywide results.
Every one of the 32 districts showed improvement over the preceding year.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-13
The West could help the Soviet Union out of its economic morass without resorting to vast amounts of aid, Secretary of State Baker said, outlining a series of proposals.
Page A1
Officials plan talks on Soviet aid and U.S. dollar A12


Sports of The Times; Let's Lower Our Goals For Locals
AS we approach the middle of the baseball season, it is time to give our local lads a bit of breathing room.
Get off their case.
Get real.
These Mets are not going to catch the Pirates, and these Yankees are not going to bash their way to the higher reaches of their division.
Just ain't gonna happen.


Lebanese Ammunition Depot Explodes, Killing 5


Cattle Prices Pushed Lower; Report Later Shows Surplus
Cattle futures prices dropped on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange yesterday on expectations that a Department of Agriculture report would show a high surplus of stocks.
On other commodity markets, pork futures prices were mixed; soybeans and grains futures prices were mostly higher, and energy futures were mostly lower.


Todd Chairman Leaving
The chairman of the Todd Shipyards Corporation, David W. Wallace, said he would resign late this summer.
Mr.
Wallace helped guide Todd through a Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization, completed in January.


Neil Bush Ends His Appeal Of Ruling in Silverado Case
Neil Bush ended his fight with Federal regulators today.
Mr.
Bush, who has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing in his role as director of a failed Colorado savings and loan, dropped his appeal of a Government order issued in April that imposed mild restrictions if he ever again became a director of a bank or savings and loan.
The Office of Thrift Supervision had ruled that Mr.
Bush, the President's son, had engaged in conflicts of interest as a director of the Silverado Bank, Savings and Loan Association.
Mr.
Bush served as an outside director from 1985 to 1988.


Little Change For C.D.'s, Bank Funds
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were down slightly to unchanged for the week ended yesterday.
According to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest rate publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla., the latest rate trend shows the downturn in bank yields easing as the ratio between banks that are raising yields and those that are lowering yields begins to narrow.


As Volcanic Ash Cools, the Philippines Digs Out


Subaru Moves Its $70 Million Ad Account
After a heated competition among six of the nation's most prominent mid-sized advertising agencies, Subaru of America, the domestic arm of the Japanese automobile manufacturer, awarded its advertising account yesterday to Wieden &amp; Kennedy, the advertising agency best known for its award-winning commercials for Nike athletic shoes.
The decision means Subaru is dismissing Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, its agency for 17 years.


For the Scientist, Electronic Notebooks
The days of the traditional laboratory notebook may be almost over.
As scientists and engineers do more and more of their work on computers, the task of keeping data in a handwritten notebook has become cumbersome and impractical.
How can a scientist enter a complex, three-dimensional color model into a notebook?
Researchers at the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston have come up with an electronic alternative, the Virtual Notebook System, or VNS, a software package that turns a computer work station into a multimedia lab notebook that can accept not only text but also sound, electronic mail, photographs and still video images.
The software can also receive faxes, allowing data from them to be incorporated into the lab notes.


The Shattered Dreams Of a Young Contender
While the debate continues about whether the use of 6-ounce gloves contributed to Kid Akeem Anifowoshe's injuries in his junior-bantamweight title bout against Roberto Quiroga, Billy Baxter, the beaten fighter's manager, is more concerned about a 22-year-old's shattered dreams.
In 1984, Anifowoshe arrived in Los Angeles, expecting to represent Nigeria in the 106-pound class at the Olympic Games.
But, Baxter said, when Olympic officials discovered he was only 15 years old, he was declared ineligible.


Drexel Tax Dispute
The Government and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. remained far apart yesterday in efforts to settle a $5.3 billion tax claim that is threatening the investment firm's bankruptcy reorganization, people involved in the case said.
Barring a late deal, the Internal Revenue Service claim will go to trial on Friday.
The main sticking point is whether Drexel took legal tax deductions on more than $1 billion in compensation to seven top executives from 1981 to 1989 -- including some of the $550 million paid in 1987 to Michael R. Milken, the former head of Drexel's "junk bond" operations.


Another Puzzle The Mets Can't Solve
The Mets' trainers, unable to persuade the team's doctor to order more sophisticated exams for John Franco's back, have started an aggressive regimen of physical therapy for the star reliever in their latest effort to solve the medical mystery that has plagued him.
"We have decided to hit him hard with exercise and treatment," trainer Steve Garland said.
"We obviously can't use him in a game in this state."


Stocks Plunge in Tokyo
Prices fell sharply on the Tokyo Stock Exchange today on higher interest rates and the dollar's continued strength.
The Nikkei average of 225 issues plunged 688.72 points, or 2.79 percent, to close at 23,996.75.
On Tuesday, the index fell 257.62 points.


Accrediting Agency and Seminary Agree on an Advisory Role for Women
The Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools has rescinded its threat to take away the accreditation of the Westminster Theological Seminary in Philadelphia because the seminary has agreed to give women a voice in its educational decision-making process.
But the seminary will not add a woman to its board, as the Middle States group had wanted.
Officials of the Presbyterian seminary and the accrediting agency said the accord was reached earlier this month but had not yet been made public.


TV in the Courtroom: 2 Plans to Capture Real Trials' Drama
The two opposing lawyers in the first episode of CBS 's new series "Verdict" deliver their closing arguments with considerably less dramatic power than Victor Sifuentes, most recently of MacKenzie, Brackman.
That's understandable; they were trained as lawyers, not actors.


Home Loan Bank Top Yield Is 7.5%
The Federal Home Loan Bank yesterday announced the pricing of $690 million in two-year and three-year bonds through various securities dealers.
Both maturities were priced at par, with the $350 million of two-year securities yielding 7.08 percent, or about 10.6 basis points more than Treasuries with a comparable maturity, and the $340 million of three-year bonds yielding 7.5 percent, or about 9.1 basis points more than comparable Treasuries.


High School Heroes, After the Last Time Up
In the baseball lore of George Washington High School, the Moneyman reigned from 1985 to 1988, batting mostly cleanup.
"Whenever the pressure was on, the Moneyman always came through," the Washington coach, Steve Mandl, recalled.
"He never struck out."


Kenneth C. Tipper; Textile Executive, 80
Kenneth C. Tipper, the former president and chairman of Cascade Woolen Mill of Oakland, Me., died Saturday at his home in Pinehurst, N.C.
He was 80 years old.
He died of cancer, said a spokeswoman for the family.


China Said to Weigh Signing International Arms Accords
China is considering signing international agreements limiting nuclear proliferation and sales of missile technology, a visiting State Department official said today.
The official, Reginald Bartholomew, Under Secretary of State for International Security Affairs, said Washington would view the moves "as very positive steps indeed."


Airbus Reports Order Snag
Airbus Industrie, the four-nation European aircraft consortium, postponed a news conference today at which it was expected to announce a large aircraft order by the Federal Express Corporation, the express cargo carrier.
Airbus executives and other industry officials had said over the last week that Federal Express would announce an order of up to 75 airplanes at the Paris Air Show this week, but today Airbus officials said that a snag had developed so that no contract would be signed this week.


Rain Date for Met's 'Ballo'
The Central Park performance of the Metropolitan Opera production of Verdi's "Ballo in Maschera" was cancelled last night because of rain.
The performance, with the same cast, will be held instead on Thursday night at 6 P.M. on the Great Lawn.





Bo Jackson on Schedule
BO JACKSON has made "significant progress" recovering from a severe hip injury and is on the timetable set for him, according to Dr.
JAMES BOSCARDIN, Chicago White Sox senior team physician.
Dr.
JAMES ANDREWS, who also examined Jackson, said the outfielder would be able to "begin to discontinue his use of crutches." Boscardin said Jackson would step up his rehabilitation exercises and be re-evaluated at the All-Star Game break in three weeks. (AP)


Petrochemical Disasters Raise Alarm in Industry
The blast that killed six workers at a chemical plant here on Monday was the latest in a streak of fires, explosions and poison-gas leaks at refineries and chemical plants around the nation.
Since October 1987, when a leak of hydrogen fluoride gas at a Marathon Oil refinery forced the evacuation of thousands in Texas City, Tex., the American petrochemical industry has endured one of the deadliest periods in its history, one that has baffled Government experts and alarmed company executives.
The 12 worst explosions have killed 79 people, injured 933 and caused roughly $2 billion in damage.


Thanks From Thomas
Buffalo Bills all-purpose running back THURMAN THOMAS yesterday gave $125,000 to Oklahoma State's athletic department.
The former all-America at Oklahoma State also took out a $750,000 life-insurance policy on himself and named the athletic department as the beneficiary. (AP)


Mets Edge Reds as McReynolds Comes Through
Kevin McReynolds was told to grab a bat.
The Mets' left fielder instantly calculated that he was going to need a handful of courage and concentration to take to the plate.
McReynolds, who hadn't seen a live pitch in three days, was going to be looking at Rob Dibble's 95 mile-an-hour fastball.
The inning was the eighth, the score was 5-5, the bases were loaded and the knot was tightening in McReynolds's chest.


Our Planet Can't Afford More Such Wars
To the Editor:
In the aftermath of the Persian Gulf conflict, there is one point on which everyone can agree: war is bad for the environment.
"Saddam Hussein's Inferno" (editorial, June 9), which urges that environmental consequences be considered before entering a war, is commendable.
However, as you mention, the 1977 Protocols to the Geneva Conventions already outlaw "methods or means of warfare which are intended, or may be expected, to cause widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment."


Accuser in St. John's Case Admits Lying About Drinks
A woman who says she was sexually assaulted by a band of St.
John's University students admitted on the witness stand yesterday that she had lied to a campus minister about how much liquor she drank before the attack.
Her testimony came as defense lawyers began to cross-examine her in a packed courtroom in Long Island City, Queens.
The amount of liquor is a major issue because the woman says a mix of vodka and orange soda made her so ill that she was helpless while she was repeatedly sodomized and sexually degraded.
The defense says she consented to any sex that occurred.
"So you lied to Sister Faith about how much alcohol you consumed?" the lawyer, Stephen Scaring, demanded of the woman in her second day on the stand.
Sister Faith Colligan was a campus minister.
"Isn't that so?" Mr. Scaring pressed as the short, thin woman hesitated.
"Yes," she finally said.  First Cross-Examination
Mr.
Scaring was the first defense lawyer to cross-examine the 22-year-old woman, a former St.
John's student who on Monday gave a graphic account of being sexually abused by male schoolmates at a house where most of the accused men were living.
She said this had occurred after she was offered a ride home from school by one of the defendants who told her he first had to stop at his house for gasoline money.
At the house, she testified, he then induced her to drink a mix of vodka and orange soda that caused her to slip in and out of consciousness.
Before Mr.
Scaring began the defense questioning, the woman ended her testimony under prosecution questioning by saying that she had dropped out of St.
John's shortly after the episode and had thought at the time of killing herself.
"I would take a notepad and write down every day how I could kill myself, but I didn't have the courage to do it," she said.
Hard to Hear in Court
She recalled this in a voice barely audible in the large courtroom in State Supreme Court, where 150 people filled every seat and stood along the walls.
Because of the poor acoustics in the courtroom, the woman's generally soft voice and a sound system that did little to remedy the problems, much of her testimony has been inaudible to spectators.
The witness's relatives and the families of the defendants were among those often straining to catch her words.
Taken into the courtroom through a side door, the woman, who has not been identified by news organizations, occasionally glanced during her testimony at the three defendants.
They stared steadily at her from the defense table 20 feet away.
The three defendants on trial, all charged with first-degree criminal sodomy and facing sentences of up to 25 years in prison if convicted, are Walter Gabrinowitz, 23; Matthew Grandinetti, 22, and Andrew Draghi, 21, all of Bethpage, L.I.
They were members of the St.
John's lacrosse team at the time of the reported assault.
Different Reports of Drinking
Mr.
Scaring, who will continue his questioning today, sought quickly to portray the woman as someone whose word was not reliable.
"So you told different stories to different people about how much you had to drink?" the lawyer said.
He recalled that in her testimony on Monday, the woman had said she had drunk two full six-ounce cups and most of a third cup of the vodka-soda mix, whereas shortly after the reported attack she told the campus minister that she had had only one cup and "didn't finish the cup."
"And you told the detective you had one drink and couldn't finish the second one, is that so?" Mr.
Scaring asked.
"That's so," the woman replied.
There was one instance in which the woman's supporters in the courtroom could not be contained.
When Mr.
Scaring asked her if she had been "very upset" that Michael Calandrillo -- another defendant who is to be tried later -- "was with another girl and wouldn't look at you on the day you were supposed to meet him," a derisive buzz could be heard in the spectator section.
As Mr.
Scaring looked angrily at the audience, the presiding justice, Joan O'Dwyer, admonished the crowd, "Please don't react." But few could hear the judge's words.


In My Garden, a Bug For Every Pest
YES, said the woman at Rincon-Vitova Insectaries , she could Fed-Ex my lady beetles from California, and they'd be devouring the aphids in my garden by tomorrow.
But could my nasturtiums last that long?
Black aphids were already covering their slender stems, crumpling up their round leaves like paper.
Green aphids were sucking the life out of my Japanese eggplants.
At night, I imagined them in my roses.


New Campaigns
*
Hagar the Horrible is going to be drinking a lot of Mug root beer this summer.
The rotund Viking comic-strip character, who appears in more than 1,800 newspapers daily, will be featured in radio and television spots as well as in-store promotions.
The campaign, created by Tracy-Locke, Dallas, for the Pepsico brand has the tagline, "Horribly good root beer."


Richard W. Couch, 73, Ex-G.T.E. Executive
Richard W. Couch, a retired communications executive with General Telephone and Electronics, died on Friday at Potsdam (N.Y.) Hospital, while visiting relatives.
He was 73 years old and lived in Harwichport, Mass., and Sarasota, Fla.
He died of complications from asthma, his family said.


Sandinista Leader Warns of a Renewed War
A former Nicaraguan President, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, warned today that war could return if the legislature repealed a giveway that enriched thousands of his Sandinista followers.
Sandinista sympathizers held at least six city halls and two radio stations today in their protest against the proposed repeal.


G.M. to Recall 700 Workers
Because of strong sales and low inventories for the Pontiac Grand Prix, the General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it will add a second shift and recall about 700 workers by September at its Fairfax plant in Kansas City, Kan.
"It's just how we read the market that gives us the confidence to do this," said Nettie Seabrooks, a G.M. spokeswoman.
The Grand Prix's daily selling rate for the last 30 days was the highest since October, and dealer inventories were the lowest since May 1988, the company said.


City Hospital Workers Are Outraged Over Planned Layoffs


Gray Sees More Options In Job Outside Congress
Representative William H. Gray 3d of Pennsylvania told colleagues today that he was resigning his job as Democratic whip and his seat in Congress so that he could earn more money and spend more time with his family and because he wanted to strengthen the United Negro College Fund's efforts to help poor black youths.
Mr.
Gray is also known to think that with current budgetary and political constraints in Washington, there is a greater opportunity to do something meaningful for black youths through the fund than there is in the House.
And he is known to believe that the colleges aided by the fund have an especially important role in reaching out beyond the black middle class to find students.
Pennsylvania's 2d Loss
The departure of Mr.
Gray would be the second major loss in the Pennsylvania legislative delegation in recent months.
In April Senator John Heinz, a Republican, was killed when his plane collided with a helicopter over a Philadelphia suburb.
Mr.
Gray's impending resignation threw Philadelphia politics into chaos.
The top figures in that city's black political scene, including Mayor W. Wilson Goode, began circulating their names as possible successors.
Mr.
Gray, the third-ranking Democrat in the House is not expected make an announcement on becoming president of the fund until its board meets Thursday in New York and formally offers him the post.
The very idea of giving up a position that was likely to lead to becoming Speaker of the House amazed many of his colleagues at first.
But he explained those reasons today in meetings not only with Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington and the majority leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, but with representatives on the House floor and in various offices.
Mr.
Gray's new salary has not been disclosed.
The last and recently retired president of the fund, Christopher F. Edley Sr., was paid $117,527 in the fiscal year that edned March 31, 1990, according to records on the organization, a fund-raising consortium of 41 private, historically black colleges.
The salary could be increased, and Mr.
Gray could also serve on corporate boards and be paid for speeches.
Both activities are prohibited by House rules.
As a member of the House, he is now paid $125,100.
While the Speaker and majority and minority leaders are paid more than ordinary members, the whip is not.
Mr.
Gray, who faces high educational costs for three sons who are 19, 17 and 14 years old, has also told colleagues that he wanted to give more attention to the church where he serves as preaching minister, the Bright Hope Baptist Church in North Philadelphia.
Mr.
Gray's father and grandfather were ministers at the 5,000-member church.
At the church today, no one would say anything about Mr.
Gray's plans.
But among the pictures and plaques in the minister's office was the 1978 Church Volunteer Leadership Award from the United Negro College Fund.
Mr.
Gray, 49 years old, has also told members that he has never been consumed with ambition to be Speaker of the House, even though his winning the whip's job in 1989 put him on a track to rise to that post.
Mr.
Gephardt, who is second in the House Democratic leadership, may give up his post to run for President.
Mr.
Foley is 62 and Mr.
Gephardt 50.
Already, two candidates are at work lining up support for election to Mr. Gray's post.
One hopeful is Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, who as chairman of the Democratic caucus ranks next after Mr.
Gray in the leadership.
Mr.
Hoyer, 52, who represents the Washington suburbs in Prince Georges County, Maryland, is in his sixth term in the House.
The other is Representative David E. Bonior of the Detroit suburb of Mount Clemens, Mich.
As chief deputy whip, he is now the highest ranking appointed member of the leadership.
He is in his eighth term in the Hosue.
He is 46.


McRae Suspended
Manager HAL McRAE of the Kansas City Royals was suspended for two games yesterday for bumping umpire DALE SCOTT.
The American League said McRae had indicated he would appeal the suspension, so it will be delayed until the appeal can be heard.


Churches Are Caught in Economy's Grip
Many of the nation's major Christian denominations have something in common with the Federal Government, the banking industry and the City of New York: trouble balancing their books.
Although churchgoers are putting more money than ever into the collection plates, many church leaders are staring at deficits.
The Roman Catholic bishops are cutting spending, the Evangelical Lutheran Church has begun layoffs, and the Episcopal Church has instituted a hiring freeze.
Expenses and Inflation Cited
These and other national church groups are reducing spending on everything from campus ministries and overseas missions to church publications and work with the aged.
Expenses and inflation have outstripped the growth in giving, and local congregations are increasingly reluctant to send money to the higher levels of their churches.


Michael Randazzo, Executive, 49
Michael Randazzo, an advertising executive for about 20 years, died on June 4 at Benedictine Hospital in Kingston, N.Y.
He was 49 years old and lived in Manhattan and in Woodstock, N.Y.
He died of pancreatic cancer, a family spokesman said.


Curbs Imposed in Rape Case
The judge in the rape case against William K. Smith today imposed restrictions on out-of-court comments by lawyers and law-enforcement agencies, but her order was less-sweeping than one she outlined in a court hearing two weeks ago.
The judge, Mary Lupo of Circuit Court, ordered prosecutors, the Palm Beach police, defense lawyers and their investigators and all courtroom personnel to refrain from making statements about the character, credibility, reputation, or criminal record of Mr.
Smith or the witnesses.
The order also prohibits statements about the possibility that a plea would be entered, the content of any confession, the performance or results of any examination or test and an opinion about Mr.
Smith's guilt or innocence.


Groups Explore Effort For Rights to the Clios
In the wake of the problems that plagued the 1991 Clio Awards, at least two groups are exploring the possibility of taking over sponsorship of the awards.
Herbert Rickman, president of New York Pride, a not-for-profit foundation that promotes New York City, said that four top advertising executives had asked his organization to consider running the Clios.
"It's not in our current scope, but our board has talked about it," said Mr.
Rickman, who was liaison to the advertising industry for Edward I. Koch, the former Mayor of New York.


Giants Release Reuschel
The San Francisco Giants released the injury-plagued veteran pitcher RICK REUSCHEL on Tuesday, apparently ending a major league career that spanned nearly 20 years.
The 42-year-old right-hander has spent most of the season on the disabled list after failing to completely recover from arthroscopic surgery on his left knee last July.
Reuschel was 0-2 in four games this season.


Cameras in Court Benefit the News Media, Not the Public
To the Editor:
"The Public's Right to Public Justice" (editorial, May 31) overstates the case for audio-visual coverage of court proceedings.
You refer to "overwhelming evidence that cameras in courtroom are a boon to justice," and yet there is no such evidence.
Like the report by the United Court System, you overlook testimony by experienced trial lawyers about the disruption in the courtroom and dangers to the fair administration of justice presented by cameras.


Handleman Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


Curbs Imposed in Rape Case
The judge in the rape case against William K. Smith today imposed restrictions on out-of-court comments by lawyers and law-enforcement agencies, but her order was less-sweeping than one she outlined in a court hearing two weeks ago.
The judge, Mary Lupo of Circuit Court, ordered prosecutors, the Palm Beach police, defense lawyers and their investigators and all courtroom personnel to refrain from making statements about the character, credibility, reputation, or criminal record of Mr.
Smith or the witnesses.
The order also prohibits statements about the possibility that a plea would be entered, the content of any confession, the performance or results of any examination or test and an opinion about Mr.
Smith's guilt or innocence.


International Semi-Tech Microelectronics Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Miscellany
*
Rowland Worldwide Inc., New York, the public relations subsidiary of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, has purchased the Sullivan Communications Group, based in St.
Paul.
William F. Sullivan, the founder of Sullivan Communications, will be president and chief executive of the subsidiary, called Rowland Sullivan.


Helene Curtis Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Curbs Imposed in Rape Case
The judge in the rape case against William K. Smith today imposed restrictions on out-of-court comments by lawyers and law-enforcement agencies, but her order was less-sweeping than one she outlined in a court hearing two weeks ago.
The judge, Mary Lupo of Circuit Court, ordered prosecutors, the Palm Beach police, defense lawyers and their investigators and all courtroom personnel to refrain from making statements about the character, credibility, reputation, or criminal record of Mr.
Smith or the witnesses.
The order also prohibits statements about the possibility that a plea would be entered, the content of any confession, the performance or results of any examination or test and an opinion about Mr.
Smith's guilt or innocence.


PHP Healthcare Corp. reports earnings for Year to April 30


Israel and Arab Neighbors Must Bend a Little; Distrust of U.N.
To the Editor:
Is it any wonder that Israel continues to have grave reservations about permitting the United Nations a role in an Arab-Israeli peace process?


Topps Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Coke-to-G.M. Shift Is Set At McCann
SEAN FITZPATRICK, the advertising creative executive who produced the Chevrolet "Heartbeat of America" campaign, was named to an important new assignment yesterday at the McCann-Erickson Worldwide agency, where, among other duties, he will handle worldwide advertising for the General Motors Corporation.
Industry executives who were familiar with details of Mr.
Fitzpatrick's appointment before it was announced said the move could also have reverberations beyond G.M., involving two other advertising giants: Coca-Cola and American Express.


This Loft Doesn't Rock, But It Sure Does Roll
ADAM KALKIN'S design for this SoHo loft is moving.
The dining table moves across the living room ceiling to nestle in a slot in the wall; vinyl draperies swing along in place of doors and walls; the guest room can be rolled across the floor, and the master bedroom looks as if it could dance on its little pointed feet.


Louisiana Abortion Law Is Delayed
The state Attorney General said today that it would be more than two months before the state's strict new abortion law could be legally enforced, and a Federal judge in New Orleans scheduled a hearing for next month on the constitutionality of the measure.
The decision by the Attorney General resolved, at least for now, the confusion over when the law would take effect.
It appeared that most, if not all, of Louisiana's abortion clinics were open and providing services today.


Standard Commercial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trade Gap Widened In April
The nation's deficit in merchandise trade widened to $4.8 billion in April as both exports and imports posted sizable and somewhat unexpected increases, the Commerce Department reported today.
Although trade figures are relatively poor gauges of overall economic conditions, partly because they are reported later than most other indicators, analysts said today's results were consistent with the increasingly popular view that the economy has begun to pull out of recession.


Rykoff-Sexton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


Israel and Arab Neighbors Must Bend a Little; Recognition Has Come
To the Editor:
Your June 3 news article on the Israeli response to the call for direct talks by Jordan's King Hussein states that such talks will be risky for Hussein because most of his subjects are Palestinians, "who still refuse to accept Israel's right to exist."


2 Feuding Virginians Meet and Declare a Truce
Senator Charles S. Robb and Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia held a 30-minute face-to-face peace parley here on Tuesday, emerging to declare that the verbal feuding between them in the past few weeks never really existed and that there was no need to worry about its effect on their once-shiny futures in Democratic politics.
"We came here as friends, and so you will find very little grist for the mill that this is a personal feud," Mr.
Robb, smiling broadly, said at a news conference after the two met in an office in the Capitol.


The Last Domino
Tomorrow, Secretary of State James Baker will make the first visit by an American Secretary of State to Albania.
His arrival will mark one more step in my country's march toward freedom.
To continue that march, to consolidate democracy and join the economic community, we need help from the West.
For Albanians, the U.S. has always been synonymous with freedom and democracy.
President Woodrow Wilson kept our neighbors from partitioning our country after World War I. Mr.
Baker's visit makes us hopeful.


Gallic Dart Distresses British Men
The weather in London and Paris has been awful for weeks, but the summer silly season has thankfully arrived on schedule, this time adding a tiff over the relative virility of English and French men to the old perennial of cross-Channel squabbling.
The first shot was fired by Edith Cresson, the first woman to become Prime Minister of France, who was quoted on Sunday as having said that 25 percent of Englishmen -- as well as Americans and Germans -- are homosexual and that, in contrast to Frenchmen, "Anglo-Saxon men are not interested in women."


World Steel Output Off 5.2%
Steel production fell 5.2 percent, to 59.9 million metric tons last month, from a year earlier, the International Iron and Steel Institute said today.
The Brussels-based group said production over the first five months of the year was 4.1 percent lower than in the comparable period in 1990, at 297.8 million tons.


Gas Giant Suspends Dividend
The Columbia Gas System Inc., one of the leading suppliers of natural gas to utilities in the Northeast, suspended dividend payments yesterday and said it might seek bankruptcy court protection unless it could renegotiate contracts with gas producers and bankers.
On the news, the company's shares lost 40 percent of their value.
The stock's opening on the New York Stock Exchange was delayed yesterday, pending the announcement.
Columbia's share price later opened at $20 before closing at $20.75, off $13.75.
With 4.4 million shares traded, the stock was the most active Big Board issue.


Lights That Shine Out All Over
JOY WULKE treats glass as jewelers do diamonds.
The facets refract light in multiple directions.
She calls "Galactica" (above) "an aggressive star."
"At night, when the light is illuminated from within, there's a soft glow," said Ms.
Wulke, of Stony Creek, Conn.
Her designs are in two versions, one of sandblasted glass, the other of broken glass between a sheet of sandblasted glass and a sheet of clear glass.


U-Haul Financing
Eleven investors have provided $102.5 million to the parent company of U-Haul International Inc., as the rental truck concern struggles to trim its huge debt.
E.
J.
Shoen, president of U-Haul and chairman of the parent company, Amerco, refused to say how much debt would be paid or the total amount of debt outstanding.
Amerco's debt had been reported to total $810 million at the end of last year.
The company said most of the $102.5 million loan would mature in 10 years.
No interest rate was disclosed.


Southern Co. reports earnings for 12mo to May 31


FEUD UNDERMINING BRITISH TORY UNITY
Since succeeding Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister in November, John Major has been trying to defuse the two issues that had split Britain's ruling Conservative Party and forced Mrs.
Thatcher out of office: a highly unpopular new household tax and Britain's position in the debate on moving the European Community toward political and economic integration.
Mr.
Major solved the first issue in April by moving to replace Mrs.
Thatcher's tax with a property tax.
He thought he was well on the way to resolving the European issue until this week, when the two Conservative Prime Ministers who preceded him, Mrs.
Thatcher and Edward Heath, spoke their piece.


College's C.I.A. Links Cause Furor, and Soul-Searching
The disclosure that a college president worked secretly for the Central Intelligence Agency while on leave has touched off a furious battle here, complete with stolen documents, bitter personal attacks, international outrage and an intense debate over ties between intelligence agencies and academia.
The dispute about links between the C.I.A. and the Rochester Institute of Technology has led to calls for the resignation of the president, M. Richard Rose, and prompted an unusual public defense by the C.I.A. of its need for contact with academia -- the "cloak and gown" relationship, as it was described in a document stolen from the president's office and mailed to the local press.


Robbins &amp; Myers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Illegal Drug Sales in Nation Put at $40 Billion
The Bush Administration's top drug policy official said today that Americans spent more than $40 billion last year on cocaine, heroin, marijuana and other illegal drugs.
In announcing the spending estimates, Bob Martinez, Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, said in a speech that the figures show "the amount of money America's users actually took out of their pockets, or took out of other people's pockets, to purchase drugs."


Home Video
'Dances With Wolves'
The cassette version of "Dances With Wolves" to be released by Orion on Aug. 28 will be the same movie that won seven Oscars and had a $173 million theater run, and not Kevin Costner's four-hour "director's cut" speculated about earlier this year.
The three-hour film will be on one cassette with larger hubs to hold it all.
There will be no half-hour profile of Mr.
Costner, as had been rumored.
"At that running time it will simply be the film," said Paul Wagner of Orion.
If the director's cut is planned for the future, Orion isn't saying.
Mr.
Costner, however, did have a hand in the upcoming release.
"He consulted with us on the design of the marketing program," Mr.
Wagner said.
From the BBC
Many of the better-known British Broadcasting Corporation programs on television in the United States are eventually released on video here by a variety of distributors.
But what about videos of BBC shows that are not broadcast in the United States?
Next week Prime Video, a new distributor in Los Angeles, will begin to release the first of 21 BBC programs new to this country.
Among the first batch are "An Englishman Abroad," a John Schlesinger film about the defector Guy Burgess starring Alan Bates; "Unexplained Laughter," a black comedy starring Diana Rigg as a London journalist, and "The Murder of a Moderate Man," a political thriller.


Grains and Soybeans Rise On Forecast of Hot Weather
Grains and soybean futures prices rose yesterday on the strength of weather forecasts of above-normal temperatures that could harm crops.
On other commodity markets, cattle futures prices continued to slump, pork futures were mixed, energy futures slipped and precious metals were mixed.


If It Gallops or Waltzes, License It!
Some 5,000 people jammed into the New York Hilton Tuesday to chase turtles.
The task was harder than it sounds.
The species involved was Teenage Mutant Ninja, whose likenesses have helped sell more than $1 billion worth of clothing, toys and movie tickets in the last five years.
Their would-be emulators included the owners of cartoon characters, sports teams and thousands of other properties, all hoping to lease their names or logos to the consumer-product manufacturers who were also prowling the Hilton's halls.


Interim Chief At Fibreboard
The Fibreboard Corporation said today that it had appointed an interim president and chief executive and an interim chairman to replace Lawrence C. Hart, who resigned from the positions on Tuesday.
The company, based in Concord, Calif., said that James D. Costello, who had been vice president of wood products, would be the interim president and chief executive and that Philip R. Bogue, a member of the board, would be the interim chairman.


Not an Extinct Species: Fast Taxi Meters
New York City taxi inspectors recently discovered something under the dashboard of a taxicab that caused them great concern: the driver had spliced his radio microphone into his meter so that whenever he pressed the "talk" button on the microphone, an electrical pulse caused the meter to click off extra miles.
Despite the Taxi and Limousine Commission's efforts in recent years to crack down on such practices, there is increasing evidence that fast meters remain plentiful.


'Odd Couple' Is Returning to Do a Good Deed
Neil Simon's "Odd Couple" has had many odd couples in its 26-year history.
Art Carney was the fussy Felix and Walter Matthau portrayed Oscar the slob in the original Broadway production in 1965; Jack Lemmon and Mr.
Matthau starred in the 1968 movie; Ron Glass and Demond Wilson assumed the roles in "The New Odd Couple," a short-lived 1982 television series, and Sally Struthers and Rita Moreno were cast as female versions -- Florence and Olive -- on Broadway in 1985.
But no odd couple has been so popular as Tony Randall and Jack Klugman, the stars of the 1970-75 television series based on the Simon comedy about two divorced roommates who were not made for each other.


Enzo Biochem reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Entertainment Marketing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Upper West Side Journal; A Block Sees More Trouble Coming
A little girl zooms into the true blue sky in her bubble-top airplane, brushing the top of a tree where a large cat had climbed near a treehouse where a little boy played.
For a closer look at the mural that hangs in the playground at Public School 75, an adventurer can climb to the the top of the monkey bars and see children on skateboards and little black smiling caterpillars and brilliant oranges and reds and blues.
This is how the children paint their lives on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
Over the top of the playground's wrought iron fence, there is something else.
A man is sitting on a stoop across West 95th Street in front of a grayish building with bricked-over windows, where old gargoyles with blistered faces watch him chop at the air with his hands to the laughter of his friends holding stuffed paper bags.


Dinkins Goes to Albany to Plead for an Aid Package


Versus Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The New York Local Government Assistance Corporation priced $558 million in 1991 B tax-exempt bonds yesterday through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The size of the offering was increased from $450 million because of strong investor demand.
Established in 1990 as part of New York State's fiscal reform measures, the corporation raises money for local governments by issuing debt, which is backed by a special fund that is financed by a first lien on 1 percent of the state's 4 percent sales tax.


Public &amp; Private; Making a Case
The moment of truth came for Carolyn Field when she was appearing on a television show.
The producers had it all worked out; she would have her face shadowed and her voice distorted, as though she were a visitor from the witness protection program.
Ms.
Field refused the subterfuge.
A man had raped her in her Tulsa apartment while her daughter slept in the next room.
She wanted the lights and the cameras on her so she could make it personal.
"Those nameless women I'd read about, it never seemed real to me," she says now.
"I wanted people to know that I was a real person, that I had a face and a name."


Dinkins Goes to Albany to Plead for Aid Package
Ten days before New York City's budget deadline, Mayor David N. Dinkins traveled to Albany today to plead for an aid package for the city, but he left with no assurances from state leaders still struggling with budget problems of their own.
Mayor Dinkins's trip to Albany today seemed aimed at heading off possible criticism that he had not lobbied hard or effectively enough for aid to the city.
The Mayor was accompanied on his trip by the City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, and the two men, who have exchanged harsh words recently over the budget.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR many children, the last few weeks of school can feel interminable and oppressive.
Summer beckons them with images of carefree days, no homework and endless supplies of ice cream.
"Some kids really thrive during the summer," said Dr.
Jon Carlson, a family psychologist and a professor of psychology and counseling at Governors State University in University Park, Ill.
"They look forward to the challenge of running their own lives. These tend to be the children who, during the school year, get themselves up in the morning, make their own lunches and schedule their own homework times."


Bush to Lift South Africa Sanctions Soon
Anticipating a strong challenge in Congress, the Administration intends to certify in the next few weeks that South Africa has met the legal requirements for the lifting of American economic sanctions and then hopes to end the restrictions by mid-July, officials said today.
The officials described President Bush as eager to lift the curbs against Pretoria, which he has often called ineffective, as soon as possible.


Strawberry No Factor In Dodger Ascent
In opening the National League West's biggest lead of the season, the Los Angeles Dodgers have added insult to Darryl Strawberry's injury.
The insult is to the division's other contenders.
Viewed by many as the preseason division favorite, primarily because they added Strawberry and Brett Butler as free agents during the winter, the Dodgers took a five-game lead into their game with the Chicago Cubs last night, a margin built largely with little help from Strawberry.


Volcano's Ash Dismays Filipinos and Americans
On both sides of the heavy steel gate that separates this city from Subic Bay Naval Station, the sprawling American naval base, there was a shared sense of hopelessness today.
Five days after Mount Pinatubo covered much of this coastal region with layer upon layer of volcanic ash and sand, which has been turned into a quagmire by the constant rains, the situation had only worsened.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.72
5.82
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.62
7.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.80
7.66
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.17
8.18
8.57
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.50
8.51
8.51
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.55
9.50
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.25
7.26
7.54
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Inquiry Finds No Basis for P.O.W. Charge
An internal investigation has found "no foundation" for an Army colonel's assertion that the Government has deliberately made a charade of the effort to resolve P.O.W. and missing in-action cases stemming from the Vietnam War, the Defense Department said today.
The charges were leveled by Col.
Millard Peck of the Army, who resigned in mid-April from his Defense Intelligence Agency job as director of the Special Office for Prisoners of War and Missing in Action.
He had bitterly accused the Administration of making his office nothing more than a "dump to bury the whole mess out of sight and mind."


Yeltsin Dons a Hat for a Washington Roundup


No Terror Court for the U.S.
If President Bush seriously wonders why Congress hasn't passed his crime bill in 100 days, he might refer to the bill's contents.
Tucked away in its 166 pages is a section called "Terrorist Alien Removal," one of many proposals that Congress is wisely ignoring.
It would create a flagrantly unjust system for deporting foreigners deemed to have terrorist connections -- using secret charges and secret evidence.
Consider how loose is the definition of "terrorist." An alien who raised money for the African National Congress or the Palestine Liberation Organization could be deported without seeing more than a bare outline of the charges, if the Justice Department wanted to call those organizations terrorist.
Justice could make a secret arrest and secretly detain the alien while applying secretly for a court hearing.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about a statement by Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, misidentified the committee addressed by David W. Mullins Jr., who has been nominated as vice chairman of the Federal Reserve.
It was the Senate Banking Committee.


Campbell Accord Criticized
A proposed settlement by the Federal Trade Commission of deceptive advertising charges against the Campbell Soup Company would allow Campbell to continue misleading consumers about health benefits of its canned soups, a Washington-based consumer group said yesterday.
The group, the Center for Science in the Public Interest, said that the proposed agreement would allow Campbell to contend misleadingly in advertising that its soups could help reduce the risk of some forms of heart disease, even though the soups are high in sodium.
Excessive sodium consumption is linked to high blood pressure, a condition that increases the risk of heart disease.


Market Place; On La-Z-Boy, A Relaxed View
EVEN the good news is, well, lazy, at the La- Z-Boy Chair Company.
Nearly three weeks after reporting earnings stronger than those announced by much of the furniture industry, La-Z-Boy investors seem to be just getting around to noticing.
Unlike companies whose stock jiggles nervously within minutes of a significant report, La-Z-Boy shareholders take their time.
"People just don't react to things too quickly in the furniture industry," said Richard G. Micka, La-Z-Boy's vice president for administration.
"So our stock doesn't move that rapidly."


Larry Kert Memorial
A memorial service for the singer and actor Larry Kert will be held on Monday at 4 P.M. in the Winter Garden Theater, where "West Side Story," his first major success, opened in 1957.
The doors of the theater, at 1634 Broadway, at 50th Street, will open at 3:30 P.M.
Mr.
Kert died on June 5 at the age of 60.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Nuclear Corp., Casper, Wyo., a uranium exploration company, named James Cornell chairman and Stephen A. Carpenter president and chief operating officer. *
Bell Helicopter Textron Inc., Fort Worth, appointed Webb F. Joiner president.


Semiconductor Plans Revamping
The National Semiconductor Corporation will be revamped as two groups.
The chip maker is forming a communications and computing group and a standard products group.
An innovative products division will be part of the communications and computing operation.


Two Infants Found in Trash Bins; One Dies
Two newborns were found discarded in trash bins in Manhattan and the Bronx yesterday, the police said.
One later died.
A baby girl was found in a Bronx trash bin at 4:10 P.M. by a man searching for returnable bottles, the police said.


Pop in Review
Buster Williams Quintet Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at Perry Street) Through Sunday
For years, the bassist Buster Williams has supplied a melodic undercurrent for some of New York's best jazz groups, most notably in the quartet Sphere.
His bass lines easily and unflappably walk, hop, hover and slide, creating countermelodies as they prod the soloists.
Now, leading his own quintet at the Village Vanguard, he does the same job, claiming only a tiny bit more of the music's foreground.


Stop the Brawling About Quotas
An overriding concept is guiding the effort of nine Republican Senators to enact compromise civil rights legislation: civil rights should not be a partisan issue.
The corollary is that the politician's responsibility is to draw people together, not drive them apart.
And while any compromise invites criticism, the destructive alternative is to keep the controversy going.
It is time to bring this matter to a close and rebuild America's consensus on civil rights.


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing the proposed distribution of a surplus in the Federal highway trust fund referred incorrectly in some copies to the amount Delaware and West Virginia would receive in bonuses under an amendment passed by the Senate.
Delaware would get $11,441,261; it would not get two bonuses in that amount.
West Virginia would receive $222,560,972.


Two Big Investors Get Top Posts at Waterford
In its second wave of senior executive changes in six months, Waterford Wedgwood P.L.C., the Dublin-based maker of crystal and china, yesterday named as its chairman Donald P. Brennan, a managing director of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The company also named as its deputy chairman Anthony J. F. O'Reilly, the Irish businessman and chief executive of the H. J. Heinz Company.
In 1990, two investor groups led by Morgan Stanley and Mr.
O'Reilly bought a 29.9 percent stake in Waterford Wedgwood as part of a plan to inject new capital into the troubled company.


A West Bank Business Chamber Votes for Islamic Fundamentalists
West Bank Palestinians from the city of Hebron have held the first elections anywhere in the occupied territories in the last 15 years, and the Islamic fundamentalist candidates won.
The voting, arranged by Palestinians, was to choose members of the Hebron Chamber of Commerce, a purely Palestinian institution; the election was on Tuesday but the results were announced early today.


Ways to Display Plants
Urban Planters 27 Taaffe Place (near DeKalb Avenue), Brooklyn, N.Y. 11205; (718) 857-2440.
Each time he moved to a new apartment over the years, Jeff Johnson, an artist from Chicago, built window boxes.
These days his boxes can be seen at his apartment in Brooklyn, but they are also on view at a few more public places, including the Carlyle Hotel and the Empire Hotel in Manhattan.


Medco Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


WNET, Citing Aid Loss, Plans to Cut Staff And Broadcast Hours
WNET, the largest public television station serving New York, announced the biggest budget cuts in its history yesterday, caused in part, station executives said, by what it called a devastating reduction in the allocation for the station in the proposed New York State budget.
Among the actions planned to save about $11 million, the station plans to dismiss 69 employees, eliminate 9 positions at the senior vice president level and to go dark for 12 hours each weekend.


Soldier's Widow Joins Army
Wearing the dog tags her husband wore when he was killed in the Persian Gulf, Dannell Dailey joined the Army today.
"The military was always in the back of my mind; I put it off because my husband was in it," said Mrs.
Dailey, 19 years old.
"I had to do something. I can't just stay at a standstill. It's something that will keep me busy and something that is connected to him."


Long Island City Financial reports earnings for Year to March 31


Raymond J. Nagle, 90, Is Dead; Ex-Dean of Dentistry at N.Y.U.
Raymond J. Nagle, a specialist in prosthetic dentistry who was a former dean of the College of Dentistry at New York University, died Saturday at Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, Mass.
He was 90 years old and lived in Centerville, Mass.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


'We Got Six Runs and Then They Brought in the Monster'
Rob Dibble left his mark on the Mets last night.
He faced five batters, struck out three of them, broke one bat into pieces and allowed a harmless single.
Apparently, New York left its mark on the relief pitcher, who always seems to have something colorful or ludicrous to say.
Dibble could not wait to flee Shea Stadium after the Reds held on for a 7-6 victory over the Mets.


2 L.I. Men Are Indicted in Metro-North Kickbacks
Two Long Island electronics executives were charged yesterday with paying more than $500,000 in kickbacks to an official of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad who later committed suicide while under investigation.
The Federal indictment charges that the official steered $4 million in contracts to the executives' company, the Envort-Gray Corporation, a maker of electronics parts based in Mineola.


Brooklyn Institutions Say Cuts Will Kill
Amid the hue and cry over proposed cuts in New York City's arts budget, a handful of cultural institutions in Brooklyn are asserting that the wounds would be mortal.
Those speaking for the Brooklyn Museum, the Brooklyn Academy of Music and the Brooklyn Children's Museum say that if Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposal to make a 47 percent cut in the city's spending for culture becomes a reality, they will close their doors either permanently or for long periods.


Israel and Arab Neighbors Must Bend a Little; No More Palestine
To the Editor:
I was surprised to read two letters June 5 referring to "Palestine." All the textbooks I have read state that Palestine went out of existence in 1948, at the end of the British mandate, and was replaced by Israel, the Jordanian-annexed West Bank and Egyptian-administered Gaza.


Casey's General Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


The Gazebo As a Lure For Blooms
THE French call it a gloriette. Others may call it a kind of trellis or gazebo.
By any name, the 18th-century garden ornament has several functions, depending on foliage.


Measurex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 2


A Garden Nourished by the Profit Motive
When the Elizabeth Street Garden opened last week, the neighborhood acquired an oasis.
And Allan Reiver and Gil Shapiro acquired a 22,000-square-foot outdoor showroom for garden statuary and ornaments.
About 100 pieces are now on display in the garden, which had been an abandoned lot filled with the usual urban detritus.
And 200 more fountains, benches and chairs are shown in Mr.
Reiver's and Mr.
Shapiro's 18,000-square-foot gallery across Elizabeth Street at No. 210 (between Spring and Prince Streets).


Seven-Year Notes From Korean Bank
The Korean Development Bank is offering $250 million in bonds due 1998, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The bonds have a 9.25 percent coupon and are priced at par, to yield about 105 basis points above the seven-year Treasury note.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Bridge
A single deal in a match, in which a game succeeds in one room and fails in another for a swing of about 11 imps, can impact on many lives.
In Memphis last month there were three close matches in the international playoffs, deciding who will have the chance to win a world title in Yokohama, Japan, in October.
In the semifinal of the Open Teams, the Grand National squad eliminated the favored Spingold team by 11 and went on to qualify to play in Japan.
In the three-way semifinal of the Women's Teams, in which the groups were named for their nonplaying captain, Ron Andersen won by 10 against Mike Passell, and this 10-imp carryover allowed his squad to advance to the final and then win by eight against the same opponents.


Hogan and Piper Set to Testify in Steroid Trial
Hulk Hogan and Rowdy Roddy Piper are among five professionals from the Worldwide Wrestling Federation who are scheduled to testify that they purchased anabolic steroids from Dr.
George T. Zahorian 3d in a trial that begins here Monday.
Zahorian, a 43-year-old osteopath and urologic surgeon, faces 15 counts of illegally distributing steroids and controlled substances to wrestlers and weight lifters nationwide.


BRIEFS
*
Allied Research Corp., Baltimore, a weapons systems maker, received a $68.3 million contract to produce anti-armor ammunition and weapons. *
Abitibi-Price Inc., Toronto, agreed to sell its Innova unit, an envelope maker, to Supremex Inc. for about $37 million.


Riley Ensconced in a Video Vault
Pat Riley has been preparing himself for the Knicks' coaching job by sitting in his Brentwood, Calif., home and watching videotapes -- some good, some bad.
He has watched Patrick Ewing at his best and the Knicks' defense at its worst, and by now he should have a clear idea why New York finished 39-43 last season and was swept by the Chicago Bulls in the opening round of the playoffs.


Guinea Pigs, Arise! A New Order Awaits
The guinea pig, among the friendliest of household pets and most accommodating of laboratory animals, may not be a rodent after all, scientists say.
According to a new analysis of its body chemistry, the guinea pig probably developed independently early in mammal evolution.
The report, being published today in the British journal Nature, suggests that guinea pigs, their close South American relatives and possibly porcupines may represent a new order of mammals, alongside such orders as carnivores, primates and lagomorphs (rabbits and hares).


Anifowoshe Improving
KID AKEEM ANIFOWOSHE, who lapsed into a coma after losing a bloody International Boxing Federation junior-bantamweight title fight last week, has shown dramatic improvement and hasn't lost any mental faculties, his doctor says.
"It's a surprise for him to survive," Dr.
GERARDO ZAVALA said Tuesday.
"When he came to the hospital, I thought he was going to be dead." It looks like his mental faculties are there.
I think everything is going to be O.K."


Points of Light Program Sets an Example
To the Editor:
"Thousand Points as a Cottage Industry" (front page, May 29) somewhat skews the intent of the Points of Light program and neglects to mention some of its positive aspects.
For one, President Bush, more than any other recent President, believes deeply that volunteerism is an essential part of our way of life.
He was brought up to believe so.


H &amp; R Block reports earnings for Year to April 30


High Court Has Several Options For New Look at Abortion Right
Louisiana's new abortion law, the most restrictive in the country, yesterday joined three others heading toward the Supreme Court for a direct test of Roe v.
Wade, the High Court's 1973 ruling establishing the right to abortion.
A much less restrictive law in Pennsylvania is more likely to be the first one appealed to the Court, if only because it is further along in the Federal appeals process.
But Louisiana's law and two others, because they outlaw most abortions, would provide the court with a clear opportunity to reverse the basic thrust of Roe v.
Wade, experts said.


International Verifact reports earnings for Year to March 31


AAR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Dravecky Thanks Fans
Former major league pitcher DAVE DRAVECKY thanked fans for their concern in a statement released yesterday by Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, where the 35-year-old Dravecky had his left arm and shoulder amputated on Tuesday.


PANEL ON SCHOOLS URGES EMPHASIZING MINORITY CULTURES
A state-appointed panel of educators has recommended that history and social-studies classes for the 2.5 million students in New York State's public schools be broadly revised to place much greater emphasis on the roles of nonwhite cultures in American life.
But the committee's report, due to be publicly released here on Thursday, has provoked strong criticism from two prominent historians who had served on the committee, who contend that it distorts United States history by unduly denigrating European influences on American society.


Irving Kissin, Lawyer, 62
Irving Kissin, a real-estate lawyer for many years, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of liver and kidney failure, his daughter, Amanda Low, said.


No Alcohol Sales For U.C.L.A. Fans
U.C.L.A. football fans will have to cheer without beer for another season.


Blount Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Horace P. Moulton, 83, Ex-A.T.&amp; T. Counsel
Horace P. Moulton, former vice president and general counsel of A.T.&amp; T., died on Sunday at the Health Care Center in Cokesbury Village, a retirement center in Hockessin, Del.
He was 83 years old and also had a home in Delray Beach, Fla.
He died of cancer, his daughter, Anne Anderson, said.


Soviet Snail's Pace; A Market Economy Is Not Expected For Decades Despite Pleas for Money
Though rival Soviet leaders are now competing with each other to plead for help from the Western industrial democracies to build a market economy, many Soviet business people, foreign diplomats and other experts here agree that it will take years if not decades to make the change.
With a thousand years of history that has little in common with Western economic experience, this society sometimes seems ambivalent about the idea.
Its leaders pay lip service to the market economy in speeches and ambitious-sounding decrees, but have done little put them into effect.
And the still-vast state bureaucracy is writing regulations that seem intended to preserve or even tighten state control rather than loosen it, some entrepreneurs have said.


Cuts at Travelers
The Travelers Corporation said it planned to cut its data-processing staff by 300 workers, about 9 percent of the work force, by January.
Travelers said the cuts, planned primarily at its Hartford offices, would streamline operations and reduce costs.
The insurer said employees would be offered a voluntary retirement package, though it did not know how many workers would accept the offer.
Travelers' stock fell 25 cents today, to $23.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Judge Blocks Child Health Cuts by Dinkins
A state judge issued a preliminary injunction yesterday barring New York City from eliminating funds for medical examinations, laboratory tests and immunizations for 260,000 schoolchildren.
Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposed budget calls for ending the program to cut costs.
The city is being sued by the Doctors Council, a union of 3,000 municipal and voluntary hospital physicians and dentists, who were joined in the suit by a group of parents.
They contended that by leaving the Bureau of School Children and Adolescent Health out of the budget for the fiscal year that begins July 1, the city was violating its own mandates and those of the state to provide health services for children.


Friends Say Rushdie Makes No More Public Appearances
Salman Rushdie, who was threatened with death for writing a book offensive to some Muslims, has stopped making public appearances after reports that assassins have arrived in Britain to kill him, his supporters said today.
In the last year Mr.
Rushdie made several public appearances for interviews and book signings, and announced on Christmas Eve that he had embraced Islam.


Hanson Discounts I.C.I. Bid Rumor
Dampening speculation about an imminent takeover, the chairman of Hanson P.L.C. said his conglomerate wanted to work with Imperial Chemical Industries, but he did not rule out a future bid.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14
A Kuwaiti court gave stiff sentences to seven entertainers, most of them Iraqi citizens, who were accused of collaborating with Iraq.
International criticism of Kuwait's trials has been mounting.
Page A1


CHRONICLE
HARRY REASONER, the CBS newsman who retired from "60 Minutes" earlier this year, was in intensive care at a Connecticut hospital yesterday after doctors removed a blood clot from his brain, a CBS spokesman said.
Mr.
Reasoner is also suffering from pneumonia, the spokesman, Roy Brunett, told The Associated Press.


Beauticontrol Cosmetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about Social Security overcharges misidentified a Government official, Dr.
Gail Wilensky.
She is Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration, not the Social Security Administration.


Corrections
An article in the Media Business pages on June 10 about New York public relations agencies misidentified an executive who has done promotional work for Peter S. Kalikow, owner of The New York Post.
He is Martin J. McLaughlin.


Frank B. Sawdon, Executive, 87
Frank B. Sawdon, an advertising executive, died on Tuesday at the Villa Pomerado Convalescent Hospital in San Diego.
He was 87 years old and lived in San Diego.
He died of complications of diabetes, a family spokeswoman said.


Montgomery Ward
Montgomery Ward &amp; Company, which shut down its general merchandise catalogue operation six years ago, will expand its specialty mail-order business.
The retailer recently tested specialty catalogues offering apparel and home furnishings.
The company, once a general merchandiser, now features specialty "boutiques" that sell brand-name electronics and other products.
In 1985, Montgomery Ward dropped its $1.2 billion general catalogue business, which lost $75 million in its final year.


Frank Valentino; Baritone, 84, Sang At Met for 20 Years
Frank Valentino, a leading baritone with the Metropolitan Opera for more than 20 years, died on Friday in Fairfax, Va.
He was 84 years old.
He died of renal failure, a family spokesman said.


Borrowing for F.D.I.C. Backed by House Panel
The House Banking Committee today took the first step down the road to another costly taxpayer bailout.
As the first part of broader banking legislation, it completed a measure that will allow the fund that protects depositors in the nation's banks to borrow more heavily from the Treasury.
The loan, of up to $25 billion on top of the $5 billion in taxpayer dollars now available to the fund, is intended to be repaid by the banking industry over the next decade.
But neither the lawmakers nor the White House are sure the banks will regain enough strength over the next few years to pay it back.


Anthony Says Goodbye To Career of Fast Lanes
EARL ANTHONY, the first bowler to win more than $100,000 in a season and more than $1 million in a career, announced yesterday that he would retire from competition after the $55,000 Flint (Mich.) P.B.A.
Senior Open tournament.
He then prolonged his career by qualifying for the final round, which begins tonight, on the last ball of his last game.
Anthony, a native of Cornelius, Ore., said he was tired of living in hotels and out of suitcases.
Anthony, 53 years old, won 41 national and 4 senior titles, more than any other P.B.A. bowler.
His career earnings ($1,359,281) are third behind those of MARSHALL HOLMAN and MARK ROTH, who are still active on the national tour.


Jim Hjelm's Private Collection Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Home Shopping Network Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


2 Congress Party Rivals Rush to Avoid a Split
As hundreds of Congress Party politicians and newly elected lawmakers flew into New Delhi to select India's Prime Minister, the two main rivals for the job opened last-minute discussions today to avert a fight that could damage or even split the nation's dominant party.
Politicians close to the two contestants -- P. V. Narasimha Rao, the ailing 70-year-old Congress Party president and a former Cabinet minister, and Sharad Pawar, 51, a powerful, Bombay-based political leader -- said the rivals were discussing several options, including the possibility of Mr.
Rao's taking over the Prime Minister's job, with Mr.
Pawar serving as his deputy.


Joan Caulfield, A Film Actress, Is Dead at 69
Joan Caulfield, an actress who starred in films of the 1940's and in television situation comedies of the 1950's, died on Tuesday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
She was 69 years old and lived in Beverly Hills, Calif.


Japan Brokers' Profits Decline
Slumping world securities markets cut deeply into the profits at Japan's four biggest brokerages in the year ended on March 31, but the securities houses are hoping for some relief in the current year.
Japan's largest brokerage, the Nomura Securities Company, said on Tuesday that its group net profits fell 57.7 percent, to 110.74 billion yen, or $785 million.


Chemical Leak Leads to Alert
A chemical leak at the Dow Chemical Company plant here forced people living nearby to stay indoors for an hour this morning as emergency crews worked to contain the spill.
About 2,000 gallons of hydrochloric acid leaked from a tanker, and some vaporized into hydrogen chloride, forming a white cloud, a Dow spokesman said.
Exposure to hydrogen chloride can cause burns, so residents near the plant were warned to stay indoors, close their windows and turn off air-conditioners.


Aztec Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


National Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Television; Hidden Cameras at Day-Care Centers
You don't have to have a child in a day-care center to be pained by some of the scenes in tonight's edition of "Prime Time Live," at 10 on ABC .
Using hidden cameras, the program's producers caught the goings-on at three centers in the New Orleans area to which middle-class parents entrusted their babies and preschoolers.
In one, the children are shown being cared for, played with, hugged.
In the other two, the pictures show confusion, sloppiness, inattention and, in one instance, a sharp smack to a baby's face.
Diane Sawyer reports finding similar scenes around the country during a three-and-a-half-month investigation: "Children running wild, screaming all day long. Children who weren't fed. Children playing on filthy floors amid dirty diaper pails. Broken cribs. Unsafe changing tables. Children who stayed in cribs all day long, no adults to play with them."


Edwards (A.G.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Resourcecan Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Prices Rise on Short-Term Issues
Falling stock prices in the United States and Japan helped to push up prices of short-term Treasury securities yesterday, as investors bailed out of equities and sought a haven in highly liquid Treasury issues.
But the drop in equities did not provide much of a lift for bond prices.


Architecture Curator Named at the Modern
The director of the Columbia University Architecture Galleries, Terence Riley, has been named curator of the department of architecture and design at the Museum of Modern Art, the director of the department, Stuart Wrede, announced yesterday.
Mr.
Riley, who has been director of the gallery at Columbia University since 1988, is also an adjunct assistant professor of the graduate school of architecture at the university and has lectured at other colleges.
He is to assume his post in October.


Bank South Chief Quits
The chairman and chief executive of the Bank South Corporation resigned today, two months after shareholders complained about the bank's losses.
After the resignation of Robert P. Guyton, Bank South's directors named John C. Wilson as interim chief executive pending selection of a permanent successor.


U.S. Agrees to Supply Trees for Cancer Drug
The Government agreed today to give a drug maker enough Pacific yew trees to insure a good supply of taxol, a promising cancer drug made from the tree's bark.
Taxol has proved to be a powerful anti-tumor agent in ovarian cancer, and appears to offer promise against breast, lung, colon and other cancers.
Millions of the trees are on land controlled by the United States Forest Service, a part of the Agriculture Department.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
BRICK walls in good condition are sturdy.
But settling and repeated fluctuations in temperature and humidity eventually cause the mortar that bonds bricks together to crumble, and this can lead to major damage.
Brickwork should be inspected yearly for cracked and otherwise deteriorated mortar joints.
The process of repairing them by adding fresh mortar is called repointing; it is tedious but fairly easy, a suitable project for an amateur unless time or a dangerous location (like an upper-story wall or the chimney on a steep roof) is a factor.


Federated Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


Dollar Closes Mostly Lower In Advance of London Talks
The dollar ended broadly lower yesterday, pushed down by technical factors, economic concerns and fears that world leaders might try to stem the currency's recent rally.
Gold was slightly higher in New York after falling overseas.


Drugs Reported Missing at V.A. Hospitals
Pharmacies at hospitals run by the Department of Veterans Affairs are losing large quantities of prescription drugs to addicts and the black market, a Government report said today.
The report by the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, said pharmacy employees "have been able to steal a wide range of addictive drugs" for years because too many employees have access.


Lamonts Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


Crime Fell 7.1% in First 3 Months of 1991
The number of major crimes reported to the New York City Police Department dropped in the first three months of the year, continuing a decline that began last summer, police officials said yesterday.
Overall, crime fell 7.1 percent compared with the first three months of 1990, the officials said.


INSIDE
Helping a New Soviet Union
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany said all the West had a responsibility to help Eastern Europe.
But as Soviet rivals compete for Western aid, experts say it will take years to change to a market economy.
Page A6.


Keeping Dry Was an Art Form


Out of the Shelter and Into a Real Home
IN May, three tiny cottages designed for the homeless in Charleston, S.C., won a 1991 American Institute of Architects' Honor Award, proving that attractive single-family houses can be built inexpensively.
"Each can be built for around $17,000," said Christopher Rose, the project architect and a senior associate with Chris Schmitt &amp; Associates, Charleston architects.


S.&amp; L. Advisory Panel Asks A New Manager for Bailout
At a time when the Resolution Trust Corporation faces mounting criticism over its internal disarray, the head of a top private-sector advisory committee to the agency called today for a new chief executive to manage it.
The statement by Philip F. Searle, chairman of the National Advisory Board to the corporation's Oversight Board, is significant because the disarray in the agency's management of the savings and loan bailout is coming under mounting criticism and because Mr.
Searle has long been a steadfast supporter of Resolution Trust.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a New York City department store to be opened by Mitsukoshi of Japan referred incorrectly to two other Mitsukoshi businesses in the city.
Its boutique and restaurant are still open; they will close for renovations next year.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS McEnroe Ousted Early John McEnroe and Brad Gilbert, who led the United States to a Davis Cup quarterfinal victory over Spain last weekend in Newport, R.I., were eliminated yesterday in the opening round of the Manchester Open, a warmup for Wimbledon.
McEnroe, seeded third, lost by 7-6, 7-6 to Cristiano Caratti of Italy.
Gilbert, seeded fourth, was beaten 6-2, 6-0, by Gilad Bloom of Israel.
There were no breaks of serve during the McEnroe match.
But Caratti, who returned well throughout, hit a backhand crosscourt return to clinch the first set and won the match when a McEnroe lob floated long. (AP)


Councilwoman Sues on District Boundaries
Councilwoman Susan D. Alter of Brooklyn went to court yesterday to challenge the new City Council boundaries, asserting that she was discriminated against because she is white.
In her suit, filed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, Ms.
Alter charged thatthe Districting Commission, which created the new lines, "deliberately and intentionally" excluded her from predominantly minority districts and placed her in a predominantly white district.
She said the result was a violation of the Constitution, which provides for equal protection under the law.


Stocks Rise in Tokyo
Japanese stocks regained some ground today after dropping sharply on Wednesday.
The Nikkei index of 225 stocks rose 85.51 points, or 0.36 percent, to close at 24,082.26.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei plunged 688.72 points, or 2.79 percent, as a result of higher interest rates and the yen's weakness against the dollar.


Terri Gordon Is Wed To Andrew H. Marks
Terrell Flax Gordon, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leo J. Flax of Denver, was married in New York yesterday to Andrew Harold Marks, a son of Arthur D. Marks Jr. of New York and the late Edith Jacobi Nichtern.
Cantor Richard Botton performed the ceremony at the bridegroom's home.
Mrs.
Marks, 40 years old, is known as Terri.
She is a vice president of the Merrill Corporation, a financial printing company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Denver.
Her father is a retired physician.


Yields Are Mixed on Money Market Funds
Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday.
IBC/Donogue's analysts said short- term interest rates might be at the beginning of a period in which yields flattened out.
Walter S. Frank, Donoghue's chief economist, said investors would continue to reach for the higher yields offered by instruments like short-term bond funds, which have maturities slightly longer than those offered by money funds.


Healthcorp Spinoff
National Healthcorp L.P. will review a plan for a tax-free spinoff of 78 percent of its assets to a new, publicly traded real estate investment trust.
Under the plan, a holder of one partnership unit in National Healthcorp would receive a share of stock in the new trust.
National Healthcorp, an operator of long-term health-care centers, said it would lease real estate from the trust.
On the American Stock Exchange today, Healthcorp's shares rose $1.25, to $24.


Jean Arthur, Actress Who Starred In Films by Capra, Is Dead at 90
Jean Arthur, the buoyant actress whose piquant charm and infectious laughter enriched some of the finest comedy dramas of the 1930's and 40's, died yesterday at the Carmel Convalescent Hospital in Carmel, Calif., where she lived for 35 years.
She was 90 years old.
Miss Arthur died of a heart ailment, a family spokeswoman said.


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Humana Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Essay; In Deep Sununu
Say what you like about Jimmy Carter, but grant him instinctive good judgment about the American voter's distaste for royalism.
He ostentatiously carried his own garment bag.
John Sununu, to whom George Bush has delegated more power than anyone, does not understand that Americans despise big-shotism in public servants.
On the contrary, he seems driven to call attention to his inflated sense of indispensability.


MGI Properties reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


In Louisiana: Law? No. Cruelty.
Those who describe Louisiana's new abortion law as "tough" or "one of the nation's most restrictive" don't do justice to its crude cruelty.
This law strips women of their dignity and their rights.
Even its exceptions are deceptive traps.
Gov.
Buddy Roemer was courageous to veto the bill, the third time in two years he has done so.
This time the State Legislature, unwilling to save itself from ignominy, has overridden the veto.


Xytronyx Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Jury Acquits 3 Los Angeles Officers of Vandalism
A police captain and two officers under his command were acquitted today of misdemeanor vandalism and conspiracy charges stemming from a 1988 drug raid in which officers wielding axes and rams did extensive damage to four apartments.
Soon after the verdicts were returned, the prosecutor told reporters that the case had been lost because of a "code of silence" within the Los Angeles Police Department and that this code had led some officers who were called as witnesses to give perjured testimony in support of the defendants.
Asked whether he would pursue perjury charges, the prosecutor, Deputy District Attorney Christopher A. Darden, said he would look into the possibility.


Tarkanian, At Hearing, Is Critical Of N.C.A.A.
Jerry Tarkanian, the long-time basketball coach of the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, appeared today before a Congressional subcommittee to criticize the system of oversight of college sports and the investigative techniques of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
In his testimony today, Tarkanian assailed the N.C.A.A. for what he called years of intimidation and other tactics he says the association has used against him and other coaches.


Dr. Samuel Gartner, Ophthalmologist, 89
Dr.
Samuel Gartner, an ophthalmologist who practiced in New York for 65 years, died on Monday at his home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 89 years old.
He had cancer and died in his sleep, his daughter said.


Singapore Privatization
Singapore's Statutory Public Utilities Board is expected to privatize its electricity and gas divisions by late next year or early 1993, the state-run Singapore Broadcasting Corporation said today.
It quoted board officials as saying that consultants were working on a plan to be ready by the end of 1991.
Some of the operations' shares would be offered to the public should they be privatized, the officials said.


Sears's Plan To Offer Visa Is Set Back
Visa U.S.A.
Inc. said today that the Federal appeals court in Denver had effectively blocked a plan by Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company to offer Visa credit cards through a Utah savings and loan owned by Sears.
The appellate court's ruling overturns a preliminary injunction that was issued against Visa in February by a Federal district court in Salt Lake City, Visa said.
The injunction had blocked Visa's attempt to keep Sears from offering the cards.
The matter will now to proceed to trial; no date has been set.


Plans to Aid New Hampshire Banks
Gov.
Judd Gregg said today that he did not care whether regulators support the plan of his choice or another to save New Hampshire's banks, just so long as they do the job.
Private meetings organized by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation this week produced a plan to save the state's five most troubled banks this summer by closing them, and reopening them immediately under new, unburdened ownership, people involved said.


Value City Department Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


Filmstar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lojack Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Sununu 'Appearance Problem' Is Conceded by a Still-Loyal Bush
President Bush said today that his chief of staff, John H. Sununu, had created "an appearance problem" by using Government planes and cars and corporate jets for political and personal trips, but he defended his aide and said he was "doing a first-class job."
Specifically, the President expressed concern over a possible "appearance of impropriety" from Mr.
Sununu's use of a chauffeur-driven Government limousine last week for a 250-mile trip to New York for a stamp auction at which he spent about $5,000.


Dense-Pac Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


RCM Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Medi-Mail Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Paul Simon to Give Free Concert in Park
Paul Simon will give a free concert on the Great Lawn of Central Park on Aug. 15, a spokesman for the singer announced yesterday.
Although starting time and other details are not expected to be announced officially until next month, many arrangements have already been made by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation and Time-Warner, the parent company of Warner Brothers, Mr.
Simon's record label, the spokesman said.
Time-Warner will pay New York City for all the costs, including sanitation, police and emergency medical services.
Mr.
Simon will also donate an additional sum, said to be in the low six figures, to the Parks Department, with the money to go to parks in the five boroughs.


Lesco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CHRONICLE
A group of directors of nonprofit theaters in London and New York got together via a televised conference call Tuesday to discuss possibilities and difficulties.
Among the five British theater administrators were GENISTA McINTOSH, executive director of the Royal National Theater, and IAN McDIARMID, artistic director of the Almeida Theater.
On the American side were WENDY WASSERSTEIN, who noted that her plays have never been performed in Britain, and LYNNE MEADOW, artistic director of the Manhattan Theater Club.
The moderator was ROBERT MacNEIL of PBS.


Victor Paschkis, 93, A Retired Professor And Pacifist, Is Dead
Dr.
Victor Paschkis, a retired professor of mechanical engineering at Columbia University and a lifelong pacifist, died on Tuesday at the Frederick (Pa.) Mennonite Home, where he lived.
He was 93 years old.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Lowell P. Beveridge, Choral Conductor, 86
The Rev.
Lowell P. Beveridge, a choral conductor, organist and teacher who was on the music faculty of Columbia University for 22 years, died on Tuesday at his home in Alexandria, Va.
He was 86 years old.
The cause of death was not known, but he died suddenly, his son, Thomas, said.


Groundwater Technology reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


Bork Gets Chicago Job
The Chicago Board of Trade has hired former Federal Judge Robert H. Bork to challenge the use of anti-racketeering laws in fraud trials at the world's largest futures exchanges.
Mr.
Bork, whose nomination to the Supreme Court by President Ronald Reagan was rejected by the Senate in 1987, will serve as co-counsel on a friend-of-the-court brief contending that the Racketeer Influenced Corrupt Organizations Act is unconstitutional and that the commodities trials on the charges may be invalid.


C3 Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Japan, Backing Down, Plans Ban on Rare Turtle Import
The Japanese Government said today that it would ban the import of endangered hawksbill sea turtles by the end of next year, backing down in a wildlife conservation and trade battle with the United States that centered on one of the earth's homeliest but most sought-after creatures.
Under pressure from President Bush and a number of wildlife groups, Japan agreed to put a stop to a centuries-old cottage industry near Nagasaki, in southern Japan, where the shells of the yardlong sea turtles are carved into jewelry, combs and eyeglass frames.
The United States already bans tortoise shell products made from hawksbill turtles, as do many other nations.


Talking Deals; Opportune Times For Big Barterers
BARTER, a practice older than paying with money, is enjoying a boom as American corporations scramble to dispose of excess output and to lighten their expense burdens.
Rarely is money exchanged in a barter transaction.
Mostly, products and services are traded.
Although the goods have a monetary value, many American companies are hardly sneezing at a product-for-services exchange at a time of erratic sales and lean profits.


L'Oreal Official Investigated By U.S. Over Pro-Nazi Past
The United States Justice Department has opened an investigation to determine whether the chairman of the $1 billion American affiliate of L'Oreal, the French cosmetics company, should be barred from the United States for his pro-Nazi activities during World War II.
The department's Office of Special Investigations is looking into whether Jacques Correze, a 79-year-old Frenchman, should be barred because of activities in groups that carried out anti-Semitic attacks.


Eljer Stock Falls On Liability Fears
The stock of Eljer Industries tumbled on fears that a $20-a-share takeover proposal from the Jacuzzi unit of Hanson P.L.C. will be scuttled.
Shares of Eljer, a Plano, Tex.-based maker of plumbing, heating and air conditioning products closed $6 lower at $16.875 on the Big Board.


Accounts
*
Olsen, Stern, Murphy &amp; Hogan Inc., Cleveland, a management consulting firm, to Wyse Advertising, Cleveland, for marketing consultation, graphic design and public relations services.
Billings were not disclosed.


Maryland Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


How The New Yorker Lost 72 Boxes of Archives
When The New Yorker moved its famously shabby offices at 25 West 43d Street across the street to No. 20 in February, the magazine announced it would bestow its archives on the New York Public Library.
Five hundred cartons of papers long squirreled away were tagged for posterity, including 50 years' worth of manuscripts, letters, rejection notices and memos of some of America's most revered writers, like E. B. White, Langston Hughes, Tennessee Williams and S. J. Perelman.
The New Yorker did not announce, however, that 72 boxes were discarded by mistake during the move.
They are believed to have held galleys and proof pages, rejected manuscripts and accounting files dating to the magazine's founding in 1925.
Whether some manuscripts of published articles were lostis a matter of dispute at the New Yorker.


McRae Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


Cone Exits With a Stiff Arm and Mets Feel the Pain
David Cone said it was not a single searing stab of pain in his right shoulder that forced him out of the Mets' 7-6 loss to the Reds last night.
The muscles just grew tighter and tighter.
Cone, a right-hander who has never experienced arm problems, had to leave the mound in the sixth inning after suffering stiffness in his right shoulder.
Dr.
James Parkes, the Mets' team physician, said the initial diagnosis was that Cone's problem concerned muscles at the front and back of the shoulder and that it was not immediately considered serious.


TCBY Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Headquarters Change For General Dynamics
The General Dynamics Corporation said yesterday that it would shift its headquarters from St.
Louis to the Washington area, a move that is likely to cost St.
Louis more prestige than dollars.
The company, the nation's second-largest military contractor, said the decision made sense in light of the heightened competition among contractors as the Pentagon cuts costs.
While no specific location has been determined, the company said it was considering sites in suburban Virginia and Maryland.


Glavine's Pitching Is a Winner; His Throwing Wins an Ejection
Tom Glavine got his 11th victory but lost his complete game when he was ejected for brushing back Dale Murphy as the Atlanta Braves broke a five-game losing streak today with a 9-2 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies.
Glavine allowed just 4 hits through 8 innings and had 12 strikeouts, a high in his career.
He was ejected from the game by home-plate umpire Bob Davidson for throwing at Murphy, who was leading off the ninth.


Cimco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Lewis and Johnson Will Now Attempt to Catch Burrell
Leroy Burrell waited barely five days for the first residual benefits of setting a world record in the 100-meter sprint at the national championships in New York last Friday.
The promoter of the BNP Meeting, a Grand Prix event scheduled for July 1 in Lille, France, has signed Burrell to join a field that already included Carl Lewis and Ben Johnson of Canada.
It will be the first meeting for Johnson and Lewis since the 100-meter final of the 1988 Seoul Olympics.


Kohl Says West Has a Duty to Step Up Aid to Former East Bloc
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany said today that "all Western countries" had a responsibility to provide greater economic aid to the Soviet Union and the former Communist countries of Eastern Europe to help them make the transition to free markets.
But it is unclear whether Bonn is willing to go much beyond the money it has already committed to the Soviet Union and the former East Germany.
Addressing a group of foreign ministers from the United States, Canada and Europe who are taking part for the first time in a post-cold war session of the 35-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, Mr.
Kohl said of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union: "Additional assistance is needed to bolster the necessary transformation in the reformist countries, and I would emphasize that this assistance must come from all Western countries. It will be help toward self-help. We know that this is a worthwhile investment in peace and stability."  Germany's Own Burden
The Germans are already committed to giving about $31 billion in grants and credits to the Soviet Union, in part because of Moscow's assent to the unification of Germany.
But Bonn, faced with mounting costs in eastern Germany, has recently appeared wary of further large-scale aid programs.


Where Baseball Is the Immigrant Dream
To the Editor:
Your May 25 article in the series about New York City's George Washington High School baseball team describes in remarkable and living detail the immigrant adjustment of the Dominican community through its dedication to the national pastime.


Alexander's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


How Senate Measure Treats New York State
The transportation bill approved by the Senate tonight would give New York State $4.9 billion for surface transportation programs and $4.03 billion for mass transit over the next five years.
Under the five-year plan that went into effect in 1987, the state received $3.6 billion for surface transportation and $2.7 billion for mass transit.


Drug Baron Gives Up in Colombia As End to Extradition Is Approved
Pablo Escobar Gaviria, one of the world's most violent drug traffickers, surrendered to the authorities in Colombia yesterday hours after an assembly writing a new constitution voted to ban extraditions of Colombian criminals.
Colombian officials said Mr.
Escobar, a 41-year-old multi-billionaire, was picked up by helicopter at an undisclosed location and flown to a luxurious prison that was especially prepared for him in his home town, Envigado, near Medellin.


CHRONICLE
BOBBY WAGNER has a new job, as the first president of the Harris Education Research Center, a newly created service of Louis Harris and Associates, the polling concern.
Mr.
Wagner, formally Robert F. Wagner Jr., is the former president of the New York City Board of Education and a former Deputy Mayor.


Review/Theater; Tadeusz Kantor's Last Self-Portrait
When Tadeusz Kantor died in December at the age of 75, his last work was in its final stages of rehearsal by his theater company, Cricot 2.
As in many of his works, Kantor was to have been a participant in the autobiographical play "Today Is My Birthday," which is being presenting at La Mama in a five-night engagement that began on Tuesday as part of the New York International Festival of the Arts.
Like the director's earlier works, including his 1975 play "Dead Class," which was revived at La Mama this month, "Today Is My Birthday" presents a surrealistic evocation of his country's war-torn history that unfolds as a succession of hallucinatory tableaux, all done in somber shades of ash.
But "Today Is My Birthday" was also to have been a more literal self-portrait in which the director, sitting at a table and gazing at a framed photo of his family, conjured up personal visions of the past.
Instead, there is only an empty chair and the pre-recorded voice of the director announcing his presence.


Why India's Unity Matters
Pity India.
Not since independence in 1947 has so much conflict beset this huge democracy.
A violent election, interrupted by the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, has left it without a majority party or a visible leader.
Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs are mired in quarrels; regions clamor for self-rule, and everyone complains about corruption, the economy and an ossified bureaucracy.
The title of V. S. Naipaul's recent book captures the mood -- "India: A Million Mutinies Now."
All this obviously matters to Indians.
It should also worry Americans.
If chaos triumphs in India, the tremors won't be contained.
Indian disunion would be a calamity for human rights.
It would fragment markets and accelerate a regional arms race fed by new rivalries.


Pop in Review
Paulinho da Viola Alice Tully Hall
Paulinho da Viola, the Brazilian performer and composer who is nicknamed "the Prince of Samba," is an austere traditionalist compared to many of the other samba musicians from his homeland who have gained international reputations.


Stuffed Victorian Birds and Beasts Are On the Prowl Again
MOST people who collect Victorian taxidermy, the stuffed birds and beasts of the wild so popular a century ago, insist there is nothing unusual about their obsession.
"We're exactly the same as anybody who collects coins or stamps," said Paul Whiting, who owns dozens of Victorian birds.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly


Walker Is Still on the Run
Some people argue that Herschel Walker was the best high school running back ever, possessing the physical skills and mental makeup to go right from preps to pros.
Some argue that if a college athlete's classification wasn't weighed so heavily in Heisman Trophy balloting, Walker might have been the first three-time Heisman winner, taking the prize as a freshman, sophomore and junior.
He did win the trophy in his junior season at Georgia before leaving for the New Jersey Generals of the United States Football League.


Sports of The Times; Sasser And That Oddball Habit
MACKEY SASSER, among others, shakes his head when he talks about the problem.
He couldn't return the ball to the pitcher.
For a catcher, this can prove very inconvenient.
And more.
"It's unbelievable," said Sasser.
"I mean, it's just weird. It's been a living hell."
Some of Sasser's return throws were like pop- ups.
Sometimes the pitchers danced around the mound trying to catch the erratic tosses.
One baserunner took second on such a throw.
Another time, with a man on third, Sasser bounced the ball back to the pitcher, but the runner held.
Also, Sasser would tap the ball in his mitt several times as the pitcher, glove up, waited and waited.
Some fans in Shea Stadium, heckling him, counted the taps, one time getting as high as six times.


A Wright Legacy for Homeless?
WHAT Frank Lloyd Wright envisioned as a center for the elderly in San Rafael, Calif., may someday appear as a 60-bed shelter for the homeless.
In 1957, Wright designed the master plan for the city's Civic Center complex, but died two years later.
Except for the center for the elderly, most of his design was completed -- the first two buildings under the supervision of his son-in-law, the architect William Wesley Peters.


Unique Personal Ad Works for Bike Maker
A bicycle maker is taking personal ads to a new level.
In its most recent advertisements in cycling magazines, Bridgestone Cycle (U.S.A) Inc., of San Leandro, Calif., included a brief note underneath a photograph where a photo credit normally appears: "Personal to Amy Landry ex-Michigan/NYC: call Chris in Ft. Worth."


Commonwealth Edison reports earnings for 12mo May 31


Hero in His Own Time, Yeltsin Delights Capital
He no longer has to come in the back door of the White House and beg to see the President.
Instead of the 10 Senators he met in the fall of 1989, hundreds of members of Congress waited in line today to shake hands with the newly elected President of Russia and shower him with such gifts as a cowboy hat, a leather belt reading "Boris," and a Senator's spy novel in which he is a character.
And when Boris N. Yeltsin dropped by the Lincoln Memorial this afternoon, history teachers conducting class trips to the nation's capital gave their students an impromptu lesson about the latest Soviet star, who was known around Washington today simply by his first name.


Information International reports earnings for Year to April 30


Delta Computec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Reitman's (Canada) reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


Genesee Corp. reports earnings for Year to April 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Bank of New York is offering $100 million in noncallable 7.3 percent deposit notes, due 1993, at 99.562, to yield 7.54 percent, through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The notes are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and A by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Continental Bank Corp. is offering $150 million in 9 7/8 percent noncallable notes due 1996, at 100, through Lehman Brothers.
The notes are rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P.


Morgan Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 21


Accuser At St. John's In Court Duel
Clashing repeatedly with a defense lawyer, a combative former St.
John's University student yesterday stuck to her account that a group of male schoolmates sexually degraded her during a nightmarish ordeal near the university's Queens campus.
"Mr. Scaring, I'm not on trial," the short, slender woman told the lawyer, Stephen Scaring, who suggested that she had consented to the sexual activity and then wove a highly embroidered tale of being attacked.


Israel and Arab Neighbors Must Bend a Little
To the Editor:
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's statement to the House Foreign Affairs Committee (news article, May 23) that he does not believe "there is any bigger obstacle to peace than the settlement activity," referring to Israeli settlements in the territories, was most unfortunate.
Far from focusing attention on the real problems, he seemed to single out Israel as the party most responsible for obstructing peace.


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


Boy Is Hurt in Fall to Tracks As Train Door Snags Stroller
A 3-year-old boy was thrown from a subway platform to the tracks yesterday when the wheel of his stroller got caught in a train door, the Transit Authority said.
The child, Courtney Sullivan of the Bronx, suffered cuts and bruises and was taken by ambulance to St.
Luke's Hospital, a transit spokesman, Bob Previdi, said.
The boy was in stable condition, a hospital spokesman said.


For Howe, the Real Save Happened Off the Field
There were far more doubters than believers when Steve Howe began his comeback four months ago, but where are they now?
Howe shrugs.
His past, he says, is littered with skeptics who said he would never make it to the big leagues again.
But he has, four years after his last appearance and last relapse into substance-abuse problems.


TRANSACTIONS BASEBALL American League    A.L. -- Suspended Hal McRae, Kansas City manager, for two games for bumping umpire Dale Scott in a game on June 6.    CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Named Rick Renick manager of Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League and Jaime Garcia manager of Sarasota of the Gulf Coast League.    SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Desmond Relaford, infielder, and assigned him to Tempe of the Arizona League. BASKETBALL National Basketball Association    MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Named Jimmy Rodgers coach.    NEW YORK KNICKS -- Named Pam Harris director of marketing. Continental Basketball Association    C.B.A. -- Named Arnold D. Fielkow deputy commissioner. World Basketball League    YOUNGSTOWN PRIDE -- Signed Duane Washington, guard. Placed Barry Mitchell, forward, on injured reserve. United States Basketball League    LONG ISLAND SURF -- Signed Sean Couch, guard. Placed Rich Henry, guard, on the taxi squad, and Ken Atkinson, guard, on injured reserve. Released Tom Greis, center, and Sean Muto and Billy Singleton, forwards. FOOTBALL National Football League    PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Pellom McDaniels, Tim Walton, Paul McGowan, Raymond Savage and Michael Teeter, linebackers.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 20


Consumers Vs. Callers: The Lines Are Busier
HELLO America, where are you?
Researchers at the University of California at Berkeley have stumbled upon a discovery that is troubling to marketers: nobody's home.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES


Public Service Enterprise Group Inc. reports earnings for 12mos May 31


John Nuveen Offering
One of the largest mutual fund and investment company managers, John Nuveen &amp; Company in Chicago, began a public offering of 50 million shares of common stock of its Nuveen Quality Income Municipal Fund Inc., a tax-free investment company.
The offering was at $15 a share, for a total of $750 million.
Nuveen called it one of the biggest offerings so far this year and said it would increase the fund's outstanding shares to 52.2 million shares.
The fund's investments will be in a portfolio of investment grade-municipals, offering dividends that are free of Federal income taxes.
The shares are offered through Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons Inc.


Feeling N.H.L. Draft, Lindros Looks for Open Window
The meeting took place in secret last Friday at a lakefront hotel in downtown Toronto.
In the room was Eric Lindros, hockey's most famous teen-age amateur.


Krugerrand Revival Plans
South Africa plans to market the Krugerrand gold coin abroad again, a mining official said.
The official, Clive Knobbs, the president of the Chamber of Mines mineowners' organization, said on Tuesday that the decision was made after the European Community voted in April to lift its ban imposed in 1985 on Krugerrand imports.
The community also banned steel and iron imports as an expression of its opposition to apartheid, South Africa's policy of separating its citizens by race.


Senate's Roll-Call On Transportation
Following is the 91-to-7 roll-call vote by which the Senate today approved a bill authorizing $123 billion for transportation programs over the next five years.
A yes vote was a vote for the bill.
Voting yes were 52 Democrats and 39 Republicans.
Voting no were 3 Democrats and 4 Republicans.
Alabama: Heflin (D) No; Shelby (D) Yes.
Alaska: Murkowski (R) Yes; Stevens (R) Yes.
Arizona: DeConcini (D) Not Voting; McCain (R) Yes.
Arkansas: Bumpers (D) Yes; Pryor (D) Not Voting.
California: Cranston (D) Yes; Seymour (R) Yes.
Colorado: Brown (R) Yes; Wirth (D) Yes.
Connecticut: Dodd (D) Yes; Lieberman (D) Yes.
Delaware: Biden (D) Yes; Roth (R) No.
Florida: Graham (D) No; Mack (R) No.
Georgia: Fowler (D) Yes; Nunn (D) Yes.
Hawaii: Akaka (D) Yes; Inouye (D) Yes.
Idaho: Craig (R) Yes; Symms (R) Yes.
Illinois: Dixon (D) Yes; Simon (D) Yes.
Indiana: Coats (R) Yes; Lugar (R) Yes.
Iowa: Grassley (R) Yes; Harkin (D) Yes.
Kansas: Dole (R) Yes; Kassebaum (R) Yes.
Kentucky: Ford (D) Yes; McConnell (R) Yes.
Louisiana: Breaux (D) Yes; Johnston (D) Yes.
Maine: Cohen (R) Yes; Mitchell (D) Yes.
Maryland: Mikulski (D) Yes; Sarbanes (D) Yes.
Massachusetts: Kennedy (D) Yes; Kerry (D) Yes.
Michigan: Levin (D) Yes; Riegle (D) Yes.
Minnesota: Durenberger (R) Yes; Wellstone (D) Yes.
Mississippi: Cochran (R) Yes; Lott (R) Yes.
Missouri: Bond (R) No; Danforth (R) Yes.
Montana: Baucus (D) Yes; Burns (R) Yes.
Nebraska: Exon (D) Yes; Kerrey (D) Yes.
Nevada: Bryan (D) Yes; Reid (D) Yes.
New Hampshire: Rudman (R) Yes; Smith (R) Yes.
New Jersey: Bradley (D) Yes; Lautenberg (D) Yes.
New Mexico: Bingaman (D) Yes; Domenici (R) Yes.
New York: D'Amato (R) Yes; Moynihan (D) Yes.
North Carolina: Helms (R) Yes; Sanford (D) Yes.
North Dakota: Burdick (D) Yes; Conrad (D) Yes.
Ohio: Glenn (D) Yes; Metzenbaum (D) Yes.
Oklahoma: Boren (D) Yes; Nickles (R) Yes.
Oregon: Hatfield (R) Yes; Packwood (R) Yes.
Pennsylvania: Specter (R) Yes; Wofford (D) Yes.
Rhode Island: Chafee (R) Yes; Pell (D) Yes.
South Carolina: Hollings (D) Yes; Thurmond (R) Yes.
South Dakota: Daschle (D) Yes; Pressler (R) Yes.
Tennessee: Gore (D) Yes; Sasser (D) Yes.
Texas: Bentsen (D) Yes; Gramm (R) Yes.
Utah: Garn (R) Yes; Hatch (R) Yes.
Vermont: Jeffords (R) Yes; Leahy (D) Yes.
Virginia: Robb (D) Yes; Warner (R) Yes.
Washington: Adams (D) Yes; Gorton (R) Yes.
West Virginia: Byrd (D) Yes; Rockefeller (D) Yes.
Wisconsin: Kasten (R) No; Kohl (D) No.
Wyoming: Simpson (R) Yes; Wallop (R) Yes.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a Senate hearing on the role of women in combat misidentified Gen.
Alfred M. Gray Jr.
He is the Commandant of the Marine Corps, not the chief of staff.


Norstan Inc.(O reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Polydex Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Johnson Shuts Out Jays As Yanks' Youth Corps Lends Another Hand
Gene Michael, the man who is making all these things happen, walked into the clubhouse when the game was over and smiled.
The night before, a rookie won his first big-league start.
Tonight, another rookie pitched seven shutout innings.
If there is a master plan, it is working.


Developer Fights Lenders on Control of His Assets
Peter S. Kalikow, one of New York's biggest developers and publisher of The New York Post, is fighting to keep control of his empire.
He is being pressed by some of his lenders to pledge to them almost all of his personal and corporate assets against tens of millions of dollars of unsecured loans, Mr.
Kalikow and other people in the talks said this week.
Under a plan that Mr.
Kalikow said he intended to head off even if it meant seeking protection in bankruptcy court, the lenders are trying to force Mr.
Kalikow to put the newspaper and nearly everything else he owns into a pool that would be controlled by the banks.
The pool would be used to shore up uncollateralized, as well as undersecured, loans to the developer, some of which he has failed to pay off or keep current with interest payments.


Sizzler International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Harvey Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


Cutbacks Weighed By America West
America West Airlines is drafting a cost-cutting plan that might include service cutbacks, layoffs and pay cuts.


Lucknow Journal; The Gentlefolk of India, Still as English as an Be
It is morning at the Dorothy Crosthwaite Home, a little corner of Hindustan that is forever England.
A romantic novel, "The Missionary's Daughter," lies open on a veranda chair.
Flowered curtains ruffle at the windows.
Dolly O'Bediah is fresh and elegant in a seersucker dress of white and violet-blue -- though she was certainly not expecting guests.


Doctor Has AIDS Virus, 442 Are Informed
Officials at two hospitals here announced today that they were informing 442 patients treated by a resident physician that he had tested positive for the AIDS virus.
The doctor, who was not identified, had been in the hospital's joint-residency training program since 1989, specializing in obstetrics and gynecology, according to a statement from Penn State University's Hershey Medical Center and Harrisburg Hospital.


Turned Over in His Grave
When William Shakespeare was entombed 375 years ago, a bit of doggerel -- the playwright's work, but not up to his usual standard -- was inscribed on the stone.
"Good friend for Jesus' sake forbear / To dig the dust enclosed here. / Blest be the man that spares these stones, / And curst be he that moves my bones." So far, despite countless pleas from people with a point to prove, nobody has.
President Zachary Taylor should have been so foresighted.


Amcast Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to June 2


Allied Stores Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


Despite Criticism, Kuwait Resumes Harsh Sentences at War Tribunals
In the face of growing international criticism of Kuwait's martial-law trials, a Kuwaiti court handed down stiff sentences again today, this time against entertainers, most of them Iraqi citizens, who were accused of collaborating with Iraq during the occupation.
Seven performers were sentenced to life imprisonment, including an Iraqi actress and a Jordanian actor who had worked in Kuwaiti motion pictures.
They were found guilty of spreading propaganda for Iraq after the conquest of Kuwait last August and taking part in an Iraqi-established artists union.


Best Buy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Points of Light Program Sets an Example; Political Exploitation
To the Editor:
President Bush's Thousand Points of Light program certainly has brought attention to many worthy efforts (front page, May 29).
However, the notion that the choices of a "daily point of light" to honor and advertise good works are nonpolitical rings hollow upon examination of the photo accompanying your article.
The map on which a Presidential assistant plots the points of light is a media market map, the type that Presidents and Presidential candidates use when scheduling time and resources.


Trenton Set to Debate Bills on Citizen Lawmaking
The New Jersey Senate is set to take up legislation on Thursday that would sharply alter the way the state makes laws by allowing citizens to enact or repeal laws through initiative and referendum, a concept with strong grass-roots support in this legislative election year.
Initiative and referendum, "I &amp; R" in statehouse shorthand, has developed into a major political issue in the wake of anger over Gov.
Jim Florio's $2.8 billion tax increase last year.
Both Democrats and Republicans have introduced bills that would allow the Constitution to be amended to allow citizen legislation.


Quotations of the Day
"The truth hidden in this bill is that men don't trust women and don't think we are capable of making our own decisions. If this doesn't bring out the vocal supporters of abortion, I don't know what will." -- Terri Bartlett, the executive director of Planned Parenthood of Louisiana.  [ A18:5. ]
"We believe that this law will be found to be constitutional and Roe vs. Wade will be overturned." -- William V. Guste Jr., the Attorney General of Louisiana.  [ A1:1. ]


Denver Elects Mayor as Personal Touch Prevails
These days, political campaigns are mostly waged in television advertisements.
So when Wellington Webb ran out of money in his race for mayor, he turned to a rather quaint strategy.
He walked to the neighborhoods and talked to voters in person.
In a remarkable surge, Mr.
Webb erased a 28-point deficit in opinion polls to win election Tuesday as the city's first black mayor.
He hailed the victory as a sign that handshakes count for more than "sound bites."


Saga of Milken's 'Dream' (Don't Hunt for Warts)
Michael R. Milken is in jail.
Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. is in bankruptcy.
The "junk bond" market is in disarray.
But to a loyal former aide to Mr.
Milken, and to companies like Safeway Stores, MCI Communications and dozens of others that were financed by junk bonds issued through Drexel, the benefits of the high-yield, high-risk securities and the financial genius of Mr.
Milken live on.


Review/Theater; Bergman's 'Doll's House' Completes a Hat Trick
Nora in Ingmar Bergman's astonishing production of "A Doll's House" is charmingly seductive, intelligent and beautiful.
In the director's interpretation and in Pernilla Ostergren's masterly portrayal, she is not a frivolous child-wife, but a willful woman with a mine of emotional resources.
This seemingly revisionist approach to Ibsen's classic does not negate any of Nora's acknowledged traits, but it probes deeply into her psyche.
In every sense, Mr.
Bergman's version, which concludes its three-performance run tonight at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Majestic Theater, makes the play even more relevant to contemporary society.
Traditional revivals emphasize Nora's ingenuousness and her husband Torvald's small-minded vindictiveness.
In this production, both characters are more complex and unpredictable.
The Torvald of Per Mattsson is certainly an egotist, but he is also very much a banker on the rise and someone who is fiercely protective of his image.


Review/Dance; Partners in Puppy Love: A New Romeo and Juliet
There is no reconciliation of the clans in Sir Kenneth MacMillan's "Romeo and Juliet." Alessandra Ferri and Julio Bocca, as Shakespear's lovers, were left to die alone in a monumental dark crypt on Tuesday night when American Ballet Theater presented its staging of Prokofiev's celebrated ballet score for the first time in its season at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Sir Kenneth's accent is on the tragic, with no lessons learned by the montagues and Capulets.
Miss Ferri, who was a MacMillan protegee in the Royal Ballet Theater, and Mr.
Bocca stayed true to the choreographer's vision.
Here was youth struck down by its elders.


CHRONICLE
ROSEANNE BARR has regained her love letters and settled her $35 million lawsuit against The National Enquirer and The Star.
She and TOM ARNOLD, her husband, had sued the tabloids for publishing the letters, written before they were married.
They said the letters were stolen.


Medical Technology Systems reports earnings for Year to March 31


New Plan Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Jewelmasters Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


Natural Gas Issues Lead Retreat in Stock Market
The stock market was battered yesterday, largely because of the poor performance of natural gas company issues.
With volume on the New York Stock Exchange a relatively low 159.7 million shares or slightly above Tuesday's 156.3 million, the few big losers weighed down all the popular indexes.
In all, 414 Big Board issues advanced and 1,156 declined.


Calendar: Floral Quilts, Ceramics and Gold Leaf
Woven Blooms Museum of American Folk Art, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street; (212) 977-7298.
An exhibition of 24 quilts with floral motifs starts today and runs through Sept. 15.
The museum is also displaying 100 objects, including hand-painted tinware, furniture and boxes, which are part of a 600-piece collection donated by the Historical Society of Early American Decoration.
Hours: 9 A.M. to 9 P.M. daily.
Free.


Material Sciences Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Survey by the Fed Sees Modest Recovery Signs
The economy has begun showing modest signs of recovery, although weaknesses remain in some regions and in some industries, the Federal Reserve said today.
"Economic conditions appear to be improving modestly in much of the nation," it said in a summary of its latest survey of the economy's state.


Court Approves Credit for Lionel
A Federal bankruptcy judge granted the Lionel Corporation's request for $18 million in interim financing while the retailer awaits a permanent credit line.
Judge Burton R. Lifland in Manhattan agreed to the request and will hold a hearing on July 2 on the credit line offered by CIT Group-Business Credit Inc.


J. C. Penney Prices A 30-Year Issue
The J. C. Penney Company priced $250 million in 30-year notes yesterday, through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The notes have a 9.75 percent coupon and are priced at 99.397, to yield 9.812 percent, or about 130 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Heilig-Meyers Co. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Groupe Laperriere &amp; Verreault reports earnings for Year to March 31


Cost of AIDS Care in U.S. Is Seen at $5.8 Billion in '91
An estimated $5.8 billion will be spent this year in the United States to treat people infected with the AIDS virus, including those with the disease, a Federal health economist told an international meeting on AIDS here today.
The figure is expected to rise to $10.4 billion in 1994.
While costs of treating people with AIDS have been estimated in other analyses, the new study is the first to assess the economic effect of treating both those with AIDS and those who are infected but lack symptoms, the economist, Fred J. Hellinger, said.


Pop in Review
King's X The Ritz
King's X, a guitar power trio that played at the Ritz on Friday night, poises gingerly between audiences.
Though it plays crunching hard rock, the words are a bit sensitive and even literary.
And though it's not a simple prole rock band -- no waving hair, not too much noticeable makeup, no costumes -- it doesn't really attract a bohemian crowd either; there was no slam dancing.


SENATE APPROVES BILL TO OVERHAUL TRANSPORTATION
The Senate tonight overwhelmingly approved the first major overhaul of the Federal transportation system in 35 years, a comprehensive package that puts new emphasis on mass transit and repairing the nation's deteriorating roads and bridges.
And in what its backers say is the bill's most significant provision, the states would gain freedom in how they spend Federal transportation money.
For the first time, they would be able to choose the projects they think they most need rather than have to follow a Federal model.


Union Talk At Apple
A group of Apple Computer Inc. workers, upset by the company's plan to eliminate 1,500 jobs, said today that they were considering a collective-bargaining effort, raising the specter of a union in the largely nonunionized Silicon Valley.
Leaders of the workers' group, called Employees for One Apple, say that its membership totals 500.
They have been talking with management since February 1990, but only recently began considering forming a union or a collective-bargaining group.


Hartford Prepares For Impasse
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and the leaders in the legislature, while continuing to express faith that the state will pass a budget by the start of the fiscal year on July 1, are nevertheless preparing for an impasse that could extend well beyond that date.
But amid the air of confrontation and suspicion at the Capitol, it is hard to tell where such preparation ends and hard-ball brinkmanship begins.


United's Outlook For 2d Quarter
United Airlines, the nation's second-largest carrier, said the number of passengers flying on United was up but yields were down.
The carrier said that after the Persian Gulf war the air-travel industry had lured passengers back by cutting fares sharply, and the impact would show in its results for the second quarter.


CHRONICLE
MERYL STREEP has given birth to her fourth child, a girl born in Los Angeles on June 12.
She and her husband, DON GUMMER, have a boy and two girls, Henry, 11 years old; Mary, 7, and Grace, 5.
LOUISA JACOBSON GUMMER weighed 6 pounds, 10 ounces.
Her parents have homes in Los Angeles and Salisbury, Conn.


GORBACHEV'S LOT: THE ENEMY WITHIN
As President Mikhail S. Gorbachev seeks to build new bridges to the West and to the Soviet Union's assertive republics, a rebellion is shaping from a new direction: his Prime Minister.
At the current session of the Soviet Parliament this week, the Prime Minister, Valentin S. Pavlov, surprised legislators by requesting extensive new powers and acknowledging that he had not discussed the matter in advance with Mr.
Gorbachev.


Philip Ernst, Marketing Consultant, 60
Philip Ernst, a marketing consultant and former marketing executive, died on Monday at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 60 years old.
He died of cardiac arrest, a funeral home representative said.


An Idea Worth the Paper It's Built On
THE Big Bad Wolf blew down houses of straw and sticks, but paper bricks?
This month, they won a recycling award from the American Paper Institute, a Manhattan-based paper manufacturers' group.
"The bricks can be sawed and made into furniture, tables and walls," said the inventor, Stanley Shetka, an associate professor of art at Gustavus Adolphus College in St.
Peter, Minn.
Last year, he exhibited a paper-brick house at the Children's Museum in St.
Paul.


Miami Students Are Investigated
A number of athletes at the University of Miami are under Federal investigation for filing suspected fraudulent applications for student loans, officials said today.
After the Federal investigation was disclosed by the acting United States Attorney for the Southern District of Florida, Dexter Lehtinen, the university said that it had found that a former employee of the financial aid office had helped students file false applications.


Cemetery Case Leaves Pet Owners Wondering
The pet owners came early in the morning and waited in the rain, trying to find out what would become of the animals that were supposed to have been buried or cremated at the Long Island Pet Cemetery.
One animal owner apparently broke into the cemetery this morning, perhaps in an effort to find his pet, law-enforcement officials said.


New Head of Dow Jones
Dow Jones &amp; Company said yesterday that Peter R. Kann, the president and chief executive of Dow Jones and president and publisher of The Wall Street Journal, had been elected chairman of the company, as expected.
Kenneth L. Burenga, Dow Jones's executive vice president and chief operating officer, was elected president.
Mr.
Kann, 48 years old, will succeed Warren H. Phillips, who is to retire on July 1.
The publishing company added that Mr.
Kann also "will continue in the years ahead as the publisher" of The Journal, a post he has held since it was relinquished to him more than two years ago by Mr.
Phillips.
In recent months, speculation had increased about whether Mr.
Kann would relinquish the title of publisher of The Journal if he became chairman.
But Dow Jones said yesterday that the chief executive had also held the title of publisher throughout the company's history except for the last two years.


Books of The Times; Mother and Daughter, Each With Her Secret
The Kitchen God's Wife By Amy Tan 415 pages. G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.
At the opening of her new novel, "The Kitchen God's Wife," Amy Tan convenes in San Francisco's Chinatown an extended family of Chinese-Americans who suffer from the generational and cultural tensions that Ms.
Tan wrote about so successfully in her best-selling first novel, "The Joy Luck Club." The results this time are mixed, entertaining in many respects but also cliched and predictable.


Mortimer H. Dubovsky, A Doctor, Is Dead at 77
Mortimer H. Dubovsky, a doctor who specialized in the care of the mentally retarded, died on Tuesday at his home in Queens.
He was 77 years old.
He died of a heart attack, a spokesman for the family said.


Corrections
An article on the Law page on May 24 about Federal efforts to find marijuana growers by checking sales records of garden-supply companies included a lawyer's erroneous account of a similar effort in 1989.
In that effort, the Government was able to obtain search warrants to enter suspects' homes by showing that the suspects were customers of garden- supply stores that advertised in High Times magazine, which advocates the legalization of marijuana.
But defense lawyers had several warrants overturned by showing that the stores also advertised in other publications.


Nomura Said to Repay Big Clients' Losses
The Nomura Securities Company, the world's largest securities house, may have improperly compensated some big investors $115 million to cover their losses in last year's stock market crash, according to reports today.
The reports, which quoted unidentified tax officials, said Nomura had given the investors guarantees that they would not lose money if they invested through the securities house.
The payments were intended to make good on the informal guarantees.


Auctions
A Lennon Guitar
As the season begins to wind down, the auction houses continue to offer a few offbeat items in most of their major sales, including the upcoming auctions of collectibles and Americana in New York City and of Impressionist and modern art in London.


New Claims By Jobless Rise Sharply
The number of Americans filing new unemployment claims surged in early June, the Government reported today.
The jobless claims number, which rose 47,000 for the first week of June to cancel out a decrease of nearly that amount the week before, added to conflicting evidence of late about the health of the nation's economy, analysts said.


Dow Slips 1.56 to Close At 2,953.94
Stock prices held steady yesterday, withstanding strong computerized sell programs and weakness in I.B.M.
The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 1.56 points, to 2,953.94, but most other averages, on which I.B.M. pulls less weight, struggled to slight gains.
The Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 mostly blue-chip stocks closed up 0.33, at 375.42.
The New York Stock Exchange's composite index edged up 0.09, to 205.87, and the Nasdaq composite rose 0.52, to 485.88.


Art in Review
George Segal Sidney Janis Gallery 110 West 57th Street Manhattan Through June 29
George Segal's lyrical new tableaux include one, two or three people.
Their expressionist and even symbolist colors are predominantly the primaries and black and white.
As is often the case in Mr.
Segal's sculpture, the mood is one of exile: people stand outside doors, walk beneath construction arcades, stand or sit (a bit like the three street philosophers in "Do the Right Thing") alongside a graffiti-scribbled wall, stand on an anonymous street.
The people think and wait, often enjoying being together; the communal feeling in this show is strong.
Always there is a certain awkwardness, an uncertainty within the people about who they are, where they are and what comes next.
The urban environment is in charge, and the architecture does not let them in.
Beneath the Segal calm in this show, there is curiosity, generosity and a sense of creative but anguished chaos that is best reflected in the bulletin board of "Miles and His Photographs," emblematic of a dynamic culture without center or home.


Congress Party Names a Premier in India
P.
V.
Narasimha Rao, an ailing 70-year-old former Foreign Minister who has loyally served the Congress Party for five decades, was formally designated by India's President today to form a government, but not before defeating a strong challenge from within his own party.
Aggressive efforts by a younger rival, Sharad Pawar, the powerful Bombay-based party leader, to wrest the Congress Party leadership from Mr.
Rao collapsed in mid-morning under pressure from state party bosses and loyalists who served under Rajiv Gandhi, the party leader who was killed on May 21.


Bush Signals Readiness to Lift All South African Sanctions
President Bush signaled today that the time had come for the United States to lift the five-year-old set of economic penalties imposed against South Africa as a punishment for that country's system of apartheid.
"Our law is very clear that when five conditions are met, we will lift sanctions," said Mr.
Bush of the 1986 law that imposed economic penalties on South Africa until specific steps are taken to remove the system of apartheid.
"Dramatic progress has been made."


Military Site Rocked By Blast in Sri Lanka
A powerful explosion rocked the military headquarters here today.
Witnesses said they saw at least 10 bodies being taken away and many more people wounded.
Police officers who blocked streets near the headquarters said the blast was caused by a bomb, but there was no immediate claim of responsibility.
The headquarters, known as Joint Police and Military Command, is the center of the Government's operations against Tamil rebels.


Weissenberg Cancels Recital
The pianist Alexis Weissenberg has canceled his Monday night recital at the 92d Street Y. The recital, which had been postponed from its original date in May, will not be rescheduled.
Refunds may be obtained by sending tickets and a stamped self-addressed envelope to: Y Box Office, 1395 Lexington Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10128.
Information: (212) 415-5440.


More Shuttles Are to Land At Space Center in Florida
The Kennedy Space Center will be a prime shuttle landing site starting with Atlantis's satellite delivery mission next month, the space agency said today.
It is the first time since the 1986 Challenger disaster that Kennedy will have equal landing status with Edwards Air Force Base in California.


Arrest Called Unlikely to Cut Narcotics Shipments to U.S.
American drug experts said yesterday that the surrender in Colombia of Pablo Escobar Gaviria, one of the world's most powerful and vicious cocaine traffickers, would probably have little effect on the flow of cocaine to the United States.
Many said they were distressed by the special treatment he appears to be receiving from the Colombian authorities.
In Washington, the State Department said it regretted the vote by a Colombian national assembly, shortly before Mr.
Escobar's surrender, to ban extradition of all citizens.
Bob Martinez, the director of the Office of National Drug Policy, said he feared that the assembly had made a mistake because extradition would have been "a very useful tool to allow the Colombian judicial system to function."


People
*
Bob Sauer has been promoted to executive vice president and creative director at Laurence, Charles, Free &amp; Lawson Inc., New York, from senior vice president and creative director. *
Dane Solomon has been named director of account services at Henszey &amp; Albert, New York.
He had previously held the same position at Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York.


Comments Curbed in Rape Case
The judge in the rape case against William K. Smith has imposed restrictions on out-of-court comments by lawyers and law-enforcement agencies, but her order was less sweeping than one she outlined in a court hearing two weeks ago.
The judge, Mary Lupo of Circuit Court, barred prosecutors, the Palm Beach police, defense lawyers and their investigators and all courtroom personnel from making statements about the character, credibility, reputation or criminal record of Mr.
Smith or the witnesses.
The order, issued at a hearing on Wednesday, also prohibits statements about the possibility that a plea would be entered, the content of any confession, the performance or results of any examination or test and an opinion about Mr.
Smith's guilt or innocence.


California Inches Toward Closing Big Budget Gap
With the state wracked by recession and grappling with the largest budget deficit ever faced by a state, the California Assembly passed a $55-billion spending plan today, only 11 days before the new fiscal year begins.
The budget action came after one of the most extraordinary sessions in the Legislature's history.
Liberal Democrats pleaded with conservative Republicans to back their own party's Governor, Pete Wilson, and accept his package of cuts in welfare grants and the largest tax increase in state history.


Moe Still a Buyer
Former Denver Nuggets coach DOUG MOE says he is still interested in buying the National Basketball Association team, but the club's majority owner said it is not for sale.
"Any club is for sale for the right price," Moe said.


Reduce Malpractice, Not the Judgments
To the Editor:
As an admirer of Dr.
C.
Everett Koop, I was dismayed to read the June 6 Op-Ed article he wrote with Senator Pete V. Domenici advocating abolition of due process in the courts for victims of medical malpractice.


Cheever's Widow Wins Case Against Publisher
After a bitter three-year court fight, the Illinois Supreme Court has ruled in favor of the widow of the author John Cheever in her effort to control publication of a collection of his short stories.
In a ruling issued here today, the court, the state's highest, said that a contract between Mary Cheever and a Chicago publishing house seeking to publish the stories was invalid because it did not say how many stories or pages would be in the collection.


New Jersey Assembly Passes Health Care Bill
After a 12-hour lobbying push by Gov.
Jim Florio and top aides, Assembly Democrats today mustered enough votes to pass a package of health care measures, including an extension of a state fund that covers medical expenses of the uninsured.
The Assembly passed the omnibus health care bill 42 to 31.
Labor, business and hospitals groups had opposed all or parts of the bill.


Leslie Davidson Taggart, Lawyer, 80
Leslie Davidson Taggart, a patent lawyer, died on Wednesday at Norwalk Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 80 years old and lived in Westport.
He died of a heart attack, his son William said.


Kittle to Go to Minors
RON KITTLE, released by the Cleveland Indians organization during spring training, has agreed to a minor league contract with the Chicago White Sox.
Kittle, 33 years old, will report to the White Sox minor league complex at Sarasota, Fla., for about 10 days before joining their Vancouver team of the Class AAA Pacific Coast League.


Thomas Victor Haney, Journalist, 84
Thomas Victor Haney, who spent 44 years with The New York Times as a sports reporter, makeup editor and coin columnist, died on Tuesday at the Harrogate Life Care Retirement Community in Lakewood, N.J.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manchester Township, N.J.
He died of kidney failure, a funeral home representative said.


Frank Umont, Umpire, 73
Frank Umont, an umpire for 20 years in the American League, died at his home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., yesterday.
He was 73 years old and had suffered a heart attack, his family said.
Mr.
Umont, who worked in the American League from 1954 until retiring after the 1973 season, umpired in four World Series, four All-Star Games, and a league championship series.
Over the latter part of his career, he wore eyeglasses on the job.
Before becoming an umpire, Mr.
Umont was a tackle for the New York Giants from 1943 to 1945.


Bradlee Will Retire Sept. 1 as Editor of The Washington Post
Benjamin C. Bradlee, the executive editor of The Washington Post for more than two decades, will step down on Sept. 1, shortly after his 70th birthday, the newspaper announced in its Friday issue.
Mr.
Bradlee, a one-time police reporter and foreign correspondent, vaulted to national prominence for supervising the paper's coverage of the Watergate scandals, which resulted in the resignation of President Richard M. Nixon.


The Young Of Jazz: Not All Are Restless
JAZZ demographers, if there are any, will mark 1991 as a turning point for the annual JVC Jazz Festival in New York City.
This year, the median age of headliners plummets by at least a decade.
After years of being dominated by venerable headliners -- many of whom are still part of this year's lineup -- the festival has also made way for a younger generation of musicians who want to join the mainstream instead of revolutionizing it.
At the same time, a counter-festival at the Knitting Factory, called What Is Jazz?, will present musicians outside JVC's mainstream, showing that not all young improvisers are willing to play by the rules of the be-bop tradition.


Drug Baron's Jailing Heartens Colombia
With Colombia's most violent drug trafficker now in a luxurious prison in his hometown, Colombian leaders said today that they believed that a two-year scourge of bombings and assassinations might finally be coming to an end.
"It may be the end of narco-terrorism in Colombia," the nation's President, Cesar Gaviria Trujillo, said in an interview about the surrender of Pablo Escobar Gaviria.
"He is responsible for the main terrorist activities of the last few years."


Kuwait at the Bar
Martial law courts in Kuwait have now condemned 29 people to death -- including 8 more yesterday -- on charges of collaborating with Iraqi occupiers.
This week, seven entertainers were given life sentences.
One was an Iraqi-born actress whose offenses include singing a song at the unveiling of a portrait of Saddam Hussein.
But all these proceedings are marred by the stench of vengeance and the denial of rudimentary safeguards.
Living under occupation poses hard and degrading choices for any subject people.
Perhaps all defendants were guilty as charged.
Yet there is something unseemly about summary justice meted out by rulers who faced no such dilemmas as they sat out the war in comfortable exile.
And now the same leaders who sought international support turn a deaf ear to appeals for clemency and fairer trials.


Plan to Raise Foreign Cash For Airlines
The Bush Administration will seek legislation to allow foreigners to own up to 49 percent of the voting stock of United States airlines, Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner said today.
The proposal is intended to attract foreign capital to shore up the troubled American industry.
In January, Mr.
Skinner decided to allow foreign carriers to buy up to 49 percent of the equity of American airlines, but a 25 percent limit remained on voting rights.
He said today that the change had proved insufficient to attract as much foreign capital as the airlines need.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A top official at Resolution Trust will be ousted by the nation's senior banking regulator.
In an effort to mollify Congress and win more money for the faltering savings and loan bailout, L. William Seidman has agreed to replace his protege David C. Cooke, a 24-year career official who was named executive director of the agency when it was created in 1989.  [ Page D1. ]


Julijonas Steponavicius, Vilnius Archbishop, 79
Julijonas Steponavicius, the Archbishop of Vilnius, Lithuania, who was arrested by the Soviet authorities in 1961 and sent into internal exile for 27 years, died on Tuesday in Vilnius, Vatican Radio said on Wednesday.
He was 79 years old.
The report did not give a cause of death.


Some Caution Greets Libel Decision
Jeffrey M. Masson expressed "sheer delight" yesterday that the Supreme Court reinstated his lawsuit against a writer who he said fabricated libelous quotations and attribute them to him.
Publishing executives and journalists said they were generally satisfied with the decision, although several said they feared that it could generate more litigation.


The Perfect Record: 17,000 and Counting
Representative William H. Natcher of Kentucky cast his 17,000th consecutive vote on the House floor today, reaching another milestone in a streak unmatched in Congressional history.
"A perfect record -- what an achievement!" exclaimed Representative William S. Broomfield, a Michigan Republican who came to Congress in 1957, three years after Mr.
Natcher.
"That's a record I'm sure will not be duplicated."


Excerpts From New Measure Limiting Louisiana Abortions
Following are excerpts from Louisiana's new abortion law, as provided by Gov.
Buddy Roemer's office:
Be it enacted by the Legislature of Louisiana:


Economic Scene; Predicting the Pay Of Ballplayers
AS professional sport becomes big business, it is getting increasing attention from economists, rookies and otherwise.
Baseball is a fertile field for economic analysis because of the comprehensive record keeping; the passionate interest of owners, players and fans in the data; the intense bargaining between players and their union and club owners, and the hot competition for talent.
Prof.
Lawrence R. Klein, a Nobel laureate in economic science at the University of Pennsylvania, found that in his last class in econometrics before his retirement this month, three of his students wanted to write term papers on sports -- two on baseball, one on basketball.
The best of three fine papers, in Mr.
Klein's judgment, was the one turned in by Joshua A. Engel, a junior from Omaha.
Professor Klein liked it because "it shows what an industrious and bright undergraduate can do these days -- armed with large data banks, powerful computers (PC variety), and abundant software; it could never have been done, as a term paper, in our days."


CHRONICLE
E.
L.
DOCTOROW is to be the national chairman of a public-reading program for writers.
They are to read aloud at Y.M.C.A.'s around the country, to inspire Americans to read and write more.


Boardwalk Bicyclists Imperil the Elderly
To the Editor:
I am a senior citizen.
My step is unsteady, and I use a cane.
I used to enjoy a walk on the Coney Island boardwalk.
Alas, no more.
Every fair day, speeding bicycles endanger the lives and limbs of less-than-agile oldsters and youngsters.
This despite numerous posted signs that prohibit bicycles after 10 A.M.


Twins Take Out Hankies and Dust Off 1987
When Jack Morris and his teammates entered the visitors clubhouse at Memorial Stadium on Wednesday morning, it would have been understandable for the Minnesota Twins to trudge to work.
A rain-delayed game the night before had extended well beyond midnight, and Wednesday's game was in the afternoon.
Instead, Morris saw the energetic evidence of a team that may be in the process of readjusting its goals.
"There was nobody just hanging out and going through the motions like I've seen on losing teams," he said.
"Very upbeat."


Uniroyal Goodrich To Cut 1,000 Jobs
The Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Company said yesterday that it planned to cut about 1,000 jobs under a restructuring plan that would consolidate two tire plants in Ontario.
Uniroyal Goodrich, based in Akron, Ohio, and owned by Groupe Michelin S.A. of France, said the Ontario plan would proceed only if the company could reach agreement with the United Rubber Workers union, which represents about 2,000 workers at the plants.
If no agreement is reached, Uniroyal Goodrich said, both plants will be closed and the company will rely on its factories in the United States.
Uniroyal Goodrich said that the two plants, in Kitchener, Ontario, are the least competitive of its nine operations.
Another of its factories, in Eau Claire, Wis., is already scheduled to close next year.


CHRONICLE
HIPOLITO (PAUL) ROLDAN, who was a MacArthur Fellow in 1988, has established his own fellowship.
A founder of the nonprofit Hispanic Housing Development Corporation in Chicago, Mr.
Roldan is using $100,000 of his $275,000 prize to start the Teresa and Hipolito Roldan Community Development Scholarship Fund, which will award graduate scholarships in public-service education.
The fund is named for Mr.
Roldan's parents, who live in Brooklyn.


Eric Bruell Dies at 65; Produced Perfume Oils
Eric Bruell, head of the Polorome Manufacturing Company, producers of oils essential to the manufacture of perfumes and other fragrances, died on Monday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 65 years old and lived in Great Neck, L.I.
He died of complications from a multiple myeloma, his son, Philip, said.


Old Color Clips Reborn in HBO Documentary
Film is the lost element in the archives of baseball.
We have newsreels from the 1930's through the 50's, but unless someone is hoarding a cache of Metrotone News, we've seen them all, and we're tired of those clips of Babe Ruth pitter-pattering at 78 revolutions per minute around the bases.
For the most part the film that has survived the decades and the elements has been in black and white, a poor palette to remember a game vibrant with color and personality.


At a Party for Columbus, a Few Uninvited Guests
New York is a city of 205,952 acres, 7,322,564 people and 21.5 billion incredibly important social, cultural and political issues.
For 90 minutes yesterday, it seemed as if all of them were squeezed into Columbus Circle.
The politicians crowded beneath the newly refurbished statue of Christopher Columbus.
The people who live beside the New York Coliseum woke up and wondered why all the fuss.
The people who object to the city's efforts to clear homeless people from Tompkins Square Park on the Lower East Side shouted slogans like "Spend money on people, not parks."


2 Trump Casinos Allowed to Keep Licenses
New Jersey casino regulators ruled today that two of the three casinos owned by Donald J. Trump here were financially stable enough to keep their licenses.
But the commission said it would lay down strict conditions before extending the license of the third.
The Casino Control Commission ruled unanimously that Mr.
Trump's company, The Trump Organization, along with the Trump Taj Mahal and the Trump Plaza, had pieced together a financial framework sound enough to keep the casinos operating.


Expos Wins Seventh Straight; Reds' Rijo Breaks His Ankle
Dennis Martinez anchored a combined three-hitter and Marquis Grissom singled home a run in the 11th inning tonight as the Montreal Expos beat the Cincinnati Reds for their seventh consecutive victory.
In the sixth inning, Reds pitcher Jose Rijo broke his right ankle attempting to steal a base.


Wheat at an 8-Week Low; Livestock and Meat Mixed
Wheat futures prices hit an eight-week low yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade amid perceptions of plentiful supplies and scarce export demand.
Soybeans and corn also turned lower.
On other commodity markets, livestock and meat futures were mixed, and energy futures gained.


Center Fielder Turns 'Political'
THERESA SUMNER imagines herself in center field again, running into the gap after a fly ball, her thudding footsteps echoing in her head.
It is, she says, the "most peaceful, wonderful feeling in the world." But right now it's only a daydream.
Last summer, in a pickup basketball game, she ruptured her right Achilles' tendon.
"I've been through heartbreak, divorce in my family, you name it, but this was the worst," said Sumner, a 22-year-old Penn State senior.
"Softball is my life."


Grand Jury Meets in Robb Eavesdropping Inquiry
The investigation into whether Senator Charles S. Robb eavesdropped on political rivals' phone conversations broadened today with the convening of a Federal grand jury to help in the inquiry.
The empaneling of the jury came after the disclosure that over the weekend Federal agents searched the home of a Virginia Beach man who is a communications hobbyist and acquaintance of Senator Robb, a Democrat.


First, Johnson Writes It Down. And Then He Hits It Out.
Howard Johnson looked at himself early in April and found himself staring at the stereotype he had laughed at for months.
After having scoffed at the conventional notion that a Christian athlete's spiritual rebirth often meant a simultaneous killing of his competitive fire, Johnson discovered at the season's start that he did in fact feel different.
There was in the mind of the third baseman for the Mets a confusion about how to handle the anger and aggression that used to fuel his performances at the plate.
Those emotions now left him feeling awkward, or were occasionally lacking altogether.


On My Mind; Learning With Yeltsin
The last time Boris Yeltsin was in Washington he had advice for the United States about how to deal with the Soviet Union.
It is lucky we did not listen to him -- lucky for us, for the Soviet people and particularly lucky for Boris Yeltsin.
Mr.
Yeltsin then was the leader of the opposition to Mikhail Gorbachev within the Communist Party.
In the U.S., he criticized Mr.
Gorbachev and said that within a year the Soviet Union might fall into the abyss.


Do Speakers Really Say What Is Between Quotation Marks?
What do quotation marks signify?
Editors deal with the question every day.
Yesterday, it was addressed by the Supreme Court, which reinstated a $10 million libel suit brought by Jeffrey M. Masson, a psychoanalyst, against Janet Malcolm, a writer.
Mr.
Masson contends that in two articles and a book Ms.
Malcolm attributed to him things he never said and does not even believe.


Tokyo Stocks Firmer
Stock prices closed higher today in Tokyo, though the market slipped back from a strong surge in early trading.
The Nikkei average of 225 issues ended at 24,275.08, for a gain of 192.82 points, or 0.80 percent.


Woolworth Plans Up to 4,900 Stores
The Woolworth Corporation said it expected to open 4,500 to 4,900 new outlets for four of its specialty-store chains, aiming to increase revenue $5 billion by the year 2000.
Frederick E. Hennig, the retailer's president, told shareholders at the annual meeting that the New York-based company expected to add up to 2,000 new Foot Locker outlets, 800 to 1,000 new Lady Foot Locker stores and 700 to 900 Champs Sports stores.
Also included in the company's plans, Mr.
Henning said, are about 1,000 more Afterthoughts stores, which carry costume jewelry, handbags and accessories.
Woolworth operates more than 8,750 stores worldwide.
Its stock fell 25 cents on the New York Stock Exchange today, to $31.75.


Rangers, Islanders and Devils Look Past Lindros in Draft
None of the three National Hockey League teams in the New York area will have a chance to select Oshawa, Ontario, center Eric Lindros when the league holds its entry draft tomorrow in Buffalo.
The Quebec Nordiques, with the first pick, say they will draft the 18-year-old junior superstar, even though he might be reluctant to play for them.
But the Rangers, the Islanders and especially, the Devils could improve their teams soon with wise choices in the early rounds.


Sports of The Times; An Instant In the Life Of a Pitcher
IT was just one pitch, just one pitch more, that is, and David Cone was gripping his shoulder, unable to go on.
Cone stood on the Shea Stadium mound in the sixth inning of Wednesday night's game against the Cincinnati Reds, with two on and two outs, trying to protect a 4-3 lead for the Mets.
Cone's pitching arm had grown increasingly stiff, and now Bud Harrelson came trotting out of the dugout, his brow furrowed, to see what the problem was with Cone, one of his best pitchers.


Excerpts From Report on Emphasizing Minority Cultures in the Classroom
Following are excerpts from "One Nation, Many Peoples: A Declaration of Cultural Interdependence":
The United States is a microcosm of humanity today.
No other country in the world is peopled by a greater variety of races, nationalities and ethnic groups.
But although the United States has been a great asylum for diverse peoples, it has not always been a great refuge for diverse cultures.
The country has opened its doors to a multitude of nationalities, but often their cultures have not been encouraged to survive or, at best, have been kept marginal to the mainstream.


Review/Television; And Now, a Real Courtroom Series
With "Verdict" at 8 tonight, CBS becomes the first network to turn cameras in the courtroom into a prime-time series.
Many outside the television industry who supported the fight to crack the courtroom barrier saw it as an opportunity to open up the workings of the law; skeptics predicted that victory would bring just a new batch of real-crime shows that would clobber the finer points of law with the blunt instruments of murder and mayhem.
The first half-hour of "Verdict" lends support to the skeptics but offers glimmers to the hopeful.
Tonight's program -- "No actors, no scripts, no re-enactments!" an authoritative off-camera voice declares -- focuses on murder and sex, that irresistible prime-time combination.
The defendant is a professional con man whose specialty was lovelorn women.
"He stole widows' hearts," says Richard Schlesinger, the evening's reporter, "and then he stole their money." As "Verdict" begins, Raymond Harry Stone, already serving a 14-year sentence for fraud, is on trial for the murder of Anita Dalfuss, an acquaintance whose remains were found in a wooded area near San Diego.


Dinkins School Board Choice a Likely Victor
Mayor David N. Dinkins's choice for president of the Board of Education seemed assured of victory yesterday after a fourth member of the seven-member board said she would vote for the Mayor's candidate.
The member, Dr.
Irene Impellizzeri, the Brooklyn representative, said that after consulting with many people, including the man who appointed her to the board -- Borough President Howard J. Golden of Brooklyn -- she had decided H. Carl McCall would make an excellent president.


New York's Pain After the Pain
After all the anguish, lost jobs and political posturing, New York City is likely to muddle through to a balanced budget for the fiscal year that starts July 1.
Because it is in nobody's interest for the city to falter, the state, the Municipal Assistance Corporation and municipal unions are likely to come up with contributions worth more or less $250 million each.
On top of the Dinkins administration's sobering service cuts, layoffs and tax increases, that should balance the budget.
But then what?


Antitrust Settlement By Sandoz
The Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to settle charges of violating Federal antitrust laws in its marketing of an expensive drug that could help people with schizophrenia.
The Federal Trade Commission had accused Sandoz, a unit of Sandoz Ltd. of Switzerland, of illegally requiring purchasers of the drug, clozapine, to buy a package of services that included monitoring for potentially fatal side effects.
The commission said Sandoz, which ended the tie-in deals May 31, could face up to $10,000 a day in civil penalties if it failed to comply with the agreement.


He Who Gets Slapped Last; Or How A Candyman Roared And Left His Mark On A State's Bar.
When Herbert Willey went down to the courthouse here to fetch a JD-GC-6 Complaint Against Attorney form, he merely wanted to gripe about a Hartford collections lawyer named Samuel Chester.
But with an assist from Mr.
Chester himself, Mr.
Willey ended up striking a blow for anyone who will ever have a beef with any Connecticut lawyer.
As counsel for the Connecticut Bank and Trust Company, Mr.
Chester slapped a lien on Mr.
Willey's property after he had missed some payments.
To Mr.
Willey, the fault lay with Mr.
Chester, whose law firm at the time had moved without furnishing him with a new address.
The checks he sent to Mr.
Chester at his old venue went out on time, only to be returned.


Review/Art; The Botanist's Art: Fine Lines and Absolute Precision
New York City has many well-known art collections, but it doesn't lack for well-kept secrets, either.
Of these, the library collection of the New York Botanical Garden is surely one of the most impressive, judging from an exceptional exhibition currently at the National Academy of Design.
A celebration of the garden's centennial, this densely installed show concentrates on what might be called a major minor art form -- botanical illustration, a genre with an unusual combination of rigor and seductiveness.
As tools of scientific research, botanical illustrations demand absolute precision, so fine lines and well-placed marks are abundant.
In addition, the forms under scrutiny include some of the most graceful and complex of nature's creations, among them orchids and waterlilies.
As a result "Illustrating Nature: The Art of Botany," as the show is titled, is an almost unbeatable summertime combination, an exhibition that should appeal to all those interested in art or plants, be they Sunday painters, armchair gardeners or more serious practitioners of either form.


Chavez Bout Canceled
JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ suffered a cut on the bridge of his nose during sparring yesterday, forcing the cancellation of his superlightweight title fight next week against HAROLD BRAZIER in Las Vegas, Nev., fight officials said.
Chavez took nine stitches to sew up the cut and will not be able to fight until it heals, said JOE SAFETY, a spokesman for Don King Productions.
The World Boxing Council 140-pound title fight was on the undercard of the heavyweight fight between former champion MIKE TYSON and DONOVAN (RAZOR) RUDDOCK at the Mirage hotel-casino.


Bat Yam Journal; In Promised Land, Jobs Don't Match the Dream
All over the wide boulevards of this seaside suburb of Tel Aviv, middle-aged Jews apathetically push trash-can carts, brooms and dust pans.
Slowly, these street cleaners collect leaves, cigarette butts and other litter.
The work pays about $350 a month.
Many doing the work now are recent immigrants from the Soviet Union who held more prestigious jobs there.
They say they were scientists, doctors, engineers and the like and are taking jobs like street cleaning in desperation because of the shortage of jobs matching their skills.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-8
President Bush praised Boris Yeltsin for pushing "democratic values and free market principles," but emphasized strongly that his first loyalty is to the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Page A1
Talks on the nuclear weapons treaty between the United States and Soviet Union produced a narrowing of differences, but not enough to be able to schedule another superpower summit meeting, officials said.
A6


Homeless Man Is Accused in a Slashing
A homeless man wielding a box cutter on a crowded midtown street slashed the face of a 22-year-old woman yesterday morning after she spurned his request for a dollar, the police said.
The woman was attacked at East 49th Street, just east of Lexington Avenue, as she and hundreds of other people poured out of subways and buses on their way to work.
A half-hour later, the police captured the suspect, 33-year-old Larry Lyles, a few blocks away, sipping a cup of coffee on a street corner.


Loan-Backed Issue By Marine Midland
Marine Midland Home Equity Loan Trust 1991-A, a financial vehicle for the Buffalo-based Marine Midland Bank N.A., is selling $400 million in securities backed by home equity loans.
Underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said the securities were priced at par to yield 58 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, more than the 30-day commercial paper rate.
The initial rate will be set next Wednesday.


Review/Film; 'Rocketeer': Wings vs. Soul
The Saturday afternoon serials that spoke to the adventure-loving children in all of us are by now several generations away.
Having inspired future film makers with their miraculous derring-do, these innocent tales of heroism have since been reconstituted as bigger, more stupendous efforts than anything their originators ever imagined.
It is now possible to film a gee-whiz story with the kind of advanced technical ingenuity that would have wowed Tom Swift, but in achieving this kind of sophistication something has been lost.
The heroes of tomorrow will not take their inspiration from the movie heroics of today.
Enter "The Rocketeer," a benign adventure saga that has attractive stars, elaborate gimmicks and nice production values -- everything it needs except a personality of its own.
The idea of infusing this story with anything better than secondhand excitement appears to have been barely an afterthought, if indeed it occurred at all.
Plenty of energy has gone into making this a bustling, visually clever film with an amusing late-1930's stylishness, but the purpose of such effort is uncertain.
Something's gone wrong when the costumes and settings in a movie are substantially wittier than the people.


Bush Meets and Commends Yeltsin But Cites Support for Gorbachev
President Bush gave Boris N. Yeltsin a brief pat on the back today for pushing "democratic values and free market principles," but emphasized his own support for the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
"We have been heartened and encouraged by President Yeltsin's commitment to democratic values and free market principles, and we look forward to working with him," Mr.
Bush said in a Rose Garden appearance with the newly elected President of Russia before their meeting in the Oval Office.
"But at the same time -- I want to be very clear about this -- the United States will continue to maintain the closest possible official relationship with the Soviet Government of President Gorbachev."


I.B.M. Sees A Gloomy 2d Quarter
I.B.M. told Wall Street analysts yesterday that its earnings for the second quarter were likely to fall below expectations and hinted that new cost-cutting moves could soon lead to further special charges.
The International Business Machines Corporation, based in Armonk, N.Y., also broadened its explanation of why it is ailing as it struggles to return to earlier levels of profitability and dominance of the industry.


Honors
*
New York Women in Communications has elected Fortuna Calvo-Roth as president.
She is the co-owner of Spanam Associates-Nueva Onda, a Spanish-language media company, and a partner and board member of Vista magazine.


Comments Curbed in Rape Case
The judge in the rape case against William K. Smith has imposed restrictions on out-of-court comments by lawyers and law-enforcement agencies, but her order was less sweeping than one she outlined in a court hearing two weeks ago.
The judge, Mary Lupo of Circuit Court, barred prosecutors, the Palm Beach police, defense lawyers and their investigators and all courtroom personnel from making statements about the character, credibility, reputation or criminal record of Mr.
Smith or the witnesses.
The order, issued at a hearing on Wednesday, also prohibits statements about the possibility that a plea would be entered, the content of any confession, the performance or results of any examination or test and an opinion about Mr.
Smith's guilt or innocence.


Selling Planes That Won the War
President Bush and President Francois Mitterrand of France have recently called for limiting arms exports, but their message has clearly not sunk in at the Paris Air Show, the world's largest showplace for fighter-bombers, attack helicopters and air-to-air missiles.
Since the 10-day show opened on June 13, dozens of combat aircraft have been parked on the tarmac at Le Bourget Airport, including an oversized Soviet MIG-31, a British Tornado GR, a French Mirage 2000 and a stubby Yugoslav G-4 Super Galeb bomber.
But the aircraft drawing the most attention among the 400,000 expected visitors is Lockheed's F-117A Stealth fighter, whose pinpoint bombing wreaked so much damage on Iraq during the Persian Gulf war.


Dinkins to Crack Down on Guns in Public Housing
Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday that the city would mount a major campaign to evict public housing tenants who own guns illegally.
In a dramatic reflection of his theme, his speech in a Brooklyn housing project was interrupted by the noise of nearby gunfire.
The plan, modeled on programs under which hundreds of drug dealers have been evicted, would be the most sweeping effort of its kind in the nation, although a similar effort has been mounted in Chicago.
But civil liberties advocates in New York immediately challenged the constitutionality of evicting people merely for possessing guns illegally.


The Spoken Word
LECTURE AND WALKING TOUR, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Pathway to Freedom: An African-American Heritage Walking Tour," by Sherrill Wilson, a cultural anthropologist.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Admission: $12; $11 for the elderly; $6 for students.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
READING, Bernard and Steve's, 277 Church Street, Manhattan.
James Purdy, author of "In a Shallow Grave," "Malcolm," and "In the Hollow of His Hand," will read from his books and plays.
Sunday at 9:30 P.M.
Admission: $3.
Information: (212) 979-7340.


Arms Talks Advance, but a Summit Meeting in June Is Ruled Out
The United States and the Soviet Union said today that they had narrowed their differences over a treaty reducing their long-range nuclear weapons, but not enough to be able to schedule another superpower summit meeting.
Speaking to reporters after a two-hour meeting, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh, said that they had largely resolved one of the three major issues holding up the strategic arms reduction treaty, known as Start.


Art in Review
Michael Rees 303 Gallery 89 Greene Street Manhattan Through June 29
The debut exhibition of Michael Rees, a 33-year-old sculptor, has moments of insight and promise, but also its share of problem spots.
One is that the sculptures on view, most of them wall pieces, are crowded together, which doesn't speak well of the artist's sense of space.


Review/Film; Dreams Of Leaving In 'Runner' From Iran
In the poignant opening scene of Amir Naderi's film "The Runner," a ragged young boy standing at the edge of a harbor waves and shouts imploringly at the silhouette of an oil tanker slipping silently through the mist.
The setting is the Iranian port city of Abadan.
Amiro (Madjid Niroumand), the film's subject, is a homeless 13-year-old who lives in the hulk of an abandoned ship and ekes out a living picking through garbage.
Variations of the scene recur several times in the 1985 Iranian film, which is at Film Forum 1.
Amiro is as transfixed by airplanes as he is by ships and spends the few coins he is able to scrounge on aviation magazines that he cannot read.
After taking himself to school where he begins learning the Farsi alphabet, he turns the letters into an incantation that he hurls to the sky with a wild, furious determination while standing on a rock surrounded by pounding surf.


Review/Film; Another Marriage of Convenience
The French-Canadian romance "A Paper Wedding" is a more serious, less stylish version of "Green Card," another story of star-crossed strangers who meet and marry before they fall in love.
Although the two films were reportedly made independently of each other, the coincidences that link them are nothing short of amazing.
The heroines of both stories are more or less scholarly types, whereas the heroes are immigrants holding restaurant jobs.
Each hero proves to be a lot more sensitive and distinguished than he initially appears.
Each heroine has a suspicious erstwhile beau who resents her new situation and won't go away.
Each newly-married couple must go to elaborate lengths to hoodwink immigration authorities.
Each film has its little misunderstandings about household trivia and international cuisine.


2 Guilty in Pentagon Case
A Federal District Court jury has convicted two former executives of Litton Data Systems of illegally obtaining confidential Pentagon procurement data to help their company obtain three Navy contracts.
On Wednesday, the former executives -- Thomas D. McAusland, Litton's former vice president for business development, and Christopher Pafort, former director of business development -- were found guilty of conspiracy, illegally converting Government property and wire fraud.


Hungry for Culture? Or Dinner? Have Both
WHETHER Joseph Papp or the organizers of the New York Philharmonic's free concerts in the park like it or not, they have given their audiences dinner theater.
Look around the Great Lawn of Central Park during a concert or before a performance by the New York Shakespeare Festival any weekend, and all you see is people eating and drinking.
For some who find that culture makes them hungry, the solution is usually to be found in last-minute hot dogs from a pushcart vendor or the sandwiches and pastries sold outside the Delacorte Theater.
But others devote the same kind of planning to the open-air feast as they would for a dinner party.
It's not uncommon to see picnics in the park by candlelight with buckets holding bottles of wine and steaks sizzling on portable hibachis.


U.S.-Backed Shift in Policy Is Rejected at World Bank
The executive board of the World Bank today rejected an agreement made by the bank's management to provide greater private-sector support in developing countries in exchange for United States backing of an increase in the capital of the bank's private-sector lending arm.
Bank and Administration officials said only a handful of the bank's 22 board members endorsed the pact between the United States Treasury and Barber B. Conable Jr., the bank's president, who is a former Republican Congressman.
No consensus was reached, and no vote was taken at the tense and somber meeting, the officials said.


Uncovered Short Sales Are Up 0.4% on Big Board
The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short and not yet covered for the monthly period ending June 14 rose by 2.5 million, or about four-tenths of 1 percent, to 712.8 million.
On May 15, the figure was 710.3 million, down about 1.8 percent from the previous month's figure.
The latest figure is equivalent to about seven-tenths of 1 percent of the total shares listed on the Big Board.


Review/Art; Making the Chaotic Manageable
"Enclosures and Encounters: Architectural Aspects of Recent Sculpture," this year's show at the Storm King Art Center here, can seem chaotic at first.
Not much immediately connects Dennis Adams's bus shelters with Donna Dennis's miniaturized buildings, which are a cross between the works of Red Grooms and Edward Hopper.
Nor does Siah Armajani's abstract and plain-spoken "Elements No. 24," composed of objects like doors, windows and a chair, communicate in the same language as Lauren Ewing's "Bank," with its inscriptions and video displays wryly commenting on the public and private meanings of "value."
But the strength of this exhibition of works mostly from the 1980's is precisely in covering a gamut of approaches to the idea of architecture as sculpture, ranging from the pre industrial to the most intensely urban.
On one end of this spectrum is the earliest work in the show, from the early 1970's, Alice Aycock's "Low Building With Dirt Roof," a primitive shelter hunkered down in the landscape.
On the other end are the bus shelters of Mr.
Adams, with their Constructivist-derived designs and politically charged photographs and text panels, conceptually wedded to the city streets.


Probation and Therapy Help Some Drug Users
Combining the therapeutic principles of addiction programs and the incentive contracts popular in the juvenile court, a judge here is using the engine of the criminal justice system to prod adult offenders into drug treatment.
The experiment, conducted by Judge Jeffrey T. Tauber of Oakland Municipal Court, has attracted the attention of criminal justice and drug abuse experts, who say it is the first serious effort to get adults charged with drug possession out of the courts and prisons and into rehabilitation.


A Debt Offering By Charlotte, N.C.
Charlotte, N.C., is tentatively offering $167.6 million in tax-exempt certificates of participation to finance a convention center project.
Underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc. are offering a maximum yield of about 7.071 percent for an issue due in 2021 and about 7.046 percent in 2011.
Yields on shorter-maturity serials range from 5.85 percent in 1996 to 6.45 percent in 2001 and 6.65 percent in 2003.


V. G. N. Lawford, 80, Former British Envoy
Valentine George Nicholas Lawford, a former member of the British diplomatic service, died Tuesday at North Shore Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 80 years old and lived in Oyster Bay Cove, L.I.
Mr.
Lawford, who was in the hospital for a series of tests, died suddenly and the cause has not yet been determined, a spokesman for the family said.


Review/Theater; Lithuanian Troupe Tells The Tale of Oppression
While the theme of political oppression has quite understandably dominated nearly all the dramatic literature from east of the Oder River or the Bohemian Forest for the last several decades, it has not been a topic of primary concern to the English-speaking stage.
By and large, the territory of the Gulag, or even the threat of the Gulag, is unknown to Western writers.
If Western theatergoers have dutifully attended productions of East European playwrights, like those of Vaclav Havel at the Public Theater and elsewhere, for example, and found them slightly dull, it is probably because we don't really recognize the terrain.
We do not live in constant fear of a midnight or even a noontime knock on the door.
If writers in the West have any real fear of prison, the cause is probably fiddling on their income taxes, not their last play.


Brazil Plans Debt Payment
Brazil, the world's largest delinquent debtor country, agreed yesterday to make a cash down payment of $900 million toward the $8 billion in late interest it owes foreign banks, according to William R. Rhodes, a senior executive at Citibank.
The $900 million payment, due on July 1, would be followed by monthly installments totaling another $1.1 billion by December, for a total of $2 billion in cash payments.
The Brazilian Senate approved the plan for paying the past-due interest late on Wednesday.


Wrestlers Dispute Link to Drug Case
The World Wrestling Federation said today that it had been victimized by reports that a suburban Harrisburg doctor supplied steroids to five professional wrestlers, including Hulk Hogan.
Dr.
George Zahorian 3d is to go on trial in Federal court Monday on charges of supplying steroids to the athletes, but Hogan's lawyer is trying to keep the former federation champion from having to testify in the case.


Yen Gains Against Dollar; Gold Closes Slightly Lower
The dollar retreated sharply against the Japanese yen and ended mixed against other currencies yesterday amid confusion over this weekend's meeting of leading industrial nations.
Gold was slightly lower after rising overseas.
In New York, the dollar closed at 138.22 yen, down from 140.05 yen late on Wednesday.
Earlier in Tokyo, the dollar fell to 139.20 yen, from 141.10 yen at Wednesday's close.
In London, the dollar fell to 138.60 yen.


At the Movies
Wine as the Hero
Do your tastes run to vintage wines?
The French Riviera?
Romance of the sort that summons up visions of Cary Grant and Grace Kelly?


President to Become C&amp;S/Sovran Chief
The C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation said yesterday that Dennis C. Bottorff, the bank holding company's president and chief operating officer, would become chief executive next year in accordance with a merger agreement.
Mr.
Bottorff, who will retain the president's post, will succeed Bennett A. Brown on Jan. 1.
In April, the board persuaded Mr.
Brown, who is 62 years old, to forestall his planned retirement at the end of the year and remain chairman at least through 1992.
Mr.
Bottorff said yesterday that no decision had been made on whether a new chief operating officer would be chosen.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Extended the contract of Sparky Anderson, manager, through the 1994 season.
National League


Asea Brown Unit Plans Furloughs
Combustion Engineering Systems Inc., a subsidiary of Asea Brown Boveri Ltd. of Switzerland, has offered its 1,000 employees two choices and given them until Friday to decide: take a two-year leave or quit and receive severance benefits.
Richard R. Cronin, the president of Combustion Engineering Systems, described the options in a memorandum dated June 12.
The document cited low market demand and made it clear that layoffs were coming for the company, which manufactures fuel boilers.
Last year, the company laid off 200 people.


Detroit Journal; With Debt on the Menu, A Monument Is Closed
The London Chop House, for 53 years an unofficial eating club for the Motor City's powerful and celebrated, served lunch for the last time Monday and then closed its doors, a victim of shifting dining habits and changing demographics.
The Chop House, in the end, did not give up easily.
The restaurant's management, saddled with heavy losses caused by the lack of patrons, announced that it was "mothballing" the chestnut-paneled restaurant two blocks from the Detroit River and would consider reopening only if economic conditions improved.


British Files Hide Truth About Hess Plot
To the Editor:
I was interested to see your June 8 front-page article about my father ("Rudolf Hess's Daring Flight: K.G.B. Files Tell New Tales").


41 Warm-Up Pitches Later, Perez Is Still Hurting
The simulated game never began.
Pascual Perez threw 41 warm-up pitches in the Yankee bullpen today, then stopped.
Perez won't be coming off the 15-day disabled list this weekend, and he probably won't attempt to throw another pitch before next week.


An Urban Oasis as the Temperature Climbs to 92


Hormel to Alter Claims In Soup Commercials
Geo. A. Hormel &amp; Company will be diluting some of its spicier soup commercials.
In response to a complaint filed by the Campbell Soup Company, the National Advertising Review Board ruled yesterday that Hormel needed to modify the claims about its Micro Cup Hearty Soup line.
The Hormel spots said people preferred the Austin, Minn., company's soups over Campbell's microwave soups by an average of 2 to 1.


1 Dead as Train Rams Another
A Burlington Northern work train slammed into the rear of a freight train hauling coal and caught fire early Wednesday, killing an engineer and critically injuring another crew member, a spokesman for the railroad said.
The wreck occurred about 20 miles north of this east-central Wyoming town.


India Party Chooses a New Prime Minister


High Court Limits Time To Sue for Stock Fraud
In a ruling that could bar the Federal court door to some investors who contend that they have been victims of securities fraud, the Supreme Court said today that time limits imposed by Federal law in bringing such cases took precedence over more generous limitations authorized by the states.
The 5-to-4 decision is a victory for a New Jersey law firm that was sued in Oregon by investors who said they had been defrauded.


Our Towns
In the interest of furthering human knowledge and improving medical care for millions of people, not excluding herself, Gail Davoll made a major personal sacrifice the other day.
She donated her cold to science.
This unselfish act of charity had nothing to do with the $40.


Art in Review
Norman Bluhm Paintings 1960-65 Washburn Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through June 29
This group of bold, beautiful paintings from the early 1960's follows displays at the same gallery of both earlier and more recent work by Norman Bluhm.
Mr.
Bluhm, who was born in Chicago in 1921, studied with Mies van der Rohe in the late 1930's, but, after serving in World World II, decided against architecture as a career and spent the late 1940's and early 50's in Paris.
He painted translucent images full of layered washes of color that gave way to more gestural, expressionistic abstractions.
He championed the New York School after returning to the United States in 1956.
The works on view here, from the early 1960's, show a stage in that period of his development.


At Columbus Circle, a Jangle of Issue


Edward E. Azar, 53, A Middle East Scholar
Edward E. Azar, a Middle East scholar and former head of the Center for International Development and Conflict Management at the University of Maryland, died Tuesday at his home in Washington.
He was 53 years old.
He died of cancer, said R. Cark Hantzmon, a member of the law firm handling Mr.
Azar's estate.


Court Opinion Holding That Libel Rests On 'Material Change' to Quotation
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision yesterday in Masson v.
New Yorker, holding that fabricated quotations may be libelous if they materially alter the meaning of what the quoted person actually said.


Rescue 1 Marks Its 75th Anniversary and Dedicates Its New Firehouse


Notes Are Priced By Rhode Island
A $250 million note offering by Rhode Island was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Lazard Freres &amp; Company.
The sale of the tax anticipation notes, which are due on June 30, 1992, was divided into three series, all given a 5.1 percent coupon.


On Stage, and Off
Casting Call for Tony Nominators
There's a big shakeup going on within the Tony Awards Nominating Committee, the group of 13 theater professionals who choose the nominees the rest of us watch on television.
Traditionally, the big complaint with the committee has been that its members are too old and too cliquish, out of touch with younger talent.
But this year's committee also drew fire from the Tony Administration Committee -- the Broadway producers and theater owners who run the Tonys -- for its voting procedures.
Members of the administration committee accuse nominators of unfairly filibustering for favorite candidates after an initial vote.
Although the committee's bylaws allow discussion after a vote, one nominator confirms that this year changes were made in seven categories.


Kuwait's Oil Industry Is Reviving
Kuwait's ravaged oil industry is creeping back to life, with modest exports beginning and crude production slowly climbing, the Oil Minister said today.
The Minister, Hamoud Abdullah al-Raqba, said that by the end of September the emirate would be able to produce and refine enough oil to provide for all its domestic consumption, which is the equivalent of nearly 150,000 barrels a day.


Howard Butcher 3d, 89, Broker; Guided Pennsylvania's Top Firm
Howard Butcher 3d, a leading stockbroker and entrepreneur in Philadelphia for almost 70 years, died Wednesday at a medical facility at Beaumont, a retirement community in Rosemont, Pa.
He was 89 years old and lived in Villanova, Pa.
He died of cancer, said his son, Howard Butcher 4th.


Books of The Times; A Russian Emigre World of Dreams and Griefs
The Tattered Cloak And Other Novels By Nina Berberova Translated by Marian Schwartz. 308 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
The six short "novels" -- or longish short stories -- in this dazzling collection by Nina Berberova were first published during the 1930's and 40's in Europe.
Born in St.
Petersburg in 1901, Ms.
Berberova had initially welcomed the Revolution, but in 1922, as the persecution of intellectuals accelerated, she fled to Paris with her lover, the poet Vladislav Khodassevitch.
There, and in Berlin, she became part of the community of Russian emigres, struggling to invent new lives for themselves far from home.


Review/Film; 'My Father's Glory,' From Pagnol's Memoirs
Yves Robert's "My Father's Glory" ("Le Gloire de Mon Pere"), adapted from the first volume of Marcel Pagnol's memoirs of his childhood, is about a little boy named Marcel, born just before the turn of the century in a village in the south of France.
Joseph, his father, is a schoolteacher.
He wears glasses, a dark suit and a spotlessly clean white shirt every day.
His mother, the beautiful Augustine, is a seamstress with the manner of an angel.
She seems to float, if not to fly.


Traffic Alert
Safe Haven Street Fair: West End Avenue will be closed tomorrow from 72d to 79th Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Burleigh Wartes, Photographer, 58, For Documentaries
Burleigh Wartes, a cinematographer who worked on three Academy Award-winning documentaries, died Tuesday at his home in Norwalk, Conn.
He was 58 years old.
His family declined to give the cause of death.


Canada Rejects Bid For de Havilland
The Canadian Government has rejected a proposal by a French-Italian consortium to buy the de Havilland division of Boeing of Canada Ltd., but it invited the group to make another offer within 30 days.
No price was disclosed.
Michael H. Wilson, Canada's trade minister, said he was not satisfied that the bid by Aerospatiale S.A. of France and Alenia S.p.A. of Italy would benefit Canada.
The companies have said they want the Government to contribute $500 million (Canadian), or $440 million (United States), over 10 years for research and development.
Boeing said in 1989 that it would sell the unprofitable de Havilland unit.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.70
5.80
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.57
7.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.76
7.65
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.13
8.17
8.53
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.46
8.50
8.48
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.50
9.55
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.24
7.25
7.54
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Reviews/Art; Nude Yet Not Exposed: Seven Elusive Charcoals
Alfred Leslie has the rare ability to make art that clearly comes out of the academic tradition without being academic.
In his seven charcoal drawings at the Barbara Flynn Gallery in SoHo, he continues to work from a model.
And he continues to approach the female nude both expressionistically and abstractly, giving the human body a brash, elusive life of its own while turning it into a play of light and line.
These are challenging works.
The nudes can seem either entirely aware of being looked at or entirely absorbed in a movement or mood.
Although they are nude and often off guard, none seem naked or exposed.
They are alone in the vast blank whiteness of the paper, yet the paper can seem as dense as the space in a Cubist or a Willem de Kooning painting.
These drawings are curious and searching, yet they radiate nonchalance and ease.


Supreme Court Activism Has Lost Its Meaning; Assault on Free Speech
To the Editor:
Regardless of one's position on abortion, the Supreme Court decision in Rust v.
Sullivan, which upholds Federal regulations barring discussion of abortion in family-planning clinics that receive Federal money, should be profoundly disturbing.
It is one thing to welcome fewer abortions, even at the expense of legalizing a double standard that mandates inadequate medical care for the poor under certain circumstances.
It is quite another to permit an assault upon the First Amendment.


House Panel Rejects Ban on Abortion Advice
Abortion rights supporters won an unexpectedly big victory today when the House Appropriations Committee voted, 35 to 20, to prohibit the Bush Administration from enforcing a regulation barring federally financed family planning clinics from discussing abortion with patients.
The regulation, upheld last month by the Supreme Court, was denounced in today's session as "an assault on the medical profession and on the truth," and as "a mandate to commit malpractice" by Representative John Porter, the Illinois Republican who led the effort to ban the regulation.


Race to Replace Gray as Leader Is in High Gear
While it became official only today, the resignation of Representative William H. Gray 3d as the third-ranking House Democrat was already old news on Capitol Hill, where his colleagues were besieged by the two prime candidates for his job, Representatives David E. Bonior and Steny H. Hoyer.
"The mourning stopped in about one hour, and the speculation and dealing about his successor began," said Representative Wayne Owens, Democrat of Utah.
"It was almost unseemly. I guess that says something about having 435 politicians on that floor who were all taught to land on their feet."


Review/Art; 2 Austrians Who Find Anxiety in the Familiar
Franz West is a 44-year-old Viennese artist whose raw, offbeat work invariably offers sculptural and intellectual surprise.
"Pis-Aller (Doubled)," his and Mathis Esterhazy's installation within the pristine white walls of the Ealan Wingate Gallery in SoHo includes eight pairs of objects, most of them as familiar as rakes, baskets and sieves.
Half are perched on white pedestals.
Two of the objects not on pedestals are thin, 10-foot steel rods.
Each hangs in the center of a room, like a cord that when pulled would initiate a bizarre ceremony or act.
The meaning of these and all the other clean-shaped, geometrical objects is definitely messy, and their psychological disruptiveness transforms the gallery into a cross between a garden, a kitchen, a psychoanalyst's study and a torture chamber.


Market Place; Price Co. Thrives In Retailing Niche
THE Price Company, the retailer that created the warehouse membership store, still holds the affection of analysts and investors, even though it has slipped a rung in sales volume rankings as competitive giants have risen.
In recent weeks, Price's stock has been hewing close to its yearly high of $58.50.
It closed yesterday at $55.25, up 50 cents a share in over-the-counter trading.
Price, founded in 1979 and based in San Diego, was recently surpassed in total sales by Sam's Wholesale Clubs, a division of Wal-Mart Stores Inc.
It also faces invigorated competition from the highly successful Costco Wholesale Corporation and the K Mart Corporation's Pace Membership Warehouses and Price Savers stores.
But Price remains the standard-bearer in terms of highest sales per store, inventory turnover rate and profit margin.


Treasury Securities Climb in Price
An unexpectedly large increase in weekly unemployment claims helped to push up prices of Treasury securities yesterday.
Initial claims rose by 47,000 in the week ended June 8, to 448,000, wiping out the decline recorded during the last week in May.


Flights Are Set From Vietnam
Northwest Airlines said today that it would begin flying to Vietnam next week, becoming the first United States airline to do so since the Vietnam War ended in 1975.
Although the United States embargo on trade with Vietnam remains in effect, Northwest has received permission from Washington to fly out Vietnamese emigrants on a humanitarian basis, said James Reinnoldt, the airline's regional manager in Bangkok.


POLICE ARE BACKED ON BUS SEARCHES
The Supreme Court ruled today, 6 to 3, that the police did not necessarily violate the Constitution by boarding long-distance buses and obtaining passengers' permission to search their luggage for narcotics.
The decision overturned a ruling by the Florida Supreme Court that had essentially prohibited a technique, known as "working the buses," that has been employed by the authorities more and more in the war on drugs.


Kenya Ends Ban On South Africa
Kenya has ended a 15-year ban on sports ties with South Africa and opened the way for athletes from each country to compete in the other.


Arguing About America; A Common Culture or a Land of Diversity? That Is the Curriculum Debate in New York
The battle over the New York State social studies curriculum is fundamentally a battle over the idea of America.
Is the United States a land where immigrants and minorities mute their separate histories and traditions and to adopt a common, if amorphous, culture?
Or is it a land where ethnicity should be celebrated over and above any shared heritage?


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 548 money market mutual funds decreased by $1.01 billion, to $460.37 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 196 institutional funds decreased by $664.6 million, to $131.04 billion.
The 92 broker-dealer funds decreased by $763.1 million, to $150.45 billion, the institute said.
The assets of the 260 general-purpose funds showed the only rise.
They gained $418.8 million, to $178.89 billion.


Manager of Savings Bailout to Be Ousted
A private disagreement at the highest levels of the Government about how to mollify Congress and win more money for the faltering savings and loan bailout was resolved today with a decision to oust the manager of the taxpayer rescue.
Acceding to the Bush Administration, L. William Seidman, the nation's senior banking regulator, agreed to replace his protege, David C. Cooke.
Mr.
Cooke is a 24-year career official he named as executive director of the Resolution Trust Corporation when it was created in 1989.


Realignment At Quaker Oats
The Quaker Oats Company yesterday realigned its International Grocery Products organization and announced several executive changes.
The Chicago-based foods company recently reorganized its $1.4 billion European business.
But Michael J. Callahan, the executive vice president for International Grocery Products, was unable to move to Europe to head operations.
He will resign on Aug. 1.


Misquotations, Measured
In ruling that Jeffrey Masson, a psychoanalyst, is entitled to a jury trial on his charge that The New Yorker libeled him by putting words in his mouth, the Supreme Court has dealt carefully and wisely with delicate issues of personal reputation and free speech.
To protect reputation, the Court acknowledges that misquoting someone can be libelous.
But to safeguard free speech, the Court won't let public figures sue unless the misquotation deliberately and materially changes the meaning of what the speaker actually said.


Apple to Cut Executive Pay
As part of an effort to reduce costs, top executives at Apple Computer Inc. will take pay cuts, effective June 28, the company said today.
John Sculley, Apple's chairman and chief executive, will take a 15 percent cut; Michael Spindler, Apple's president and chief operating officer will take a 10 percent cut, as will all members of the executive management team and all senior vice presidents, all other executives will take 5 percent cuts in salary.


Review/Film; Messed-Up Lives in 'Dying Young'
It takes a special kind of person to embark on a two-week trip, find a charming cottage in a romantic coastal town, set up housekeeping, make a set of new friends and show up for a Christmas party in a strapless white evening gown, something that could neither have been packed nor purchased by any reasonable means.
To do this it takes a movie star of the old school, the kind whose overriding personality is never fettered by the specifics of any given role.
Julia Roberts is that kind of star, and she gets away with murder in stories that nobody else could make nearly so disarming, stories that become Julia Roberts movies no matter who else happens to be on hand.
She does it again in "Dying Young," a pretty, decorative movie about messy lives and a tale best appreciated by those willing to check their taste for realism at the door.


Opponents of Louisiana's New Law Say It Could Limit Use of Some Contraceptives
In its drive to challenge Louisiana's strict new abortion law, the American Civil Liberties Union suggested yesterday that the legislation could bar doctors from prescribing contraceptive methods like the intrauterine device or low-dose birth control pills.
Although the law says nothing about birth control, it defines pregnancy as beginning at conception, and the civil liberties union said the IUD and the low-dose pill work by thwarting pregnancy after conception.


Taking Favors in the White House
Three days into his Presidency, George Bush shared his thoughts on integrity in government service with members of his White House staff: "It's not really very complicated," he said.
"It's a question of knowing right from wrong, avoiding conflicts of interest, bending over backwards to see that there's not even a perception of conflict of interest."


Chicago Adds 2 New Futures
The Chicago Board of Trade will begin trading two new futures contracts on Friday whose prices will be tied to the interest rate on financial arrangements known as swaps.
In a swap, two parties, typically a bank and a company, exchange interest payments.
The bank earns fees and the company protects itself against swings in rates.
So, for example, a bank like Citibank might agree to pay to one of its customers -- for example, I.B.M. -- a floating interest payment every six months on $100 million.
I.B.M., in turn, would agree to pay Citibank a fixed rate of interest on the $100 million.


PLAN TO EMPHASIZE MINORITY CULTURES IGNITES A DEBATE
With a sweeping blueprint for amending the teaching of history and social studies in New York's public schools, state education officials today set in motion a sharp debate over how much to emphasize the roles of nonwhite cultures.
The revisions, offered by a state panel of teachers and scholars, presented a radically different program for public education in New York State.


Leary Remains Mystery For Yanks and Merrill But Not for Blue Jays
No one seems to have an explanation that fits.
Tim Leary is struggling, and all anyone can offer is theories.
In the Yankee manager's office tonight, Stump Merrill said that Leary had lost the drop on his split-fingered fastball.
Outside the coaches' room, Mark Connor said he thought the problem might have something to do with the way Leary releases the ball.
In the clubhouse, Leary said he is simply making bad pitches at bad times.


Boaters, Put on Those Flotation Devices
To the Editor:
The death of Officer Kenneth Hansen of the Police Department's Harbor Unit during a routine rescue drill (news article, June 12) is a sad reminder of the danger lurking for boaters in waters that are swept by strong currents such as those surrounding New York City.
Officer Hansen was not wearing a flotation device because he was simulating the conditions facing the Harbor Unit, Coast Guard and others when they come to the rescue of those capsized or fallen overboard.
Many boaters who must be plucked out of the briny sea are not wearing such devices.
Nor are they required to.


Hare Krishna Gets 30 Years
The leader of a Hare Krishna commune who had been convicted of authorizing the murder, kidnapping and beating of his devotees to protect an illegal multimillion-dollar enterprise was sentenced today to 30 years in prison.
The sentence, imposed by Judge Robert Merhige Jr. of Federal District Court, was the culmination of a years-long battle by the Government against the defendant, Kirtanananda Swami Bhaktipada, who in 1968 founded the 4,000-acre New Vrindaban commune, near Moundsville, W.Va., 85 miles southwest of Pittsburgh.


New Campaigns
*
The Uniroyal tiger is returning to national television after a 10-year hiatus.
Wyse Advertising, Cleveland, has created a 30-second spot featuring a new animated tiger for the Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Company, Akron, Ohio.
The spot is appearing on sports-oriented programming on ESPN and CNN, and is being made available to Uniroyal dealers to run in their local markets. *
Dell Computer Corporation, Austin, Tex., has introduced its first television advertising campaign.
The campaign, created by Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising, San Francisco, discusses the top ranking that Dell's personal computer received in a recent J. D. Power &amp; Associates survey.


Armstrong Case Is Overturned
Armstrong World Industries said a Federal District Judge in Newark had overturned a jury verdict against the interior furnishings maker.
Last April, the jury in the civil case awarded $238 million to Industry Network Inc..
The company, which was based in Paramus, N.J., had accused Armstrong of forcing it out of the business of producing videotapes for retailers who sell floor coverings.
The jury awarded about $38 million in compensatory damages and $200 million in punitive damages, but Judge John W. Bissell said his review of the three-month trial had convinced him that the law did not support the verdict.
Armstrong's shares rose 87.5 cents today, closing at $29.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


For First Time, Council Uses Power to Block Landmark
The New York City Council used its new power to overturn a landmarks designation for the first time yesterday, rejecting the landmark status granted to a brick row house that was once home to the composer Antonin Dvorak.
The decision allows Beth Israel Medical Center to proceed with plans to build an AIDS hospice on the site of the house on East 17th Street in Manhattan.
In the 26-year history of the landmarks law, only about a dozen designations have been modified or overturned -- all of them by the city's Board of Estimate, which was abolished last year by changes in the City Charter.


A Copy of Declaration Said to Be an Original
A copy of the Declaration of Independence, ignored for nearly a century because it was thought to be a reprint, was determined to be an original on Wednesday, the Maine Historical Society here said.
Another first-edition copy was sold for $2.4 million at Sotheby's auction house in New York on June 13.


Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond Names a New Partner
Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond yesterday announced the agency's first partner not named Kirshenbaum or Bond.
He is William Oberlander 3d, 31 years old, who joined the agency last year as creative director.
Asked if he would be added to Richard Kirshenbaum and Jonathan Bond in the agency's name, Mr.
Oberlander joked that his name was too long to do that.


Art in Review
Joel-Peter Witkin Pace/Macgill 32 East 57th Street Manhattan Through June 29
Joel-Peter Witkin is not a photographer as some people might still narrowly define one: he works over his photographs, artificially making them appear old, and manufacturing bizarre images that involve severed limbs, physical oddities and the occasional art-historical reference.
Courbet, Rubens, Gericault, Bosch, Duchamp and Diane Arbus seem to share honors in Mr.
Witkin's artistic pantheon.


Masques and Operas Of England in 1600's
Four 17th-century English masques and operas are to be presented by Opera at the Academy, the experimental opera group in residence at the New York Academy of Art, 419 Lafayette Street, Manhattan.
They are John Blow's "Venus and Adonis"; Henry Purcell's "Saul and the Witch of Endor" and "Blessed Virgin's Expostulation," and Matthew Locke's "Cupid and Death." The directors are to be Christopher Alden, John Kelly and Travis Preston, with Paul Echols conducting the Academy Consort.
The performances are to take place at 7:45 P.M. on Monday and at 8 P.M. on Tuesday, Thursday and next Friday.
Monday's performance, a benefit, will be preceded by a champagne reception at 7 P.M.
Tickets for the benefit are $50; for the other nights, $20.
Information: (212) 677-8960.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Tuesday about Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, and two United States Senators who have developed the Management Corps -- a project that sent 17 business executives to Latvia as consultants to entrepreneurs -- misidentified one senator and an aide to Mr.
Markey.
The Senator is Robert J. Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska; the aide is Kristan Van Hook.


Court Widens Police Searches
By 6 to 3, the Supreme Court ruled that the police may board long-distance buses and request passengers' permission to search their luggage for narcotics.
Page A13.


Sanitation Workers Begin Slowdown
Sanitation Department employees, angry over layoff notices sent to nearly 450 of their colleagues, began a work slowdown yesterday, delaying garbage collection across the city.
It was not clear how long the slowdown would continue.
Sanitation Department officials said they might be forced to assign workers on overtime to complete the work of disposal.


Corrections
A music review on Saturday about the American Festival of Microtonal Music at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University misstated the festival's first year of concerts.
It was 1981, not 1988.


EXECUTIVES
*
Advest Inc., Hartford, a brokerage and underwriter, named Murry M. Beach senior vice president and head of corporate finance. *
Apple Bank for Savings Inc., a unit of Apple Bank Corp., named Robin Thomson senior vice president of commercial real estate lending.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Joan Caulfield, the actress, reversed the identities of the male stars in two films.
Bing Crosby starred in "Blue Skies," Bob Hope in "Monsieur Beaucaire."


Drifter Sought Bellevue Help Before Murder
Less than a month before he was arrested on charges of stabbing a woman to death near Central Park, a mentally disturbed drifter sought treatment in Bellevue Hospital's emergency room.
But he was sent away with a number for a cocaine hot line, hospital officials said.
The homeless man, Kevin McKiever, who is accused of the June 8 murder of Alexis Ficks Welsh, showed up at the hospital at 4 A.M. on May 14 and was released four hours later, said a hospital spokeswoman, Lorinda Klein.


Alain Kagan Wed To Miss Hochman
Elizabeth Anne Hochman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Raymond B. Hochman of New York, was married in Paris yesterday to Alain Edouard Xavier Kagan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henri Kagan of Paris.
Deputy Mayor Martine Aurillac officiated at the Seventh Arrondissement Town Hall.
Mrs.
Kagan, 32 years old, is an associate in the Paris law office of S. G. Archibald.
She is a cum laude graduate of Harvard University and received a master's degree in international affairs and a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father, a gastroenterologist, is an attending physician at New York Hospital and an associate clinical professor of medicine at Cornell University Medical College.
Her mother, Elaine S. Hochman, is an art historian.


Ameritrust Delays Merger Decision
The Ameritrust Corporation said it was delaying a decision on a merger offer from the National City Corporation while it reviewed its options.
In May, after privately approaching Ameritrust's board and receiving no immediate response, National City went public with its merger offer, calling the move the best option for both of the Cleveland-based bank holding companies.
National City said today that it would not comment on the Ameritrust statement.
The proposed merger would create the nation's 17th-largest bank holding company, with assets of more than $34 billion and about 670 branches in Ohio, Michigan, Indiana and Kentucky.
Ameritrust said it had set no deadline for responding to National City's offer.
Ameritrust's shares were unchanged at $21.875 in over-the-counter trading today, while National City's rose 75 cents, closing at $36.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Buyers Choose Airbus and Boeing
Airbus Industrie, a four-nation European consortium, said today that the International Lease Finance Corporation had placed orders for up to 15 Airbus jets in a deal worth more than $960 million.
Airbus's leading competitor, the Boeing Company, said Thai Airways International had placed firm orders for six 777 jets, and secured options on six more, bringing the total potential value of the agreement to $2 billion.


Festin and Lite Light Could Enliven Belmont's Fourth of July Weekend
Two of racing's glamour horses of the season seemed ready to decamp from California yesterday and fly to New York in major changes of plans.
In one switch, the 5-year-old handicap star Festin will skip the $1 million Hollywood Gold Cup next weekend and appear instead in the $500,000 Suburban Handicap on July 4 at Belmont Park.
In the other, which is still being argued by the horse's owners and trainer, M. C. Hammer's filly Lite Light would stage a return match with the champion Meadow


A.T.&amp; T. Venture For Hong Kong
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said it had joined a venture to bring its business-messaging technology to Hong Kong.
The venture links A.T.&amp; T. with Hong Kong's Hutchison Telecommunications Ltd., a unit of Hutchison Whampoa Ltd., one of the four trading houses that founded the colony a century ago.
The business will be called Hutchison A.T.&amp; T. Network Services.
A.T.&amp; T. said that Hutchison would initially market global messaging services, like electronic mail, that were offered by A.T.&amp; T.'s EasyLink Services operation.
Hutchison will own 51 percent of the venture, said A.T.&amp; T., which will hold the remaining 49 percent.


TV Weekend; New Showing of AIDS Documentary
Notorious for focusing almost exclusively on teen-age markets, Fox Broadcasting has generally shied away from public-service programming.
An outstanding exception can be found on Channel 5 on Sunday evening at 7 as the would-be network presents, without commercials, a half-hour documentary called "The Los Altos Story." The subject is AIDS.
Actually, the film, directed by Robin Young, was shown some time ago on the Financial News Network, since merged with CNBC.
It has already won a 1990 Peabody Award and, this year, an ACE award, the cable industry's equivalent of the Emmys.


Camouflaged Donor Tissue Holds Transplant Promise
In a new approach to transplants, scientists working with mice have devised a way to disguise transplanted tissue chemically so that the body's immune system cannot recognize and attack it.
"In most transplants we treat the recipient to prevent rejection," said Dr.
Denise Faustman, who did the research.
"Our paper proposes a different approach: to treat the donor tissue."


Northrop to Develop Army Antitank Missile
The Northrop Corporation said today that it had been awarded a contract to develop a new antitank weapon under a previously classified $2.2 billion Army program.
Northrop said that it had been working in secrecy for six years on the research portion of the program and that it would now proceed to the development phase, scheduled to last 42 months.
The development contract, which involves the engineering work needed to prepare for actual production, is worth $344 million.
Production is expected to begin in the mid-to-late-1990's.


COURT, 6-3, APPLIES VOTING RIGHTS ACT TO JUDICIAL RACES
In decisions that could eventually change the makeup of state courts, particularly in the South, the Supreme Court ruled in two cases today that elections for judges are covered by the Federal Voting Rights Act.
The rulings could affect most parts of the country, because 41 states elect at least some of their judges and relatively few blacks or members of other minorities are represented on state courts.


Monarch Capital Protection
The Monarch Capital Corporation, stripped of its life insurance subsidiary and unable to pay its debts, consented today to file for bankruptcy protection.
The Massachusetts insurance division had filed a petition to place Monarch Capital in involuntary bankruptcy, and Monarch said it would not contest the action.
Monarch Capital once held $6 billion in assets before the declining economy dragged down its real estate portfolio.
The company defaulted on bank loans, and its troubles prompted the state last month to seize a subsidiary, the Monarch Life Insurance Company, to protect policyholders.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Michigan State Hospital Finance Authority is offering $449 million in tax-exempt hospital revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 7.65 percent.
Yields on shorter-maturity serial bonds range from 6.25 percent in 1995 to 7.25 percent in 2001.
The issue is rated A by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp,


Review/Theater; 'Forbidden Broadway,' New Edition
As long as there is a Broadway, that sharpshooting parodist Gerard Alessandrini will be serving hemlock on the rocks to sacred cows, fat "Cats" and bullionaire Brits.
And speaking of the last category, where would "Forbidden Broadway" be without Cameron Mackintosh?
The producer of hits from "Phantom of the Opera" to "Miss Saigon" has his signature on marquees (and on checks) all over town.
In his new rush-to-criticism revue, "Forbidden Broadway 1991 1/2," Mr.
Alessandrini puts Mr.
Mackintosh at center stage (in the person of the impish Jeff Lyons).
Remove him from the scene and the show would be substantially shorter and, one might add, so would the Broadway season.


AIR FORCE TO CUT PHILIPPINES UNITS
The United States Air Force announced today that it would evacuate more than half of its uniformed personnel in the Philippines because of an erupting volcano that has coated a major American air base in ash, making it unusable.
The pullout of 4,500 of the 7,000 active-duty workers assigned to Clark Air Base would be the first major withdrawal of American military personnel from the Philippines since Mount Pinatubo unleashed a series of deadly eruptions last week.
The evacuation of their families was begun last week, and is almost complete.


CHRONICLE
REUVEN FRANK, the author and former president of NBC News, is to be the John Peter Zenger Memorial Lecturer today at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University.
Mr.
Frank created award-winning programs and organized political convention coverage for NBC News for nearly 20 years.
He stepped down in 1984.


Looking Ahead, Returning to the Past
Sounding as sure as the professor he once was, and as fiery as the preacher he still is, Representative William H. Gray 3d of Pennsylvania confirmed yesterday that he would leave his position as the third most influential member of Congress to go into the family business: education.
Accepting the presidency of the United Negro College Fund, Mr.
Gray said at a news conference in New York, where it is based, that higher education had always been part of his family's tradition.
His father was president of two historically black colleges; his mother was dean of students at another, and his grandfather was a professor of Greek and mathematics.


Anderson Is Re-signed By Tigers Through '94
SPARKY ANDERSON knew there was something special about the Detroit Tigers the first day he walked into JIM CAMPBELL's office.
That was 13 years and more than 1,000 victories ago.
And the relationship shows no signs of going stale.
Anderson signed a two-year contract extension yesterday that will keep him on as manager of the Tigers through the 1994 season.
By that time, he should be third on the career victory list and a lock for the Hall of Fame.


At Home Abroad; Britain And Europe
Imagine Rip Van Winkle awakening after decades and finding the politicians of his country arguing exactly the same issue as when he went to sleep.
That is what he would find in Britain today: the same old arguments, long since threadbare, about Britain's place in a uniting Europe.
Here are the same old fears of wily Continentals and Brussels bureaucrats, the same obsession with "sovereignty." And the same delusion that Britain can go it alone.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Sampras Beats Masur Pete Sampras, the United States Open champion, the defender and the No. 1-seeded player, beat Wally Masur of Australia, 7-5, 6-2, in the quarterfinals yesterday of the grass-court tournament at Manchester, England.
Sampras survived seven break points before winning.
Goran Ivanisevic also advanced, but was close to being defaulted before completing a 7-5, 6-3 victory over Arne Thoms of Germany.
The volatile 19-year-old from Yugoslavia received two warnings for code violations. (AP)


Woman Bitten by Rabid Raccoon That Climbed Down a Chimney
A 90-year-old woman in Hanover Township, N.J., is undergoing treatment for rabies after being attacked by a raccoon that climbed down her chimney Tuesday morning, state and local health officials said yesterday.
She is the second 90-year-old woman in Morris County to be bitten in the last six months by a rabid raccoon that climbed down a chimney.


Nicaraguan Talks on Property Seizures Begin


House Panel Changes Rules On Shutting Weak Banks
The House Banking Committee approved new rules today that would permit Federal regulators to shut down weak banks sooner than they now can.
The proposal for earlier intervention, which would greatly restrict the latitude that regulators currently have in deciding when to close troubled banks, will be included in a package of changes to the Depression-era laws governing the banking industry.
The proposal provides that banks with capital equal to less than 2 percent of their assets would be subject to prompt regulatory intervention, including seizure.
The capital-to-asset ratio is a key measure of banks' health.


Diner's Journal
Oak Room, by Chance
I wandered over to the Edwardian Room of the Plaza Hotel the other week with the intention of sampling the current menu by Kerry Simon, the resourceful young chef there, only to find that a private party was in progress.
So I walked down the hall to the baronial Oak Room, where I had not been in years.
My guests and I were seated near the pianist at a roomy table with leather armchairs big enough to hold a close-knit family of four.


BRIEFS
*
AFN Inc., Dallas, a data processing company, has acquired American Security Mortgage Co., Houston, a lender.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Caterpillar Inc., Peoria, Ill., a maker of diesel tractors and other heavy machinery, will lay off about 150 employees, effective July 1.


Restaurants
Solera
By next summer Spain and all things Iberian will be hotter than a jalapeno as Barcelona plays host to the Olympic Games.
Perhaps that accounts for the flurry of new Spanish restaurants in Manhattan this year, all of which hope to take home the gold in 1992.
The latest and perhaps the most genuine is Solera, owned by Rufino Lopez-Lourido and Dominick Cerrone, both of whom were involved with Alcala on Amsterdam Avenue.


Malcolm Frager, 56, Pianist, Dies; Recovered Classical Manuscripts
Malcolm Frager, an American pianist whose music making and life style steered a career path somewhat outside the ordinary in the music world, died yesterday at the Berkshire Medical Center in Pittsfield, Mass.
He was 56 years old.
Mr.
Frager was a Christian Scientist and his family declined to give the cause of death, but he was reported to have been ill for about a year.
His most recent public appearances were in July with the Baltimore Symphony under David Zinman's direction.
Many concert dates thereafter were canceled.


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about a showdown among Leroy Burrell, Carl Lewis and Ben Johnson in a 100- meter race on July 1 misstated the world record time credited to Lewis for the distance at the 1988 Summer Olympics.
It was 9.92 seconds.


Bookmakers' Computer Trips Them Up
A family of bookmakers in Westchester County developed what seemed to be a modern-day solution to an old problem: what to do with betting slips when the police come.
In the old days, the solutions involved a fire in the trash can, a flush of the toilet or an impromptu meal of the evidence.


Rockets Make Racket, But Gooden Gets Victory
Of all the flight data from tonight at The Launching Pad there were a combined eight home runs -- perhaps the least satifying, but most important, fact for the Mets was this: Dwight Gooden's recovery project didn't exactly get off the ground.
Gooden, who homered himself in the power party at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium, stood on the mound to watch three rockets travel over the fences in the course of an exhausting, and occasionally exhilarating, 9-7 victory over the Braves.


New Operating Officer Named at Ames Stores


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to the Discount Corporation of New York.
It is a publicly held company; it is not a subsidiary of the DCNY Corporation, which no longer exists.


Bush Drops Plan for a Court for Aliens
Faced with mounting criticism, the Bush Administration today withdrew its proposal to create special tribunals in which foreigners accused of terrorism could be deported without being given a chance to rebut or even to learn of evidence against them.
The plan was an early casualty of private meetings between Democrats and Republicans who are sponsoring competing anticrime legislation.
As the Senate began debate on the bills today, Republican supporters of the Administration's crime-fighting measure also dropped a provision that would have allowed firearms seized by the police during an illegal search to be introduced as evidence in Federal courts.


Drexel and I.R.S. in Accord On $5.28 Billion Tax Claim
Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and the Internal Revenue Service have reached a tentative settlement of the Government's $5.28 billion tax claim against the former Wall Street giant now in bankruptcy proceedings, the Federal judge overseeing the case said yesterday.
Federal Judge Milton Pollack said in an interview that a deal was struck between lawyers for Drexel and the I.R.S. late Wednesday.
As a result, he said, he postponed a hearing scheduled for today on the I.R.S. claim.


BERLIN TO REGAIN FULL CAPITAL ROLE
The German Parliament voted by a narrow margin today to move the seat of federal Government 350 miles eastward, from Bonn to Berlin, the country's historic capital.
The vote, taken after nearly 12 hours of vigorous and often bitter debate, was 337 for Berlin and 320 for Bonn, a small city on the Rhine that became West Germany's temporary capital in 1949 pending eventual reunification with East Germany.
Over the years, Bonn increasingly took on the look of a permanent capital as its bureaucracy grew and hopes for unification faded.


Art in Review
Robert Therrien 65 Thompson Street Manhattan Through June 29
Robert Therrien specializes in monolithic, monochromatic sculptures whose simple shapes often have an endearing, animated bob.
The vaguely figural cuteness of these objects was overly loyal to the 1970's (think of the early work of Elizabeth Murray or Joel Shapiro), and therefore overly familiar as well.
Now Mr.
Therrien seems bent on breaking the mold around his art.
His new work strikes out in several directions at once, but the problem is that, again, none of them are genuinely his own.
Except for the consistent attention to craft and to beautifully worn or modulated surfaces, this could almost be a group exhibition.


CHRONICLE
DAISY EAGAN, the youngest Tony Award winner, led 50 youngsters at New York City Hall yesterday in a protest against Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposal to cut the city's spending for culture by 47 percent.
Miss Eagan, the 11-year-old star of "The Secret Garden," got her start two years ago in a play at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, which is among the organizations threatened by the cuts.


Supreme Court Activism Has Lost Its Meaning
To the Editor:
"Conservatively Speaking, It's an Activist Supreme Court" (The Week in Review, May 26) unfortunately misses part of the point about today's Court and Court watchers.
"Activist" used to refer to a Court that reached out to confront constitutional issues that might have been avoided or postponed.
For much of this century, the Supreme Court has been active in that sense, irrespective of which Justices happened to be sitting.
Franklin D. Roosevelt clashed with the conservative Court through the mid-1930's precisely because it was activist in using the Constitution to blunt his New Deal initiatives.
He appointed Justices intended to be less active, at least in that sense.


'Odd Couple' Join Snack-Food Fight
Tony Randall and Jack Klugman will make their Broadway debut as "The Odd Couple" this Sunday.
But they have been reunited for a while on Madison Avenue, much to the delight of a growing snack-foods company.
For the last three years, the pair have been portraying their comic "Odd Couple" characters -- fussy Felix and grouchy Oscar -- in television commercials for the Eagle Snacks subsidiary of the Anheuser-Busch Companies.


Justices Refuse To Open a Gate For Libel Cases
In a major libel decision, the Supreme Court ruled today that fabricated quotations attributed to a public figure may be libelous only if the alterations materially change the meaning of what the person actually said.
The decision reinstated a celebrated seven-year-old libel suit by a psychoanalyst, Jeffrey M. Masson, who has accused Janet Malcolm, a writer, of deliberately misquoting him in an unflattering profile in The New Yorker magazine that later appeared as a book.


Critic's Choice; French Dancing
"Young Dance" is the name the French gave to their widespread dance boom of the 1980's.
Most of the choreographers were young, experimental and less abstract than American modern dancers.
A second wave has now washed up on our shores, as Angelin Preljocaj will show when his company makes its United States debut as part of the New York International Festival of the Arts.
After studying ballet and joining a rock group, Mr.
Preljocaj trained with Karin Waehner, a former disciple of Mary Wigman in Paris, before attending the Merce Cunningham school in New York and studying in France with Viola Farber, Mr.
Cunningham's former partner.


Bush Misused West Point for Political Speech
To the Editor:
President Bush's use of the podium at West Point to deliver a partisan political attack on the House Democrats' civil rights bill (news article, June 2) insults the graduates and their families.
It is also contrary to the principle that the United States military must remain above the conflicting interests of political parties.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 21


INSIDE
Ouster in Savings Bailout
A high-level rift about how to mollify Congress and win more bailout money was resolved by ousting the taxpayer rescue's manager.
Page D1.
Deportation Plan Dropped


'Penn and Teller' Closing
"Penn and Teller: The Refrigerator Tour" is to close after its second performance on June 29 at the Eugene O'Neill Theater, 230 West 49th Street.
That show will be the 103d regular performance for the comedy; it had 9 previews.


Quotation of the Day
"The irony of it. Here I am talking about gun control and I'm hearing gunshots." -- Mayor David N. Dinkins.  [ A1:5. ]


Hal Riney Establishes Operations Committee
The New York office of Hal Riney &amp; Partners has established an operations committee to fill a gap created by last month's departure of Jerrold H. Gottlieb, the agency's former executive vice president and general manager.
The members of the committee are Joseph O'Neill, executive vice president and general manager; Nancy McNally, senior vice president and group account director; Mitchell J. Brooks, senior vice president and group account director; Robert Rose, vice president and media director, and Debby Martin, vice president and director of creative services and broadcast production.


Pratt &amp; Whitney
Pratt &amp; Whitney, a unit of the United Technologies Corporation, said an affiliate of Lufthansa A.G., the German airline, had ordered 25 Pratt &amp; Whitney engines worth about $175 million.
The PW4060 turbofan engines are to be delivered between October 1992 and the end of 1995.
Some of the engines will power 10 new Boeing 767-300 aircraft owned by the Lufthansa affiliate, Condor Flugdienst.
The rest will be used as spares for those planes, as well as three 767's Condor purchased last year, Pratt &amp; Whitney said.


Miscellany
*
Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates Inc., an investment banking firm that specializes in the communications industry, is predicting a 6.8 percent compounded growth rate for United States spending on advertising and promotion over the next five years, compared with a 7.4 percent annual gain from 1985 to 1990.
According to the firm's forecast, the total spending will reach $331.2 billion in 1995, up from $238.7 billion in 1990. *
The New York Market Radio Broadcasters Association said advertising by banks and financial-services companies in the New York radio market had increased 34.2 percent, to $6.3 million in the first quarter of 1991, from $4.7 million in the first quarter of 1990.


For Children
'Dancing Traditions: Plains Dolls' National Museum of the American Indian 3753 Broadway, at 155th Street Manhattan (212) 283-2420 Recommended ages: 6 and up Through July 14
Charles Chief Eagle has been influenced by his grandmothers, whom he never met.
An Oglala Sioux, he creates American Indian dolls in full traditional regalia in beading and quill-work techniques that his parents, schooled by the grandmothers, handed down to him.
His low-key exhibition is of 10 12-inch dolls, all displayed in one case.
His detailed dolls are gentle reminders of how elaborate, how beautifully lush and ornamental the Sioux and Crow tribal dress could be.
He says it takes him, working in his home on a Sioux reservation in South Dakota, two to five weeks to make one doll.
As he grew up, he developed his own style of doll making, using extremely small beads, tanned buckskin and other animal skins, feathers for miniature fans and dance bustles on the female dolls.
One doll in 19th-century dress is decorated with dentalium seashells and heavily beaded leggings and moccasins.
Two other dolls have bushy mink puffs at the ends of their braids; the parts in their hair are painted vermillion.
As a touch of whimsy, he created his idea of a Sioux calvary officer's jacket, a lovely juxtaposition of feathers with a navy blue military officer's coat.
In the long-ago past, he said, the Sioux would often have military jackets on hand as spoils of war, and they would wear them at powwows with feathers in the breast pockets or on the lapels.
A Crow woman's moccasins -- called high tops by contemporary Crows -- look so soft you wish you could wear them. (The gift shop sells them in children's sizes.) The display is on the first floor.
The museum does not have elevators for public use.
Strollers are allowed throughout the museum.
The museum, a branch of the Smithsonian Institution, is closest to the No. 1 and No. 9 trains, stopping at 157th Street.
Hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tuesday through Saturday and 1 to 5 P.M. on Sunday.
Admission: $3 for adults ($2 for students and the elderly; free for those under 7).
There are no places to eat in the building.


Comments Curbed in Rape Case
The judge in the rape case against William K. Smith has imposed restrictions on out-of-court comments by lawyers and law-enforcement agencies, but her order was less sweeping than one she outlined in a court hearing two weeks ago.
The judge, Mary Lupo of Circuit Court, barred prosecutors, the Palm Beach police, defense lawyers and their investigators and all courtroom personnel from making statements about the character, credibility, reputation or criminal record of Mr.
Smith or the witnesses.
The order, issued at a hearing on Wednesday, also prohibits statements about the possibility that a plea would be entered, the content of any confession, the performance or results of any examination or test and an opinion about Mr.
Smith's guilt or innocence.


Cuomo Plan On Insurance For Infants
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed legislation today that would create a no-fault system of malpractice insurance for newborns, compensating infants who suffer birth-related impairments even when it cannot be proved that physicians were at fault.
The long-awaited bill -- applauded by doctors and criticized by lawyers -- would revolutionize New York's system of medical liability.
It would allow the families of injured infants to circumvent the court system and receive payments from a pool financed through assessments on physicians, nurses and other health-care providers.


U.S. Inquiry on Mini-Vans
The Commerce Department today began investigating charges by American auto makers that Japanese companies were "dumping" mini-vans in the United States at prices below cost to increase their market share.
The inquiry was sought three weeks ago by General Motors, Ford and Chrysler through the Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association.


Pier 1 Imports Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Mary C. Scurlock Is Wed in Oregon
Mary Christine Scurlock, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arch C. Scurlock of Arlington, Va., was married yesterday to Peter Stanwood Adamson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Adamson of Marion, Mass.
Madeleine Watters Landis, a nonsectarian minister, performed the Universalist ceremony at the head of the Metolius River near Camp Sherman, Ore.
Mrs.
Adamson, 28 years old, is an associate in the law firm of Johnson &amp; Kloos in Eugene, Ore.
She graduated from Duke University and received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is the chairman of the Trans Technology Corporation, a manufacturer of high-technology products in Sherman Oaks, Calif., and the president of Research Industries Inc., an investment concern in Alexandria, Va.


Pre-Human Jawbone Discovered
The jawbone of an animal that could prove to be a "missing link" between apes and humans has been found in southern Africa, one of its discoverers said today.
"It really is quite unexpected and quite startling," said Glenn Conroy, leader of a four-member team that found the fossil in the northern Otavi hills in Namibia on June 4.


Credo Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


We Can't Abandon Talented Homeless Children
To the Editor:
Your May 30 profile of 8-year-old Shara Overton, who lives in a Harlem shelter for homeless families and takes lessons at the New York Theater Ballet School, illustrates the tremendous talent that exists among our country's homeless children, whose numbers are growing every day.
These children are not unique to New York City.
A recent national survey of state education departments found talented homeless children in every part of the United States.
Each child's story is as compelling as Shara's.


Trump Castle Plan Facing Opposition
The dissident Trump Castle Bondholders Protective Committee said holders of more than 25 percent in principal amount of bonds of the Trump Castle Casino would reject a restructuring proposal outlined by its steering committee this week.
The protective committee said it would also explore all legal remedies, including filing an involuntary petition under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code, because of the failure of Trump Castle to pay its debt as it came due.
The protective committee said it would move to have the maturity of the bonds accelerated if the interest payment on those now in default was not made before the 10-day grace period expired.
The maturity can be accelerated if 25 percent of the bondholders reject the plan.
The grace period for a $41 million payment on the $351.8 million outstanding in Trump Castle bonds ends on June 28.


Savings Outflow Rises
Net withdrawals at the nation's savings institutions jumped to $10.6 billion in April, the highest level in a year, according to a Government report today.
The outflow was the largest since April 1990's record $15.1 billion withdrawal and was the 34th outflow in 35 months, the Office of Thrift Supervision said.


Cooper Development Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Britain Selects Tank Produced By Vickers
The British Government said today that it would buy a domestically built battle tank, rejecting competing bids from the United States, France and Germany.
The contract for about 130 tanks ended months of speculation over which design would be chosen as a replacement for the British Army's 25-year-old Chieftain tanks.


Street Preachers Spread the Word, Loudly
Like the many actors who answer the casting call, Brenda Allen came to New York City dreaming of being among the few chosen to tread the boards.
Fourteen years later, she is on Broadway in front of the boards -- those plastered over the closed Nathan's Restaurant in Times Square.
Brenda Allen is a street corner preacher.


In Senior Olympics, Age Is Barely a Hurdle
Many Americans are reluctant to reveal their ages.
But that's hardly the case with the senior athletes participating in the National Senior Sports Classic in Syracuse, which begins Friday and ends July 3.
The biennial event, also known as the Senior Olympics, began in 1987.
This is the third time that senior athletes have gathered to compete on a national level in 18 sports ranging from archery and horseshoes to volleyball and cycling.
Athletes are sorted into seven five-year age groupings starting at 55 and going up to 85-plus.


Tuscarora Plastics reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Data Translation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Burrell: No Showdown
World record-holder LEROY BURRELL says he is not planning to run in the 100-meter showdown July 1 between CARL LEWIS and BEN JOHNSON.
Burrell and his coach, TOM TELLEZ, said on Thursday that Burrell would run the 200 and not the 100 in the meet at Lille, France.


Peoples Jewellers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nancy Sarnoff, Stylist, Marries
Nancy Sarnoff, the daughter of William Sarnoff of New York and the late Pamela Sarnoff, was married last evening at the Metropolitan Club in New York to Scott Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Vernon Williams of Seattle.
Cantor Ellen Math officiated.
Mrs.
Williams, 30 years old, is a fashion stylist in New York.
She graduated from the University of Washington in Seattle.
Her father is the chairman of Time Warner Trade Books in New York.
Her mother was a board member of the New York City Opera.


Seidman Asks for Hiring of a 'Strong' Bailout Chief
L.
William Seidman, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, proposed today that a "strong" chief executive be hired to oversee the nation's savings and loan bailout and repeated his view that an additional $80 billion would be needed to keep the bailout going.
As part of a proposed restructuring of the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency in charge of the bailout, Mr.
Seidman presented two alternatives that would reduce the role of the F.D.I.C. in the trust agency's operations and would structure it more like a corporation.


Review/Dance; A Latvian Surprise In 'Jewels'
George Balanchine's "Jewels" has long been one of the biggest crowdpleasers in the New York City Ballet repertory, as it was intended to be.
The ballet looks pretty, drawing small gasps as the curtain rises on each of its three acts to reveal jewel-strewn backdrops and decorative assemblages of ballerinas.
It takes a pleasant stroll through scores by Faure, Stravinsky and Tchaikovsky.
And there are inventive little surprises scattered throughout.
The company's performance of "Jewels" on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater had one added surprise in the debut of Erlends Zieminch, a Latvian guest artist, in the ballet's culminating "Diamonds" section.
Mr.
Zieminch, a graduate of the Riga Choreographic Institute, where Mikhail Baryshnikov trained, was spotted by Patricia McBride when he danced in a recent production of "The Sleeping Beauty" staged by her husband, Jean Pierre Bonnefoux, in Bloomington, Ind.
He has performed with the Latvian National Opera and the Indiana Ballet Theater, and he will join City Ballet as a soloist during its summer season in Saratoga, N.Y.


Air Travel Off in April
Airline travel remained light in April despite the end of the Persian Gulf war, the International Air Transport Association said today.
Scheduled international passenger traffic of the association's 200 members was 11 percent lower in April than a year earlier -- only a slight improvement on the 14 percent drop in the first three months of the year.


Watts and the Emerson At Caramoor Festival
Andre Watts is to be the soloist with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's in Beethoven's Piano Concerto No. 4 tomorrow evening at 8:30 in the Venetian Theater at Caramoor, on Girdle Ridge Road, Katonah, N.Y.
The program, to be conducted by Hugh Wolff, also includes Beethoven's "Leonore" Overture No. 1, Haydn's Symphony No. 87 in A, and Kodaly's "Dances From Galanta." Tickets are $10 to $27.50.
The Emerson String Quartet is to play Mozart's "Hunt" Quartet in B flat (K. 458), Beethoven's Quartet in F minor (Op. 95) and Dvorak's Quartet in C (Op. 61) on Sunday at 5:30 P.M. in the Spanish Courtyard at Caramoor.
Tickets are $22.50.
Information: (914) 232-1252.


Assault Case Called Racial by Relative of the Accuser
The emotions surrounding the St.
John's sex assault trial continued to intensify yesterday as the first demonstrators chanted in front of the Long Island City courthouse, the crowds attracted to the case swelled once again and the family of the victim charged that the case was racial.
The accusation came as the 22-year-old woman, who says she was orally sodomized and sexually degraded by a group of St.
John's University classmates, testified for the fourth day this week.
In contrast to her earlier combativeness, she became woozy near the end of the day and began to weep softly as she was cross-examined by a defense lawyer.


Dental Patient Torn by AIDS Calls for Laws
As Kimberly Bergalis lies dying in her bedroom at home, her radiance stolen by AIDS, she has issued a last, angry demand for laws to stop health-care workers like the dentist who infected her from spreading the disease.
"I have lived to see my hair fall out, my body lose over 40 pounds, blisters on my sides," the 23-year-old woman from Fort Pierce, Fla., wrote in a letter that she addressed -- but never sent -- to a state health investigator.
After consulting with Miss Bergalis and her family, her lawyers made the letter public this week.





Leader Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Michael Westphal, Tennis Player, 26
Michael Westphal, a former Davis Cup tennis player for Germany, died Thursday night at the Eppendorfer University Clinic.
His death was a result of a virus he had suffered from for two years, officials at the hospital said.
He was 26 years old.
From 1982 to 1986, Mr.
Westphal competed for West Germany in 11 Davis Cup matches.
He became a national hero after an epic five-hour victory over Tomas Smid in a Davis Cup match against Czechoslovakia in 1985.
Mr.
Westphal's highest world ranking was 46th in March 1986.


Health Jobs Defy Recession in New York
New York's health-care industry is one of the few areas of growth in the city's faltering economy, providing thousands of new jobs, especially for immigrants and members of minorities.
But the growth has provided little stimulus to the economy over all, and the health-care jobs often offer workers only a tenuous economic foothold.


Policing the Private Police
Frustrated by drug dealers who terrorize residential buildings, some Brooklyn landlords have called in a Muslim security force whose guards boast of using violent intimidation to get results.
This "unconventional" approach, revealed recently in an eye-opening story by Chris Hedges of The Times, appears to work, helping to make buildings safer for crime-weary tenants.
But does that end justify the means?
Only the most shortsighted citizen could answer yes.
The story underlines the need for tougher regulation of private police.


Waldheim Won't Run


In the Nation; Improving the Debates
Are televised debates between Presidential candidates, to which the voting public has become accustomed, just "Hollywood high-noon shootouts"?
That's what I called them in an article in this space on May 22 -- an irreverence that provoked many protests like this one: "The potential benefit of Presidential debates to the American people, whether that benefit is fully realized or not, is of great national value."


The Yeltsin Touch
On his visit to America this week, Boris Yeltsin has shown himself to be, in the very best sense of the word, a pol -- something to hearten Americans watching soberly as the Soviet people cross the great political and economic divide.
The Russian republic's president-elect talked easily with professional politicians, journalists and others, warmly complimenting the American system.
He demonstrated wit, tenacity and a comfortable willingness to defer to his advisers on detail.
He showed that he knows how to deal deftly with symbols, when he donned a cowboy hat and posed for photographers.


U.S. Offers Rules on Tests for Transplants
Federal health officials today proposed rules requiring that organs for transplants be tested for the AIDS virus before they are supplied to hospitals.
The proposal, from the Health Care Financing Administration, was offered as part of a requirement under two laws, passed in 1988 and 1990, that set out new rules that organizations must follow if they collect and supply organs.


Brazil Accord on Computers
The Brazilian Congress has reached an accord that paves the way for a long-awaited opening of Brazil's computer market to imports, starting in 1992, legislators said today.
The accord would end a policy adopted in 1984 that protected Brazil's fledgling computer industry and that prompted United States trade retaliation.


At Local Level, Dancing Still Goes On Despite the Ruling
Uncle Al's Cafe, across the street from Hartford Police Headquarters, featured nude dancers today, as usual.
The police and prosecutors here and around the country said the United States Supreme Court decision affirming the right of state and local governments to ban nude dancing, while important as a victory in theory, would have little immediate effect.
They said that most of the states with restrictive nudity laws were never stopped from making arrests and that states where such laws are not always vigorously applied, like Connecticut, would probably not start making many more arrests because of today's ruling.


Applied Power Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


I-80 Journal; Where Interstate Means A War Along the Border
To George Malito, Interstate 80 is not just a highway; it is an asphalt-covered conveyor belt bringing customers to the service station he operates here.
So when he heard about an attempt by Illinois to renumber part of the highway and thereby reroute some of the interstate's traffic through the Land of Lincoln, Mr.
Malito was irate.


Thomas I. Emerson, 83, Scholar Who Molded Civil Liberties Law
Thomas I. Emerson, a legal theorist who was a major architect of civil liberties laws, died on Wednesday at the Yale Health Services Center in New Haven.
He was 83 years old and lived North Haven, Conn.
He died of complications from a stroke, said Martha Matzke, a spokeswoman for Yale.


Train Strikes Truck in Indiana
A luxury passenger train bound from New York to Chicago derailed today after striking a flatbed semitrailer, causing one minor injury, the authorities said.
The Greenbrier Limited, owned by American-European Express, struck the trailer at a CSX railroad crossing near this town in northwestern Indiana.
The train was carrying 31 passengers.


Reviews/Dance; An American's Venture Into Malay Culture
Asia Society has offered many voyages through Asian cultures.
In "Made in Malaysia/A Shamanic Journey," presented on Thursday night, the audience was guided by Manuel Alum, an American modern dance choreographer, in an impressive venture into cross-culturalism.
Sent by the society to Malaysia to explore dying traditions of theater, dance and music and to re-create and reinvigorate them, Mr.
Alum assembled a 30-member company of traditional musicians and traditional and modern dancers and wove together an impressively -- and sometimes uncomfortably -- seamless blend of the new and old.


Solectron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Tapes That Wilt (and One That Won't)
Summer heat inside a sealed automobile can damage many things that are often routinely left in cars.
Food, film, makeup and plastic are vulnerable, and cassette tapes can be destroyed.
When the temperature is above 130 degrees, which can be reached in 10 minutes in a car parked in the sun in 90-degree heat, cassettes with plastic shells can warp or melt, making it difficult or impossible to get the tape in or out of the player, and it can ruin the tape.


Scientists Encouraged By Two AIDS Vaccines
Scientists today reported surprisingly encouraging results from tests in the United States of a combination of two experimental AIDS vaccines in a small number of uninfected human volunteers.
The combination yielded the best immune responses recorded in vaccine experiments to date, the seventh international AIDS meeting was told, increasing hopes that a vaccine might be developed by the turn of the century.


U.S. Reluctant to Aid Soviets, Bush Aide Says
With the finance ministers of seven leading industrial countries scheduled to meet on Sunday in London, a senior Administration official said today that the United States was reluctant to give financial aid to the Soviet Union without strings attached.
The official, who insisted on anonymity, said he was against any effort in which "substantial amounts of money are put up against promises of reform."


Credit Bureaus Draw Fire for Misuse of Data
Credit bureaus, the nation's clearinghouses for consumer credit information, are under attack.
Some members of Congress, consumer advocates and individuals say the credit bureaus have inaccurate data and don't keep a tight lid on their files.
The bureaus, in response, say that their information is correct, that they try to correct errors quickly and that only subscribers -- primarily granters of credit -- with legitimate needs have access to files.
Credit reports are vital to the functioning of the credit system, the bureaus say.


Methode Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Taurus Footwear reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


I.B.M. Link With Lotus Is Expected
I.B.M. and the Lotus Development Corporation plan to announce an alliance based on Lotus software designed to permit groups of office workers to share electronic information and to work on common projects using personal computers.
Analysts and several industry executives said that under an agreement scheduled to be announced at an I.B.M. news conference Monday in New York, the International Business Machines Corporation would agree to use an innovative Lotus program called Notes in its OfficeVision desktop software.


Sir Isaac Wolfson, Philanthropist And Business Leader, Dies at 93
Sir Isaac Wolfson, a British business leader and philanthropist, died on Thursday at his house in Rehovot, Israel, his main residence in recent years.
He was 93 years old and had been a longtime resident of London.
He died in his sleep, family members said.


Elizabeth Bowerman Wed
Elizabeth Wise Blair Bowerman, the daughter of Jean G. B. Bowerman and Michael E. Bowerman, both of Virginia Beach, Va., was married in San Francisco yesterday to Charles Errol Wade, a son of Mrs.
Charles Jackson of Norcross, Ga., and L. Allison Wade of Griffin, Ga.
The Rev.
Marc DuPlan Lee officiated at Grace Episcopal Cathedral.
The bride, 26 years old, teaches French at the Katherine Delmar Burke School in San Francisco.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Mr.
Wade, 25, a student at Foothill College in Los Altos, Calif., is to enter the University of California at Berkeley in the fall.


Heat Puts Seikaly in Rare Company
Miami Heat center RONY SEIKALY has signed a multiyear, multimillion-dollar contract extension that would rank him a salary notch below the National Basketball Association's top three centers, his agent said yesterday.
The long-term contract would place the fourth-year player right below New York's PATRICK EWING, Houston's HAKEEM OLAJUWON and San Antonio's DAVID ROBINSON, said Seikaly's agent, STEVE KAUFFMAN.
Terms were not disclosed.
Seikaly, 25 years old, had two years remaining on his contract.
He was to be paid $753,000 this year and $1 million in the 1992-93 season under the old contract.


Major Pre-Wimbledon Upset: Seles Withdraws
Monica Seles, the top-seeded women's singles player at Wimbledon, stunned tournament officials this evening by announcing that she was withdrawing from the event, which begins Monday, because of injuries she suffered in a "minor" but unspecified accident.
This was the first time in Wimbledon's history, which dates to 1877, that any top-seeded singles player, male or female, had withdrawn from contention after the draw had been determined.


Building a Voice for Chinese in the U.S.
After the Chinese Army shot down pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing two years ago, I. M. Pei, the Chinese-American architect, found himself besieged with calls from people wanting to know how Chinese-Americans felt about the crackdown.
So, too, did other leading Chinese-Americans, including the cellist Yo-Yo Ma.
Mr.
Pei and Mr.
Ma were not sure how to react.
And they were concerned that the China experts who were quoted on television and in newspapers were not Chinese-Americans.


Insurer Weathers Real Estate Recession
To the Editor:
"Shielding Insurer From Its Parent" (Business Day, June 1) and its accompanying chart do not give a complete or correct picture about our company.
The casual inclusion of one statistic unfairly represents the Phoenix's financial position.


Traffic Alert
Safe Haven Street Fair: West End Avenue will be closed today from 72d to 79th Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Lexington Avenue Street Fair: Lexington Avenue will be closed tomorrow from 23d to 34th Street from 10 A.M to 6 P.M.


G.E. Venture In Soviet Deal
A venture between the General Electric Company and Snecma S.A. of France received an order today for up to $1 billion in jet engines for the Soviet Union, the latest in a series of East-West aerospace deals.
The accord calls for the venture, CFM International, to provide engines for at least 20 Soviet-made IL-86 aircraft, G.E. officials said at the Paris Air Show.
They estimated the deal to be worth $750 million to $1 billion.


Invention Design Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


New England Electric System reports earnings for 12mos to May 31


Drug Baron's Prison Has Every Comfort, Even Mom and TV
On Pablo Escobar Gaviria's first night in jail, the Mayor of this city stopped by to watch television with him.
"We watched all the news shows and had a good laugh at the way they were presenting it," said the Mayor, Jose Mario Rodriguez, referring to the surrender on Wednesday of Mr.
Escobar, the country's most-wanted drug trafficker.


Aura Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


S.E.C. Drops Merger Case
Federal securities regulators said today that they were dropping a five-year-old administrative proceeding against George C. Kern Jr., a New York merger and takeover lawyer.
Mr.
Kern was a director of the Allied Stores Corporation during its unsuccessful battle to avoid being acquired in 1986 by Robert Campeau, the Canadian business executive.


Robert Purvin, A Consultant On Energy, 74
Robert L. Purvin, a chemical engineer and energy consultant, died on Wednesday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 74 years old and lived in Mamaroneck.
He died of prostate cancer, his wife, Maria-Lidia, said.


Surrender in Colombia
Colombian officials hail the surrender of Pablo Escobar, the infamous leader of the Medellin drug cartel, as the beginning of a new era of domestic tranquillity.
But celebrations are premature.
Colombia's President, Cesar Gaviria Trujillo, must first persuade the world that the arrest is more than a momentary triumph -- and that he and his Government are truly serious about fighting drugs.
The hunt for Pablo Escobar began in earnest in 1989 after the assassination of a presidential candidate, Luis Carlos Galan.
Colombian authorities pressed a campaign against drug traffickers, destroying their laboratories, seizing their property and arresting those they could find.
But top leaders like Pablo Escobar avoided capture.


Los Angeles Opens Its Water Tap to the Mountains
Water flowed into the Owens River Gorge today for the first time in more than 40 years as the City of Los Angeles set free a watercourse in the Sierra Nevada that had been dammed in its quest for water and power.
Water poured through a pipe and spilled into the 1,000-foot-deep gorge, a once-famous trout fishery, after a 6-inch gap was opened in a dam at a hydroelectric plant 240 miles north of Los Angeles.


An Editor Is Retiring, Leaving His Mark
The front-page layout of this morning's Washington Post, taken into Benjamin C. Bradlee's office on Thursday night, showed an article called "ozone" in the lower lefthand corner.
It was an inside joke.
The real article in that space would announce that Mr.
Bradlee, one of the dominant figures in American journalism in the last quarter-century, was retiring as the newspaper's top editor on Sept. 1.
The other part of the joke was that Mr.
Bradlee, who made his reputation by pushing his staff to break big political stories like Watergate, is notoriously impatient with articles about science, business and other fields he finds boring.


Excerpts From Supreme Court Ruling That States May Ban Nude Dancing
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 5-to-4 ruling yesterday in Barnes v.
Glen Theatre, holding that states may ban nude dancing.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote a plurality opinion that was joined by Justices Sandra Day O'Conner and Anthony M. Kennedy.
Justices Antonin Scalia and David H. Souter filed concurring opinions.
Justice Byron R. White dissented in an opinion joined by Justices Thurgood Marshall, Harry A. Blackmun, and John Paul Stevens.
FROM THE OPINION By Chief Justice Rehnquist


Carol Rinzler Memorial
A memorial service for Carol Rinzler, a lawyer who was the author of books about childhood and adolescence, is to be held on Tuesday at 6:15 P.M. at St.
Peter's Church in the Citicorp Center, 619 Lexington Avenue, at 54th Street.
Speakers will include Joni Evans, Judith Martin and Les Whitten.
Ms.
Rinzler died on Dec. 6 at the age of 49.


Frank Umont, Umpire, 73
Frank Umont, an umpire for 20 years in the American League, died at his home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., on Thursday.
He was 73 years old and had suffered a heart attack, his family said.
Mr.
Umont, who worked in the American League from 1954 until retiring after the 1973 season, umpired in four World Series, four All-Star Games and a league championship series.
Over the latter part of his career, he wore eyeglasses on the job.
Before becoming an umpire, Mr.
Umont was a tackle for the New York Giants from 1943 to 1945.


Review/Cabaret; Ascap Show Celebrates With All the Big Names
"My roots are in cabaret, but in those days we didn't call it cabaret -- it was saloons, or dumps actually," Dorothy Loudon recalled.
Ms.
Loudon was one of a string of well-known performers and composers who participated in "An Ascap Salute to Cabaret," an impeccably produced 90-minute show presented by the performing rights organization at the Pierre Hotel on Thursday as part of the New York International Festival of the Arts.
The singer went on to clown her way amusingly through "Sara Lee," John Kander and Fred Ebb's ode to the godmother of baked goods, and to deliver a feisty, red-hot-mama-style rendition of "A Good Man Is Hard to Find."
The show underscored the ways in which the worlds of musical theater and cabaret have been linked for decades.
The composers Charles Strouse, Jerry Herman and Cy Coleman, each of whom played and sang an extended medley of his best-known songs, recalled working in nightclubs before establishing careers as Broadway composers.
All three have written modern standards that are largely kept alive by cabaret singers.
Mr.
Herman was particularly ebullient, and his performances of "I Am What I Am" and "The Best of Times" rang with an emphatic emotionality.


An Old Name for Denver Team
The National League expansion team expected to be awarded to Denver will be named the Colorado Rockies and the mascot will be a bear, a concession to local supporters of a competing name, the Denver Bears, The Rocky Mountain News reported today.
The name selection is expected to draw some criticism because the city's National Hockey League franchise, which became the New Jersey Devils in 1982, held the same name.
The Denver Bears name dates to 1922 and has been favored in some polls of baseball fans in Denver.


Eagle-Picher Has $2.3 Million Loss
Eagle-Picher Industries said it lost $2.3 million in the second quarter, partly because of costs associated with its bankruptcy reorganization.
The maker of automotive and industrial parts also blamed the depressed economy.
Eagle-Picher said its loss came on revenues of $154.9 million in the period from April through June.
In the corresponding period last year, the company earned $22.5 million, or $2.11 a share, on revenues of $184.3 million.
Eagle-Picher, which filed for reorganzation under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code in January, has been hit by lawsuits filed by people who say their health was damage by exposure to a pipe sealant the company made for ships from 1931 to 1974.
The sealant contained asbestos.


Last U.S. Dependents Evacuated From 2 Bases in the Philippines


Pico Products reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Glove Weight at Issue
State boxing commissions in Arizona and Nevada are reconsidering their policies on six-ounce boxing gloves, which may be too dangerous even for smaller boxers.
Both states and Iowa have waived glove-weight requirements in the past to accommodate the International Boxing Federation, which allows boxers to use the six-ounce gloves in weight divisions under 127 pounds.


Hach Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Raychem Outlook
The Raychem Corporation said it would probably report a loss for its fiscal fourth quarter because of sluggish orders and shipments.
The company, based in Menlo Park, Calif., may discontinue some of its businesses.
Raychem, which makes wire and cable, wiring components and tubing, announced a host of cost-cutting measures.
On the New York Stock Exchange today, Raychem's stock fell $2.50, closing at $26.75.


Waldheim Removes Himself From '92 Austrian Election
President Kurt Waldheim of Austria, who found himself ostracized by most world leaders after revelations of his wartime past, announced tonight that he would not run for a second six-year term in elections scheduled for next June.
The 72-year-old former United Nations Secretary General said he had decided not to seek another term "after due consideration of the interests of the republic."


Randolph T. McKelvey, Executive, 86
Randolph T. McKelvey, an advertising executive and former executive vice president of Young &amp; Rubicam, died on Thursday at the Village on the Green Health Center in Longwood, Fla.
He was 86 years old and lived in Tequesta, Fla.
He died of complications of Alzheimer's disease, a family spokeswoman said.


Northwest Drug reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


CHRONICLE
Former Gov.
MADELEINE M. KUNIN of Vermont is among the 45 fellows at the Mary Ingraham Bunting Institute at Radcliffe College in Cambridge, Mass.
She will spend the next academic year doing research on women in politics for a book, said Gretchen Elmendorf, a spokeswoman for the institute.
Ms.
Kunin ended her third term as governor in December.
At the institute she holds the post of Distinguished Visitor in Public Policy.
Ms.
Kunin will give lectures on the environment, women in politics and on developing leadership among women, Ms.
Elmendorf said.


Quotation of the Day
"I'm fed up, too. I don't want to be stepping over people. I don't want them approaching me all over the place. You're not going to get me to say homeless people should be living on the streets. But until we offer a decent alternative these people aren't going to go anywhere." -- Douglas H. Lasdon, executive director of the Legal Action Center for the Homeless.  [ 26:6. ]


Yanks Fall to Hottest Team in Town: the Twins
It's been like this since the final days of May.
Someone gets a hit, drives in a run, strikes out a batter, makes a marvelous defensive play.
The Minnesota Twins win again.
They have been doing it for almost a month, beating teams and finding heroes every night.
The Yankees are familiar with the formula.


BRIEFS
*
Audi A.G., Ingolstadt, Germany, a unit of Volkswagen A.G., will raise the prices on almost all models by an average of 2.9 percent beginning Monday. *
Eaton Corp., Cleveland, a maker of power components and electrical equipment, has bought the Arrow-Hart business from Cooper Industries, Houston.
Terms were not disclosed.


Patents; Seeking Out The Lowest Air Fares
For passengers lucky enough to spot it, Continental Airlines had a terrific bargain on June 15: $56 to fly from Washington to Los Angeles.
Most people, however, would have missed it.
Although valid, because the fare was sent to airline reservation computers used by travel agents, it was offered by mistake when a Continental keypunch operator dropped the 2 from the correct price of $562.
As a result, it was never advertised and remained buried amid hundreds of other fares in dozens of seat categories.
Indeed, it took Continental itself three days to catch the mistake and scratch the offer.


Sports of The Times; The Wedding Was Set for Home Plate
It was going to be one of those glorious little baseball weddings, with the ballplayer and his betrothed walking under a canopy of bats held aloft by teammates from the pitcher's mound to home plate, and there, with a priest instead of an umpire, they would take their marriage vows.
All this was scheduled to take place for Ivan (Pudge) Rodriguez, 19, and Maribel Rivera, 18, childhood sweethearts, Thursday night in Tulsa, Okla., between games of a doubleheader between the home team, the Drillers, for whom Rodriguez was the regular catcher, and the Shreveport Captains, of the Class AA Texas League.


Syracuse Official Foresees Trouble
Syracuse's athletic director concedes that the school's basketball program is not likely to escape unscathed from an investigation of possible N.C.A.A. rules violations.
"We won't be vindicated," Jake Crouthamel said earlier this week at a country club event near Rochester sponsored by boosters.


Video Display Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Japan's Socialist Party Leader Quits
The leader of the Socialist opposition, the best-known woman in Japanese politics, said today that she would resign to take responsibility for the party's recent electoral defeats.
The resignation of the politician, Takako Doi, after five years as the leader of the Japan Socialist Party marks the end of a failed revolution in postwar Japanese politics.


Location, Location: For Viola, It's Nowhere
"Brutal pitch," said Frank Viola.
The analysis of his fourth-inning fastball was short, lacerating and conclusive.
It was a lot like the swing Brian Hunter put on it.


Istec Industries &amp; Technologies Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mission West Properties reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Cardinal Said God Is a Man? Not Really
When John Cardinal O'Connor was reported this week to have declared in his Sunday sermon that God is a man, a theologian in Germany compared the Cardinal's powers of reasoning to a donkey's.
Stand-up comics reacted with ribald meditations on the male anatomy.
And a radio talk-show host in New York spent a full hour encouraging callers to comment, prompting several "male chauvinist pig" characterizations.
There is one problem: The Cardinal apparently never said it.


James M. Dunning, 86, Former Harvard Dean
Dr.
James M. Dunning, the former dean of the Harvard School of Dental Medicine, died Thursday at the Carlton Willard Village Nursing Home in Bedford, Mass.
He was 86 years old and lived in Cambridge.
He died of cancer, a spokeswoman for the dental school said.


Undersized and Unable to Speak, 3 Girls Are Found Amid Squalor
Three malnourished girls who apparently have had little contact with the outside world have been found living in a squalid apartment, unable to speak, the police said.
The girls, 2, 4 and 6 years old, made only grunting noises and hid under trash and moldy clothing when an officer arrived to arrest their mother, Ruby Pointer, 40 years old, on drug charges Wednesday, the police said.


Parades Bring Revenue Into New York City
To the Editor:
Your suggestion that all New York City parades should be combined (editorial, June 7) does not consider the millions of dollars these parades bring into the city through tourism.


Specialist on Leisure Is Dismissed by College
A professor of leisure studies who had been accused of too leisurely an approach to his duties has been dismissed by Western Illinois University's board.
After 30 minutes of discussion at a closed meeting, the Board of Governors of State Colleges and Universities on Thursday voted 8 to 0 to discharge the 47-year-old professor, George R. Harker, effective immediately.
He was the first tenured professor to be dismissed in the school's 92-year history, university officials said.


Dollar Is Generally Higher and Gold Moderately Lower
The dollar was mostly higher in quiet trading yesterday as the foreign exchange markets awaited the outcome of a weekend meeting of Group of Seven monetary officials.
Gold prices fell moderately.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold fell $2.10 an ounce, closing at $365.90.
The Republic National Bank later quoted gold at $365.50, off $2.50.
The dollar has soared about 20 percent in recent months on optimism about an economic turnaround in the United States.
The improving economy raises the prospects of higher interest rates, which support the dollar by increasing foreign demand for United States investments.


Reunion for Henefeld
It's been almost a year since NADAV HENEFELD broke the hearts of Connecticut basketball fans by signing a professional contract to play in Israel, but Husky fans still love Henefeld, known as the Dove.
Henefeld returned on Wednesday to the University of Connecticut campus for a reunion with his old teammates, and he was welcomed back to Storrs like an old friend.


The Car Is Dead. Long Live the . . .
The people who say they have the alternative to the car have put their show on the road.
Ragtag and quirky, maybe, but definitely alternative.
The "Festival of Solar, Electric and Human-Powered Vehicles" toured Washington for three days this week and then began a six-day trip to New York.
It featured experimental bicycles and cargo tricycles, high-tech electric go-carts and a solar-powered plastic car, a lot of enthusiasm, a lot of rain and heat, and a sense that a long evolutionary struggle lies ahead.


Hunt Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 2


Lionel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


Todd Shipyards Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Imnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Parliament in Poland Rejects Walesa Plan on Election Law
Poland's Parliament today rejected election law changes demanded by President Lech Walesa, despite his threat to dissolve it.
Parliament's lower house threw out all four amendments to the law introduced by the Senate on Thursday in line with President Walesa's wishes.


Marquest Medical Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30


Soviet Politics At Home and Away


Bridge
Several newcomers to the international scene will have their chance in the women's teams when the Venice Trophy is played in Yokohama, Japan, in October.
Stasha Cohen of Glen Ridge, N.J., Sue Picus of Manhattan, Nancy Passell of Dallas and Nell Cahn of Shreveport, La., will make their debut on one American team along with Rhoda Walsh of Los Angeles and Sharon Osberg of San Francisco.
The other will also have four newcomers, Jill Meyers and Kay Schulle, both of Santa Monica, Calif., Pam Wittes of Los Alamitos, Calif., and Randi Montin of Torrance, Calif., together with two former world champions, Juanita Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., and Cheri Bjerkan of Elmhurst, Ill.


Jako Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


GORBACHEV TO MIX PLANS ON ECONOMY OF LEFT AND RIGHT
Confronted with competing economic plans from left and right, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that he was preparing to combine them to present to the leaders of seven major industrial nations next month.
His decision not to support in its entirety the radical plan worked out by a liberal economist, Grigory A. Yavlinsky, in collaboration with Harvard economists and instead to seek to merge it with a somewhat more conservative "anti-crisis" reform favored by Prime Minister Valentin S. Pavlov, underscored Mr.
Gorbachev's continuing efforts to keep a centrist policy, in the face of competing pulls and tugs.


LTV Names Chairman
The LTV Corporation, which is trying to reorganize after five years in bankruptcy court, said today that its president and chief executive, David H. Hoag, would also become chairman.
Mr.
Hoag, 52 years old, succeeds Raymond A. Hay, who will continue to serve as a director, the company said.
Mr.
Hoag, who is directing LTV's bankruptcy talks, was named as president and chief executive in January.
He also serves as chief executive of LTV Steel.


U.S. and Its Allies Plan to Station Troops in Turkey to Protect Kurds
The United States and its European allies plan to leave a 5,000-member contingency force in southeastern Turkey to protect the Kurds once coalition forces withdraw from northern Iraq in mid-July, European diplomats and Administration officials said today.
British and French officials, who are under heavy pressure from large Kurdish minorities in their countries to protect their countrymen in northern Iraq, have pressed the Bush Administration to contribute forces to a multinational brigade that could quickly respond to any possible retribution against Kurds by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.


Arch Petroleum Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


SHL Systemhouse reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Caution Is Urged on Lyme Disease Vaccinations for Dogs
A shield to protect humans against Lyme disease is not at hand, but a vaccine to protect dogs became available last summer.
Hundreds of thousands of worried dog owners around the country have already flocked to their veterinarians to obtain it.
Some leading veterinary scientists, alarmed by the rush for a magic answer to what they feel is sometimes an inflated fear, have urged that the vaccine be used sparingly until more is learned about its effectiveness and long-term safety.


U.S. OFFICIALS SEIZE HUGE HEROIN CACHE
Federal agents in San Francisco yesterday announced the biggest seizure of heroin in United States history, raising more concerns that the drug is growing more and more popular.
"There's been a tremendous amount of attention focused on cocaine," said Ralph B. Lochridge, a spokesman for the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration in Los Angeles.
"But we have a serious heroin problem and it's growing."


John Neulinger, 67, Psychology Professor
John Neulinger, professor emeritus of psychology at City College, died yesterday at his home in Dolgeville, N.Y.
He was 67 years old.
He died of a heart attack, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Summer Dawns Sunny, Hot and Humid


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL 2-5
Rival economic plans in Moscow from the left and the right will be combined by President Gorbachev, who said he would present the result to the leaders of seven major industrial powers next month.
Page 1
Boris Yeltsin defended his maturity and morality to an audience of students and guests in New York.
Accused of rowdiness and drinking too much on his last trip here, he said he was not a hooligan.  5


Damson Oil Files Chapter 11 Petition
The Damson Oil Corporation, an oil and gas concern, said it had sought protection from creditors in Federal bankruptcy court, while also agreeing to sell its natural gas properties in 24 states to the Parker &amp; Parsely Company, in Midland, Tex.
The deal would face approval from the bankruptcy court in Houston, where the New York-based Damson filed its Chapter 11 petition.
Under the arrangements, Damson would receive stock from Parker &amp; Parsely, also an oil and gas company, for the properties, and the stock would be distributed among creditors.
A lawyer for bondholders who hope to receive a large portion of the stock was not sure how much the deal would be worth.
Damson had about $50 million in bonds outstanding, said the lawyer, Jeff Leighton.


New Diversity Old Hat in Some Schools
Sharon Selwyn and Pearl Shoskes teach 46 kindergarten children from 20 different countries, and yesterday their students were learning how to count in Polish, Urdu, Tagalog, Vietnamese and Punjabi as well as in English and Spanish.
"You can't get any more multicultural than this," Ms. Selwyn said.


Base-Closing Panel Reaps No Personal Gain
To the Editor:
In "White House Sleaze Is Back" (Op-Ed, June 8), Representative George Miller writes about what he calls the "sleaze factor" pertaining to "the flagrant conflicts of interest that riddle the Presidential commission on military base closings." He states that five commission members had financial links to companies "that are directly tied to the Pentagon" and criticizes the chairman, former Representative Jim Courter, for serving as a lobbyist for Grumman.


Owner of Killer Dogs Receives Jail Sentence
The owner of two pit bull dogs that killed his neighbor was sentenced to two years in prison today, despite tearful claims of remorse.
The dogs owned by Edwin Hill, a former police officer, attacked and killed his nextdoor neighbor, Betty Lou Stidham, a 57-year-old school teacher.


Cattle Are at 8-Month Low; Grains and Soybeans Fall
Cattle futures prices on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange tumbled today to an eight-month low.
Other meat and livestock futures also declined.
On other commodity markets, grains and soybeans futures plunged; precious metals slipped and energy futures were mixed.


INSIDE
Council's Deeper Cuts To avoid the property tax rise called for by Mayor David N. Dinkins, the City Council is proposing more layoffs, mayoral aides say.
Page 25.
Washington Post's New Era


BAKER URGES END TO YUGOSLAV RIFT
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d made a highly unusual attempt today to persuade the feuding leaders of Yugoslavia's six republics not to let their country break up into separate states, but said his appeal got nowhere and that Yugoslavia could be headed for "disintegration."
Mr.
Baker was visiting Yugoslavia for the first time, and was not expected to make much headway in defusing a welter of old nationalist feuds.
Nonetheless, he sounded something of an international alarm.
Fear of Broad Consequences
After individual meetings with the leaders of the six republics, Mr.
Baker said he had heard nothing to reduce his fears that this nation could break up in violence, fomenting the kind of instability in the Balkan region that helped touch off World War I.


Music in Review
'The Burning Fiery Furnace'  Church of the Holy Trinity 318 East 88th Street
In past seasons, the Center for Contemporary Opera has presented the first and third of Benjamin Britten's church parables, "Curlew River" and "The Prodigal Son." On Tuesdayevening, the company completed the cycle with a modest but attractive and well-performed production of the middle work, "The Burning Fiery Furnace."


Corrections
A report by The Associated Press in the Chronicle column last Saturday about the arrest of Jack LaLanne on suspicion of drunken driving in San Luis Obispo, Calif., misstated the position of his car.
It straddled the line dividing two northbound lanes of a four-lane, two-way highway.
It did not cross a center divider.


Music in Review
Grupo SEMA  Merkin Concert Hall 129 West 67th Street
Not long ago, Spanish early-music ensembles could be heard infrequently on recordings and hardly at all in live performance outside Europe.
But in the last year several fine groups have made their American debuts, some of them sponsored by Spanish foundations intent on showing off their country's culture in conjunction with next year's celebration of the 500th anniversary of Columbus's voyage.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.79
8.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.56
7.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.75
5.73
7.63
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.16
8.13
8.52
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.50
8.46
8.47
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.55
9.505
9.62
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.24
7.24
7.54
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mark's Work Wearhouse reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


Top Japanese Brokerage Admits It Repaid Losses of Biggest Clients
In a dramatic comedown for the world's largest brokerage house, the Nomura Securities Company admitted today that it had discriminated against the majority of its customers by improperly compensating some of its biggest clients for stock market losses.
In its stunning announcement, Nomura reversed a heated denial that it made just one day earlier and confirmed reports that it had made nearly $120 million in such payments.


Child World Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


Evicting the Homeless; All Sides Show an Increasing Frustration As New York City Uses Harsher Measures
The Dinkins administration's separate decisions to roust homeless people from Tompkins Square Park earlier this month and from Columbus Circle within the next week represent a more aggressive approach to a growing problem that is trying the patience of many New Yorkers, including the Mayor.
City officials say there is no new blanket policy of removing all homeless people from all the public spaces they now occupy.
But they acknowledge that they are responding, if sometimes reluctantly, to rising anger over permanent encampments by the homeless in public spaces.
Several recent crimes and disturbances have also heightened the public's frustration with government's failure to reduce the homeless problem after more than a decade.


CHRONICLE
BOB KEESHAN, a.k.a.
Captain Kangaroo, is to receive an award from the American Medical Association tomorrow in Chicago.
The award, which goes to a layman for distinguished service, is to be presented at the A.M.A.'s annual meeting.


What Next? The Macaroni Knows
Spotting the recession's end is not that hard.
Just forget the index of leading economic indicators.
Ignore consumer confidence.
And don't even give a passing thought to the stock market.
Ponder, instead, macaroni and cheese.
Kraft General Foods does.
Like ancient Roman priests peering at bird entrails, executives at the nation's largest food company contemplate the vagaries of creamy carbohydrates for clues to the economy.


Idan Software Industries.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


MDS Health Group Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Your Money; When Enterprise And Family Mix
Owning a business can enrich a family, as well as strengthen relationships as people work together, or it can split a family apart, pitting generation against generation, sibling against sibling.
An example of the latter situation is provided by the Bingham family, who sold their Louisville, Ky., newspapers after being unable to resolve bitter family quarrels.
Most families who own businesses -- and 90 percent of the businesses in America are family-owned -- do not quarrel in the glare of national publicity as the Binghams did.
Still, only 13 percent of family businesses survive into the third generation, Benjamin Benson told more than 100 business owners at a seminar sponsored by Chemical Bank at its headquarters in New York on Wednesday.


Bush Critical of Senate Transportation Bill
President Bush criticized a Senate bill for highway construction and mass transit today, saying it was too costly and would not give states enough control over how the money is spent.
The Senate approved the $123 billion transportation bill on Wednesday by a vote of 91 to 7.


Lewis Sylvester May, Stockbroker, 90
Lewis Sylvester May, a retired stockbroker, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 90 years old.
He died of heart failure, a funeral home representative said.


Jay Jacobs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 22


Filling Prescriptions More Cheaply by Mail
The steadily rising cost of medicine is helping to increase the appeal of mail-order pharmacies, which can offer substantial savings to those who regularly take prescription drugs.
The prices are 10 to 30 percent lower than in a regular pharmacy.
And there is sharp price competition among mail-order concerns.
At four mail-order pharmacies called this week, the cost of Prozac, a widely used antidepressant, varied from $144.39 to $171.95 for 100 pills, a price difference of 19 percent.
A Manhattan pharmacist quoted a price of $228.95.


Spain Warned on Inflation
Spain must keep a tight rein on monetary policy to control its high inflation and prepare for the increased competition of a single European market at the end of 1992, the International Monetary Fund said today.
The report said Spain had made much progress since the mid-1980's in lowering trade obstacles, opening its economy to foreigners and producing jobs and investment faster than the European Community as a whole.


Beliefs
Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls had just stormed back into their locker room after defeating the Los Angeles Lakers for the National Basketball Association championship.
Television cameras were scanning the scene for the first stirrings of frenzied celebration.
What they found instead was a ragged huddle of players, straining to join hands in the center of their ring and reciting.
It took a few seconds before the microphones picked up the sound: the Lord's Prayer.


EXECUTIVE
*
Black &amp; Decker Corp., Towson, Md., a maker of power tools, named Gary D. Kennedy executive vice president. *
E.
J.
Brach Corp., Oakbrook Terrace, Ill., a candy company, named Robert P. Magrann senior vice president of sales and trade marketing.


Tidewater-Zapata $407 Million Deal
Tidewater Inc., a large operator of vesselss and barges for offshore oil operations, will acquire a rival, creating the largest company of its kind in the world.
The $407 million acquisition of the Zapata Gulf Marine Corporation in Houston will give the New Orleans-based Tidewater 576 vessels ranging from towing and supply craft to barges.
John P. Laborde, Tidewater's head, will continue as chairman, president and chief executive of the combined company.
Under the deal, Zapata Gulf's three owners will get $315 million in stock, representing 46 percent of the combined company.
Tidewater will also assume $92 million in debt from Zapata Gulf.


Yeltsin Gives His Regards To Wall Street (Soberly)
On his last day in America, Boris N. Yeltsin addressed the issue of hooliganism head-on.
Although he indulged a bit too much in Jack Daniel's and jackanapery on his last visit to the United States in 1989, leaving an impression of rowdiness, the new President of the Russian republic defended both his maturity and morality before an audience of students and guests at New York University yesterday.


Bronx Board Member Backs Dinkins Choice
Ninfa Segarra, the Bronx representative on the New York City Board of Education and a potential challenger to Mayor David N. Dinkins's choice for board president, said yesterday that she would support the Mayor's candidate, H. Carl McCall.
"In H. Carl McCall, the board will have reinvorgated leadership and a partner with government expertise who can help carry forward the board's priorities for the schoolchildren of our city," Ms.
Segarra said at a news conference at the board's Brooklyn headquarters.


A.L. Van Houtte reports earnings for Year to March 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras in Final


Workingmen's Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lindsay Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 11


How Banks Can Help Children
Bringing up children is a responsibility shared by parents and the community.
Still, while 90,000 children under 3 years of age need day care in New York City, only 6,100 licensed slots are available.
And local and state government certainly cannot afford to foot all the capital costs of building and starting new child-care centers.
But no one should give up hope.
One solution is to find financing partners.
Banks are more than a resource.
They have expertise in investing in child care and they also have incentive.
In New York, local banks are required by Federal and state Community Reinvestment Acts to meet the credit needs of all segments of their communities.
Nationally, the Federal law has encouraged banks to commit more than $7.5 billion in loans to poor communities.


Ben Benjamin, Theatrical Agent, 80
Ben Benjamin, an agent who represented Burt Lancaster, Sir John Gielgud and Ingrid Bergman, among others, in a longtime Hollywood career, died of cancer on Thursday.
He was 80 years old.
He died at his home in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles, said his spokesman, Dick Winters.


Scandinavia Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


About New York
Boris Yakobson was born during the siege of Leningrad, suffered persecution in the Soviet Union for being a Jew and immigrated to New York City a year ago.
He has a job as a porter in a Russian nightclub in Brighton Beach.
On Wednesday, he sat in a blue hospital gown waiting for something he has long wanted.
At 47 years of age, he was going to be circumcised.


MAN IN THE News; Congress Party's Calculating Loyalist: Pamulaparti Venkata Narasimha Rao
An intellectual who speaks at least six languages, a quiet-spoken poet and linguist, a Hindi and Sanskrit scholar, P. V. Narasimha Rao, a frail, elderly South Indian, seems at first glance a curious choice to lead a nation of 850 million that is seized by poverty, illiteracy and increasing violence.
Even friends speak a bit cautiously about a politician who faithfully served Prime Minister Indira Gandhi as well as her son, Rajiv, who was also Prime Minister.


Bossy and Potvin Honored
Mike Bossy and Denis Potvin, the scorer and the defender who helped the Islanders win four straight Stanley Cups from 1980 to 1983, were elected today to the Hockey Hall of Fame, along with Bob Pulford, a wing on the last four Toronto teams to win the Cup, and Clint Smith, a center on the last Ranger team to win the cup, in 1940.
Smith was voted in by the veterans committee.
Bossy, a right wing who scored 573 goals and had 553 assists in an 11-year career that was shortened by back problems, was the National Hockey League rookie of the year in 1978, four years after Potvin was voted the award.
Potvin, who scored 1,126 points in 1,060 games, was voted the league's top defenseman three times.
Pulford, now senior vice president of the Chicago Blackhawks, played most of his 16-year career from 1956 to 1972 with the Maple Leafs.


Sanford Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
An article last Saturday about financial disclosure forms filed by House and Senate members from the New York area misidentified the recipient of speaking fees listed by Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey.
The $1,600 in speaking fees for 1990 were earned by his wife, Ernestine, a professor of literature at Montclair State College.
Amy Felber, a press aide for the Senator, said he does not accept honorariums.


Richard Freedman, Critic, 59
Richard Freedman, an educator and film critic, died on Friday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 59 years old and lived in Hoboken, N.J.
He died of cancer, a family spokesman said.


Reactor Tests Hair and Nails Of Zachary Taylor for Arsenic
Scientists today irradiated parts of the remains of President Zachary Taylor in a uranium-fueled reactor to determine if the nation's 12th President died of arsenic poisoning.
The hair and nail samples tested were taken earlier this week after the remains were exhumed in Louisville, Ky.
The samples were placed in the Oak Ridge National Laboratory's high flux isotope reactor, the Department of Energy's most powerful research reactor, and bombarded with neutrons.


2 Carolina Banks In Merger Talks
The South Carolina National Corporation, the state's biggest bank, and the Wachovia Corporation confirmed that they were discussing a merger.
Neither would elaborate, but analysts said such a move would be a good fit.
South Carolina's shares have risen recently on rumors that Wachovia, based in Winston-Salem, N.C., had been considering a buyout.
Henry Coffey, an analyst at J. C. Bradford in Nashville, called South Carolina a good bank that "could stand on own two feet for years to come." But it has had trouble recently, primarily because of loan troubles.
South Carolina's earnings fell 35 percent between the first quarters of 1990 and 1991.
Wachovia has about $25.6 billion in assets, with branches in North Carolina and Georgia.


Peerless Carpet reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Eagle-Picher Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Penwest Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Tokheim Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


FDP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Film; When Murder Is Surreal, Corpses Don't Stay Dead
"What does a real artist do when he sees blood?" asks a menacing middle-aged murderer after he has stabbed two almost-innocent bystanders in a college men's room.
"He uses it," the killer says as he dips his hand into a pool of bright red goo and starts writing on the wall.
He would seem truly lethal, but the corpses on the floor are fidgeting.
Many people are killed but few stay dead in "The Golden Boat," Raul Ruiz's affectionate satire of murder mysteries, soap operas and life on the artistic fringes of downtown New York.
The film, shot in lower Manhattan and featuring cameos by the directors Jim Jarmusch and Barbet Schroeder and the writer Kathy Acker, is the first English-language work by Mr.
Ruiz, a prolific Chilean-born, European-based film maker.


Justices Hold Localities May Impose Pesticide Rules Stiffer Than U.S. Law
The Supreme Court ruled today that the Federal law regulating the manufacture, sale and use of pesticides permitted local governments to impose more stringent regulations of their own.
The 9-to-0 decision overturned a 1990 ruling by the Wisconsin Supreme Court, which found that the Federal law pre-empted efforts by local governments to impose their own pesticide regulations.


Patents; Protein in Corn Called Potential Fat Substitute
Opta Food Ingredients Inc., a start-up company in Cambridge, Mass., has patented a protein derived from corn that it says could serve as a potential fat substitute.
The protein is called zein (pronounced zeen), which is abundant in corn kernels and has many characteristics of fat: It coats the mouth and makes many foods seem creamy, juicy or succulent, yet has about one-third as many calories, the company contends.


Base-Closing Panel Reaps No Personal Gain; Thornburgh and Exxon
To the Editor:
The distorted "sleaze" attack on Attorney General Dick Thornburgh by Representative George Miller, a Democrat (Op-Ed, June 8), is wrong on the law and the facts, and unfair in its conclusions.


CSP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


London Journal; The Pub's Still a Fixture, but What About Darts?
For most of the 1980's, the Sydney Arms was a magnet for the best and brashest of London's dart set, young men who came to prove they could hold their beer and still pitch a needle-tipped tungsten shaft with close to the accuracy of a laser-guided missile.
But these days, when Roger Nickson surveys an evening's crowd inside his south London pub, mostly middle-aged men and women pinching their darts like dead herring and squinting in the smoky air, he shakes his head and wonders aloud about the future of the game.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the creation of the Courtroom Television Network omitted one system in Manhattan that will carry it.
In addition to the Paragon cable system, Manhattan Cable TV will carry the channel beginning July 1.


Cimflex Teknowledge reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Satellite Radio System for Homes Is Cleared
In what would be the first venture to broadcast radio programming directly to listeners by satellite, the Federal Communications Commission gave permission today to a start-up company here to launch a satellite that will provide service to countries throughout Africa and the Middle East.
The company, Worldspace Inc., hopes to launch a satellite in 1993 that would broadcast up to 36 channels.
Because satellite signals can blanket a large region, they can reach locations too remote to receive radio signals from local towers or from shortwave.


Boeing Stock Off
The Boeing Company declined to comment on reports that company officials told analysts at the Paris Air Show that research and development spending could be higher than Wall Street's current estimates.
Boeing's stock fell $1.875 today, to $46.875, on a volume of 2.5 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
Traders said analysts, including Phil Friedman of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company and Judith Bollinger of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, had trimmed earnings estimates after comments by Boeing officials in Paris.
"That's absolutely proprietary information," a Boeing spokesman said of research and development spending levels.
"We never talk about that."


Payment Set By Shearson
Shearson Lehman Brothers has agreed to reimburse Consumers Union, publisher of Consumer Reports, for money it spent as a result of a kickback scheme between Consumers Union's former chief financial officer and a Shearson broker, the organization announced yesterday.
Consumers Union dismissed the officer, David Granston, in April after an investigation into an arrangement Mr.
Granston had with a broker, Stanley Feminella, who had worked at three firms: David Lerner Associates in Syosset, L.I.; Paine Webber, and Shearson Lehman, to share commissions for the purchase by Consumers Union of securities.


New Tactics in Promoting Movies
People who go to Paramount Pictures ' summer movies will receive "scratch and win" cards offering a chance to win prizes ranging from a Caribbean cruise to automobile tires and videotapes.
At American Multi-Cinemas, the nation's second largest theater chain, customers can join a "frequent moviegoer program" that promises free tickets and refreshments.
Both programs are being carefully monitored by other studios and theater chains and are likely to be imitated if successful, industry executives said.
Movie revenues have risen only because of higher ticket prices, but attendance has been stagnant for more than a decade.


States May Ban Nude Dancing To Protect 'Order,' Justices Rule
The Supreme Court ruled today that while nude dancing is a form of expression entitled to a measure of First Amendment protection, states may ban it in the interest of "protecting order and morality."
The 5-to-4 decision upheld a public-indecency law in Indiana as applied to nude performances in a nightclub and adult bookstore in South Bend.
The law, similar to laws in effect in some two dozen other states, requires female performers to wear at least pasties and a G-string.


COMPANY NEWS;
Isuzu Motors Ltd., Japan's second-largest truck maker, announced a $1.44 billion investment program that would include more production at its Indiana plant.
The announcement came as Isuzu reported that for the six months through April it had a loss of $132 million, on sales of $4.20 billion.
The investment program is designed to return the company to profitability starting with its fiscal year ending in October 1993.
Isuzu said that production of its small pickup trucks and recreational vehicles at Subaru Isuzu Automotive Inc. in Lafayette, Ind. -- owned by Isuzu and Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd. of Japan -- would increase to 8,000 trucks and recreational vehicles a month from 5,000.
Isuzu said it would ask the General Motors Corporation to sell the vehicles.
They are involved in about a half-dozen ventures.


Wacoal Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Adobe Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


G.M. Prepares To Offer 'Percs'
Investment bankers for General Motors canvassed Wall Street yesterday to test the waters for a security that is expected to be priced next week.
The new security, known as "percs," for performance equity redemption cumulative stock, is essentially a way for G.M. to sell common stock at a price to be set later.
Investors will pay for the preferred security in 1991, but the amount of common stock they will later get depends on the price of G.M.'s common shares over the next three years.
The more the share price rises, the less stock an investor in the percs will receive.


Review/Dance; A French Company's Version Of 'Noces'
D.
H.
Lawrence might have appreciated the instinctual drive and onrush of sexual passion that dominate "Les Noces," in a powerful new updated version by the French choreographer Angelin Preljocaj.
The Compagnie Preljocaj (pronounced prel-zho-KAHJ), which made its United States debut on Thursday night as part of the New York International Festival of the Arts, is one of those rebellious experimental dance troupes that seem perennially concerned with the human condition in France, and it is one of the best.


VICTORIOUS REBEL SEES ERITREA VOTE
With a modest show of war weaponry and a parade of guerrillas at an outdoor stadium, the leader of Eritrea addressed the people today for the first time since his rebel group defeated the last Ethiopian Army outpost in the region four weeks ago.
Dressed in civilian clothes instead of the khaki garb of his fighters, Isaias Afewerki, the 46-year-old secretary general of the Eritrean People's Liberation Front, told the crowd that he would seek to legalize last month's military victory through a United Nations-sponsored referendum on independence from Ethiopia.
He said the referendum, a basic goal of the Eritrean Front's separatist campaign, would take place within two years.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Nomura Securities admitted that it had discriminated against the majority of its customers by improperly compensating some of its biggest clients for stock market losses.
A Nomura executive also confirmed reports that the company, which wields enormous political influence, had provided more than $150 million in financing to one of Japan's most powerful and best-known crime families.
The money was apparently used for a stock-manipulation scheme that Nomura helped execute.  [ Page 1. ]


Man in Videotaped Beating Won't Face a Parole Charge
The black motorist whose videotaped beating by white police officers provoked a nationwide uproar will not be charged with violating parole for what the police described as an attempt to run over an undercover vice officer, a state official said today.
Jerome Di Maggio, regional administrator of the Department of Corrections, said an investigation supports the account of the motorist, Rodney G. King.
Mr.
King said he mistook two officers for robbers as they tried to arrest him May 28 after they said he solicited a transvestite prostitute.


Review/Dance; Contrasting 2 Romeos and 2 Juliets
Sylvie Guillem and Ricardo Bustamante stepped into the title roles of "Romeo and Juliet" with American Ballet Theater on Wednesday night, while the matinee performance of Sir Kenneth MacMillan's version of the Prokofiev score at the Metropolitan Opera House was led by Amanda McKerrow and Wes Chapman.
Everyone loves a tragic love story with monumental scenery, as the virtually full houses have testified this week.
Miss Guillem packed the house.
It was her first Juliet in New York and the performance that ended her guest appearances this season with Ballet Theater.
The French-trained dancer will return in July with the Royal Ballet of Britain, where she has been a principal guest artist for two years.


G.O.P. Chief Gives Taste of '92 Attack
The Republican national chairman gave a rough example of the opening dialogue of the 1992 campaign today, laying the failures of the nation's domestic policy squarely on the Democratic-controlled Congress.
"The entire political process in Washington, D.C., stagnates at the Congressional level," the party chairman, Clayton K. Yeutter, declared at the annual summer meeting of the Republican National Committee here.
Escalating the recent attacks on Congress by the Bush Administration, Mr.
Yeutter portrayed Congressional Democrats as out of touch with average Americans, beholden to special interests, unable to fulfill their promises of a new domestic agenda and unable to do much beyond bicker.


CHRONICLE
Archbishop RAYMOND G. HUNTHAUSEN of Seattle, whose stated positions led to an investigation by the Vatican into liberal practices in his archdiocese, announced this week that he will retire in August, five years before he is 75, the mandatory retirement.
He will be succeeded by Archbishop THOMAS J. MURPHY, who was named archbishop coadjutor in 1987 as part of an unusual power-sharing arrangement worked out by a panel of United States bishops and Vatican officials.


South Africa Overhauls Law Used as Muzzle on Dissenters
Parliament wrapped up a landmark session today by approving a radical overhaul of South Africa's Internal Security Act, which was long used to stifle opposition to apartheid.
The new law ends preventive detention and severely limits detention for the purpose of interrogation.
Until now, the Government could hold its opponents indefinitely without trial under Section 28 of the Act, which authorized preventive detention for renewable periods of up to 180 days, and Section 29, which authorized indefinite detention for interrogation.


Jared K. Levin Is Wed to Suzanne J. Hoffman
Suzanne John Hoffman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Hoffman of Madison, Wis., and Jared Kennedy Levin, a son of Gabrielle R. Levin and Ira Levin, both of New York, were married last evening in New York.
Judge Renee R. Roth of Surrogate's Court in Manhattan officiated at the Sign of the Dove restaurant.
The bride, 21 years old, attended the University of Wisconsin and is studying voice.
Her mother, April A. Hoffman, is a librarian at the Randall Elementary School in Madison.
Her father is a counselor for the Madison Metropolitan School District.


Air Products Official Promoted to President
Air Products and Chemicals Inc., the large supplier of industrial gases, specialty chemicals and environmental and energy systems, elected Harold A. Wagner president and chief operating officer yesterday.
Mr.
Wagner is currently executive vice president of the company's gases and equipment division.
To many analysts the selection of Mr.
Wagner, who has been with the company for 28 years and was a former head of its European business, seems to pave the way for him to succeed Dexter F. Baker, the company's chief executive, who will retire next April at age 65.


Machine Technology reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Idea Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Mail Boxes Etc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A New Superintendent Of New York Banking
While Congress is debating substantial changes in banking regulations, some of which could curb the powers of state regulators, Derrick D. Cephas was confirmed by the State Senate late last week as New York's Superintendent of Banks.
He will replace Jill M. Considine, who resigned earlier this year to take a job at the American Express Company.
Mr.
Cephas, 39, a partner who specializes in banking law at Breed, Abbott &amp; Morgan, was general counsel at the Banking Department for two years in the mid-1980's.


Shade Becomes a Tourist Haven on a Hot Day in the Capital


Biocraft Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Council Seeks Further Cuts In the Budget
To hold down Mayor David N. Dinkins's demands for property tax increases, the New York City Council leadership has proposed far deeper spending cuts.
The Mayor's staff said yesterday that this would mean the layoff of 7,000 more city workers than the 10,000 Mr.
Dinkins has already moved to dismiss.
The Council's call for $476 million in additional budget cuts -- on top of the $1.5 billion Mr.
Dinkins has already proposed -- amounted to a last-ditch effort to stave off that much of the $776 million in higher property taxes Mr.
Dinkins has sought.


Corrections
A picture caption on Thursday about a New York City crackdown on fast taxicab meters misidentified the inspector shown.
He was Andres La Salle.


Patents; Self-Watering Planter
Fred W. Lishman, a geophysicist with the Federal Government, has patented a new self-watering planter.
"I've had a couple of plants, and they always died because I didn't know how to water them," the inventor said.
The most common kind of self-watering planters dangle fiber wicks from the base of the pot.
The wick draws up water through capillary action from a container below.
The problem, the inventor said, is that these planters cannot be fine-tuned to the needs of a particular plant.
Mr.
Lishman invented a planter that becomes activated by weight loss as water in the pot evaporates.
The plant sits atop a spring-loaded scale, which is linked to valves that allow water to flow from a reservoir when the pot reaches a designated weight.
Mr. Lishman received patent 5,020,261.


Swing Series to Open at Lincoln Center Plaza
Tito Puente and his orchestra are to play dance music at Lincoln Center plaza from 8:15 to 11 P.M. on Wednesday to open the 1991 Midsummer Night Swing series.
The series is to present a different ensemble four evenings a week through July 27; groups led by Lionel Hampton, Illinois Jacquet, Peter Duchin, Yomo Toro and Bruce Daigrepont are to be included this season.
The series is to present an evening of Viennese and American waltzes, polkas with the Emery Davis Orchestra, a tribute to the Mozart Bicentennial and an all-American Fourth of July weekend to which United States military personnel in uniform will be admitted free.
On Wednesday evenings, free dance lessons will be offered from 6:30 to 7:30 P.M.


Upjohn-P.&amp; G.
The Upjohn Company said it had agreed to buy all rights to the motion sickness medication Dramamine from the Procter &amp; Gamble Company before June 30.
Terms were not disclosed, but Upjohn said Dramamine was the top-selling preventative and treatment for dizziness, nausea and vomiting from motion sickness that could be purchased over-the-counter.
The medication had been marketed by Richardson Vicks Inc., a Procter &amp; Gamble subsidiary.
Upjohn, which is based in Kalamazoo, said the acquisition was consistent with its objective to expand its consumer products operation.


WD-40 Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Billboard's New Charts Roil the Record Industry
When Billboard, the music industry's leading trade magazine, began publishing new pop and country album charts last month using a new computerized method, the change set off alarms in the record business that have not stopped ringing.
Pop albums by a number of new artists whose careers major record companies were trying to establish suddenly plummeted, while a bunch of country albums took dramatic upward leaps.
A chorus of record company executives charged that the chart, prepared by Soundscan, a research film in Hartsdale, N.Y., would seriously undermine their efforts to promote new talent.


Inquiries by the F.T.C. on Intel Cited
Federal Trade Commission lawyers have been inquiring about the business practices of the Intel Corporation, computer industry executives said today.
It does not appear the F.T.C. has begun a formal investigation yet, and Intel said today that it had not heard from the agency.
Rather, industry executives said, it appears the agency is making some preliminary inquiries because it has received complaints about reportedly anti-competitive practices by the Santa Clara, Calif., semiconductor company, which dominates the business of supplying microprocessors for computers.


Rijo Sidelined
The Cincinnati Reds placed right-hander JOSE RIJO on the 15-day disabled list yesterday and recalled pitcher TIM LAYANA from Class AAA Nashville.
Rijo, winner of his last five decisions, has a 6-2 record and a 2.82 earned run average.
But he chipped a bone in his right ankle while sliding into second base on a steal attempt against Montreal Thursday night and the leg was placed in a brace. (AP)


A Ruling on Pesticides
The Supeme Court ruled that the Federal law regulating the production, sale and use of pesticides permitted municipalities to impose more stringent regulations of their own.
The 9-to-0 decision overturned a ruling by a Wisconsin court that Federal law pre-empted efforts by local governments to impose their regulations.
Article, page 9.


Challenges to Judicial Elections Revive
When she sought election as a district judge in 1986, Janice G. Clark, a black lawyer here, knew the deck was stacked against her and she couldn't win.
Her aim, she said today, was to "raise the consciousness" of black Louisiania voters to the need for more black judges.
She lost the election, but her cause got a boost on Thursday, when the United States Supreme Court ruled 6 to 3 in both a Louisiana and a Texas case that judicial elections are covered by the Federal Voting Rights Act, which prohibits voting practices that discriminate on the basis of race.
The decision overturned a September 1990 ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, covering Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi, which held that judicial elections were exempt from the act.


Realistic Goals Can Keep a Runner's Eyes Dry
When Gordon Bloch of Manhattan was new to running competition, she found disappointing performances devastating.
"Early in my career, if I was having a bad day, I'd cry in the middle of the race," said Bloch, now a world-class runner.
Along with other runners and sports psychologists, Bloch said the key to satisfaction in road racing was to establish many measures of success.
"Your finish time is not everything," said Bloch, who is 30 years old.
"Every race has many positive things to offer."


Hopeful View By Executives
The Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation, in its latest survey of business expectations released yesterday, said executives anticipated higher third-quarter sales and profits, up sharply from a second-quarter survey.
But the new results are below the levels reported in a special survey conducted after the Persian Gulf war.


Guidepost; Keeping Food Safe
Some of summer's bounty -- just-picked corn, delicate raspberries -- is not eaten right away.
But there is no reason to let foods spoil.
Here are a few storage tips.
Refrigerator Temperatures


A Tale to Be Told In a Fortune Cookie
To the Editor:
Permit me to share a recent occurrence.
My mother, age 87, and I were enjoying a Chinese dinner at a restaurant in the Somerset, N.J., area.
Our understanding (which we arrived at before leaving her apartment) was that this time was her treat, and I would handle the tip.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Sean Rees, pitcher, and assigned him to San Bernardino of the California League.


Sri Lanka Bomb Said to Kill Up to 60
A suicide car bomb attack at the command center of the army's campaign against guerrillas killed scores of people today, military officials said.
They blamed rebels of the Tamil minority ethnic group for the attack.
Up to 60 people, including 20 civilians, died in the explosion at the heavily fortified Joint Operations Command in the heart of Colombo, the officials said.
The Government, whose figures are often conservative, reported 20 dead, mostly soldiers, and more than 50 wounded.


Dow Rises 11.62; Trading Is Heavy
Under pressure all week, stock prices rebounded yesterday on heavy volume.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 11.62 points, to 2,965.56.
For the week, however, the Dow was off by 34.86.


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Be It Canadian or U.S., It's Money to Lindros
On the eve of the National Hockey League draft, Eric Lindros, the best amateur player in recent years and the player certain to be drafted first, insisted today that money was not everything and his options were open.
Lindros is the 18-year-old son of a nurse and an accountant.
His size and physical skills make him a player in demand and he is aware of his market value.


Impromptu Curtain Speech By 'I Hate Hamlet' Star
As the ghost of John Barrymore in "I Hate Hamlet," Nicol Williamson has offered nightly advice on acting and show business.
Last night, in a protest speech that is bound to become part of Broadway folklore, Mr.
Williamson once more gave the theater a piece of his mind.
During the curtain calls at the Walter Kerr Theater (the show is to close tonight after a 10-week run), Mr.
Williamson stopped the applause and said: "Ladies and gentleman, you know we're closing tomorrow. Shows don't usually end like that. Usually you go out with a smattering of people. You don't go out jam-packed."


Budget Deficit a Factor as Bond Prices Fall
Treasury bond prices fell yesterday, while most shorter maturities posted modest declines.
Dealers attributed the weaker bond prices more to the absence of buyers than any significant selling pressure.
What kept many buyers away, they said, was the record Federal budget deficit of $53.35 billion for May, the relatively large amount of short and intermediate Treasury debt scheduled for sale next week, and the usual caution that precedes a meeting of the Group of Seven nations.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day on Thursday about criticism of the Campbell Soup Company's advertising reported part of the company's response incorrectly.
Campbell said the advertising in question ran three and a half years ago, not "for" three and a half years.


Pavichevich Brewing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Music in Review
'Ballo in Maschera'  Carlos Moseley Music Pavilion Great Lawn, Central Park
Anyone attending the dress rehearsal of the New York Shakespeare Festival's "Othello" at the Delacorte Theater on Thursday evening got a double dose of jealous rage and mayhem.
As the play was starting, at 8 P.M., the Metropolitan Opera was swinging into the murderous final scene of Verdi's "Ballo in Maschera" nearby on the Great Lawn.


Vikonics Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Etymology Favors 'Humankind' as Nonsexist
To the Editor:
Discussing the new Random House Webster's College Dictionary (Arts pages, June 11), you quote Jacques Barzun's defense of the word "mankind" against the supposedly nonsexist alternatives, "humankind" and "humanity." Mr.
Barzun has written "that the word 'man' has its roots in the Sanskrit 'manu,' which means human being," you note, continuing: "Its counterpart in Latin is 'homo.' Thus, he argues, the word 'man' has always had a double meaning -- both male human being and human being in general. . . . Mr. Barzun has written, 'Being derived from "homo," "human" and "humanity" should therefore be damned and suppressed if "mankind" is forbidden.' "


Commecial Metals reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Court TV Seeks Rights to Carry Kuwait Trials
It seemed like a good idea at the time.
Steven Brill, the founder of Courtroom Television Network, the first cable network devoted entirely to broadcasting trials from across the country, was watching CNN in London in May when he saw Kuwait's ambassador to the United States issue an extraordinary invitation.
Ambassador Saud N. al-Sabah, defending his country's trials of people accused of collaborating with Iraq during the seven-month occupation, urged Americans to come and see for themselves whether the trials were fair.
Mr.
Brill was delighted with the offer, since his network is scheduled to start broadcasting courtroom drama 24 hours a day to cities in 40 states, including New York, on July 1. 'Balanced and Dignified'
On May 23, his company wrote a letter to Ambassador Sabah, requesting permission to videotape the trials of 22 journalists accused of collaborating with the Iraqi regime.
Court TV, the letter stated, would cover the trials in their entirety in "a balanced and dignified manner." Such broadcasts, wrote Aaron Freiwald, Court TV's editorial director, would allow viewers "to see and understand not only the story unfolding during the course of the trial, but also exactly how the justice system functions."


Electrocon International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Grave Confounded
After Bing Crosby died his son Gary published a book saying his dad had been a truly terrible father.
This prompted Bob Hope to observe, "It's not even safe to die anymore."
Zachary Taylor, former President of the United States, dead since 1850, might have said, "Bob never spoke a truer line," had he been capable of issuing a press release when the knock came at his mausoleum door the other day.
He was about to be hauled out for further study.
Someone writing a book suspected he may have been poisoned, so an obliging coroner had agreed to subject him to the indignities modern science is uniquely qualified to inflict.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on June 12 about the diversity of the Asian-American population misidentified one group.
Figures from the 1990 census show that 11.2 percent of Asian-Americans are of Indian descent, not "East Indian."


Grants at Issue in Miami Inquiry
Federal investigators working on an inquiry into apparent fraudulent financial aid applications at the University of Miami are looking into the records of more than 100 athletes and a former official in the athletic department, two newspapers reported today.
The former official, Tony Russell, who was assistant academic coordinator in the athletic department, is the primary subject of the inquiry, which is being conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Department of Education, The Miami Herald and The Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel reported.


Donald W. Smith, 85, Ex-Consular Official
Donald W. Smith, a retired Foreign Service officer who held consular posts in London, Bonn and Sydney, Australia, died on Monday at Venice Hospital in Florida.
He was 85 years old and lived in Venice.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


At Last, a Labor Pro at City Hall
Amid the budgetary gloom in New York City, there is one encouraging sign: Mayor David Dinkins's decision to call in an experienced labor consultant.
The arrival of Edward Silver, a labor lawyer with a reputation for tough, fair bargaining, has a chance of turning things around -- if he is given enough responsibility.
In an administration consistently weakened by fragmented authority, that's far from certain.
So far, Mr.
Silver, who was a consultant on labor talks for the Koch administration, has only an ambiguous mandate to advise City Hall on the concessions it needs from municipal unions to help close the budget gap.


Man Accused of Mail-Bomb Killings Blames Klan
The man charged with killing a Federal judge in Alabama and a civil rights lawyer in Georgia has testified that the Ku Klux Klan made and mailed the package bombs that killed the two men a year and a half ago.
In his third day of testifying against the advice of his lawyers, the 57-year-old defendant, Walter Leroy Moody Jr. of Rex, Ga., said Friday that the bombings were the Klan's revenge against the Federal court system for its handling of a lawsuit stemming from a 1987 civil rights march in Cumming, Ga.


Ms. Murphy Wed To Andus Baker
Rowan Durrell Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Murphy of Tewksbury, N.J., was married in Bernardsville, N.J., yesterday to Andus Baker, a son of Robert Baker of Provincetown, Mass., and Barbara M. Baker of Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Alfred M. Niese performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
John on the Mountain.
Ms.
Murphy, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Amherst College and received a master's degree in public administration from Harvard University.
Her father is the president of Application Research and Design, a computer marketing consulting concern in Easton, Pa.
Her mother, Miriam L. Murphy, is the executive director of the New Jersey Committee for the Humanities in New Brunswick.


Air-Conditioners Need Care This Time of Year
ROOM air-conditioners need simple cleaning and maintenance at the beginning of the cooling season and usually again midway through the summer.
Following are the steps involved, together with tips for improving performance and remedies for common air-conditioner woes.
Unplug the air-conditioner before beginning.
Then vacuum the front grille or wipe it clean with a cloth and household spray cleaner.


Camera
The panorama is one of the most dramatic formats in photography.
These pictures cover a range approximating an adult's natural field of vision, and when viewing them, the sensation is that of being there, of witnessing a place or an event.
The latest wave of panoramic pictures started with a tiny one-time-use camera from Eastman Kodak.
It lists for $13.95, but costs $10 or below at shops.
Originally called the Stretch 35, it has been renamed the Fun Saver Panoramic 35.


Reviews/Music; Remembering Kreisler, Violinist and Composer
Fritz Kreisler was born in Vienna in 1875 and died in New York in 1962, neatly spanning two very different times and worlds.
For most of his life he was one of the most famous violinists on the planet, the possessor of a soulfully silvery tone and a generously expansive personality that breathed through every note he played.
Kreisler was also a composer, often playing works of his own in the latter part of a program or as encores.
For a time, in that innocent era before musicologists ruled our lives, he passed off some of those compositions as recently discovered manuscripts by composers famous (Beethoven) to not so famous (Pugnani).
Others were unashamedly his own and tended toward Viennese nostalgia and cheerfully virtuosic transcriptions.


Evening Primrose Requires a Firm Hand
THE evening primroses are in bloom.
These sunny yellow flowers with their up-facing petals (four of them) provide bright spots throughout the summer.
Their golden yellow color is a delightful asset.
Some gardeners also call this plant sundrop, which is a little closer to reality.
But this plant is an aggressive grower.
It needs discipline.
Where once there were just a few of these delightful flowers, there often are many.
In a few years, gardeners often wish they had never planted it.
The plant spreads and grows and in no time appears to be all over the place.


Fields Change Size; Harris Plays On
If anyone ever makes a movie and calls it "Honey, I Shrunk the Football Field," quarterback Major Harris will be in line for a lead role.
Last year, Harris was with the British Columbia Lions of the Canadian Football League, which plays on a field that is 110 yards long and 65 yards wide.
Now, he's playing with the Columbus (Ohio) Thunderbolts of the Arena Football League, whose field measures 50 yards long and 28.3 yards wide.


Robert C. Chinn, Executive, 74
Robert C. Chinn, a business executive, died of a heart attack on Thursday while on a trip to Mexico City with an economic development commission appointed by Gov.
Buddy Roemer.
He was 74 years old.
Mr.
Chinn, a native of Biloxi, Miss., was president and chairman of the Carson-Walker Corporation, an electronics concern, and the Robotic Displays Corporation, which develops advertising in malls, arenas, airports and other large public spaces.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
WOMEN AND FITNESS
Westchester County's Women's Health and Fitness Weekend, to be held at the County Center in White Plains from Friday through next Sunday, is expected to draw 5,000 women and their families to a battery of events designed to shape them up and ship them out in improved condition.
A Citibank Women's Health Conference on Friday from 9 A.M. to 4 P.M. offers free testing for blood pressure, cholesterol, skin and breast cancer and glaucoma; and workshops on a variety of subjects including single parenting, Elderlaw, menopause, arthritis and osteoporosis, and nutrition.
The only charge is a $70 fee for mammograms, available to women older than 35.


Air-Conditioners Need Care This Time of Year
ROOM air-conditioners need simple cleaning and maintenance at the beginning of the cooling season and usually again midway through the summer.
Following are the steps involved, together with tips for improving performance and remedies for common air-conditioner woes.
Unplug the air-conditioner before beginning.
Then vacuum the front grille or wipe it clean with a cloth and household spray cleaner.


Elizabeth Jenkins Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Jenkins of Summit, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Elizabeth Bonnefond Jenkins, and Frank J. Codey 4th, the son of Hertha C. Codey of Tequesta, Fla., and Frank J. Codey 3d of New York.
Miss Jenkins, 24 years old, is a marketing assistant at Vector Strategic Resources, a management consulting concern in New York.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
Her father is a vice president and general counsel at the Hoechst Celanese Corporation in Bridgewater, N.J.
Her mother, Dr.
Barbara Jenkins, is a psychologist in Summit.


Mutual Funds; One Way Funds Can Inflate Yields
When it comes to meny-market funds, there is such a thing as a free lunch.
More and more funds are absorbing some expenses as part of marketing strategies intended to attract investors by inflating yields - the amount that funds earn in interest after the expense charges are substracted.
As of April 30, 7 of the 10 top-yielding money funds were subsidizing at least part of their expenses, by charging investors less than the total amount spent to run the funds.
And, on average, 7 of the 10 top money funds have done so for the last year, according to Martha Wittbrodt, editor of IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report, in Holliston, Mass.


Christine Curley Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Curley 2d of Bonn have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Christine A. Curley, and Richard Lindsay Newton Weaver, a son of Mrs.
Robert Almon Weaver of New York and Miami and the late Colonel Weaver.
Miss Curley, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president of Prudential Mutual Fund Management in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is an attache at the United States Embassy in Bonn.


Evening Primrose Requires a Firm Hand
THE evening primroses are in bloom.
These sunny yellow flowers with their up-facing petals (four of them) provide bright spots throughout the summer.
Their golden yellow color is a delightful asset.
Some gardeners also call this plant sundrop, which is a little closer to reality.
But this plant is an aggressive grower.
It needs discipline.
Where once there were just a few of these delightful flowers, there often are many.
In a few years, gardeners often wish they had never planted it.
The plant spreads and grows and in no time appears to be all over the place.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Faldo Moves in Front Nick Faldo overcame heavy winds and shot a two-under-par 70 yesterday to turn a three-stroke deficit into a three-stroke lead after three rounds of the Irish Open in Killarney.
The United States Open champion, Payne Stewart, was the co-leader going into the round.
But he shot a 77 and fell four shots behind Faldo's 213.
Faldo, the British Open champion and a two-time Masters winner, began the day three strokes behind Stewart and Colin Montgomerie of Scotland. (AP)


Public Debate on Base Closings Disorients Capital's Power Brokers
There will be no private dinners and no closed meetings between members of Congress and members of the seven-member commission charged with closing American military bases.
The process is unusually public by capital standards, and political Washington is a little disoriented.
"Under the rules, if two or more of us meet to discuss business, we have to advertise it in public session," said James C. Smith 2d, an engineer who serves on the commission.
"And we're very stringently following that process."


New Mexico
To the Editor: After a first visit to Santa Fe, N.M., where it seemed everyone was unusually friendly, a friend and I encountered a surly man in charge of the Shuttlejack, Santa Fe's only public transportation to the airport in Albuquerque 70 miles away.
Our concierge at La Posada had obliquely warned us that the Shuttlejack was the only game in town.
When the bus arrived at the Inn at Loretto, the first stop, the driver asked us, "Reservation?" We were stunned along with a cluster of other potential passengers.


Anne Moritz Wed To T.C. Slaughter
Margaret Anne Moritz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Moritz of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Thomas Caldwell Slaughter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. Slaughter of New Canaan, Conn., at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien.
The Rev.
Frederick T. Bender performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Slaughter, 25 years old and known as Anne, graduated from Lake Forest College, as did her husband.
Her father is chairman of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation in New York.


A Festival in Queens (and Parking's No Problem)


Sports of The Times; Andre Takes A Big Step Forward
WHAT with Carl Lewis promoting a warm-up suit that looks like a tuxedo, one can only wonder what Andre Agassi has in store for us at Wimbledon.
He has had, after all, a bit of time to plan his wardrobe.
It has been four years since Agassi tentatively tiptoed onto the carnivorous lawn of the All England Club, losing to Henri Leconte before you could say "Jerry Tarkanian also lives in Las Vegas." Now Agassi is going to give grass another chance to behave itself.
Good for him.


They Even Say 'Thank You' and 'Please'
A RESTAURANT simply called 75 Main has hit Southampton with the impact of the A train.
This stunning big-city express is both restaurant and marketplace.
Its sparkling display cases of salads, tempting desserts and freshly baked breads combined with a sleek cafe are a dream team, Balducci-style takeout and snazzy East Side dining.
Service is another marvelous mixture, consisting of sophisticated, concerned hosts and clean-cut sweet college-age servers.
It is somewhat unusual to catch Midwestern accents in the New York region, but downright startling to hear, "Yes sir," "Thank you," and, "Please."


Bente Foss Is Married
Bente Foss, a daughter of Tore J. Foss of Oslo and the late Eva Foss, was married yesterday in New York to Justin Anthony Gentile, a son of Dr.
Louis A. Gentile of Bronxville, N.Y., and the late Isabel M. Gentile.
Msgr.
George F. Bardes officiated at St.
Thomas More's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Gentile, 24 years old, graduated from Rosenvilde language school in Oslo and is a secretary in her father-in-law's surgical practice.
Her husband, 28, is a graduate of Manhattan College and a freelance film and video maker.


A Date for Knicks
The Utah Jazz will open the club's new 20,500-seat arena Oct. 23 with an exhibition game against the Knicks.
The exhibition will be the first between the Jazz and the Knicks, whose president is DAVID CHECKETTS, the former Utah president and general manager. (AP)


All About/Weddings; It's One Party Even the Recession Can't Spoil
When Shannon and Gregg Scott of San Diego got married in May, it was not the best time to spend $25,000 on a wedding.
She is an interior decorator, he a construction executive, and business was not exactly booming.
Though both sets of parents helped out, the couple still spent most of their savings on an elegant wedding ceremony and reception for 240 guests.
"If times were to get worse for us, we wouldn't have our cushion," said Ms.
Scott, who is 25.
"But even from a money perspective I don't regret what we spent at all. We did things exactly the way we always dreamed they would be."


Man Fatally Shot in Dispute
A Brooklyn man was shot to death after he pulled a knife on another man during an argument, the police said.
Pete Bullock, 29 years old, of 203 Weirfield Street, was arguing with another man at 11:25 P.M.
Friday in front of 511 Wilson Avenue in the Bushwick section, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.
"He pulled a knife and the other man pulled a gun," Sergeant Mohrmann said.
Mr.
Bullock was shot in the chest, abdomen and buttocks and was pronounced dead at the scene, she said.
The gunman fled.


Julie Nelson Is Married
Julie Alexandra Nelson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Nelson of Falmouth, Me., was married at her parents' home yesterday evening to Matthew Sevier Forsyth, the son of Jack Forsyth of Fremont, Calif., and the late LuVerne Forsyth.
Rabbi Harry Z. Sky officiated.
The couple graduated from Harvard University.
Mrs.
Forsyth, 25 years old, is a senior consultant with Price Waterhouse in Columbus, Ohio, where Mr.
Forsyth, 26, is a program manager for the National Center for Science Teaching and Learning at Ohio State University.


Travel Advisory; Route Reopens In California
Visitors exploring the California coast north of San Francisco can once again enjoy easy access to the Marin County seaside with the reopening June 15 of a stretch of State Route 1 between Muir Beach and Stinson Beach.
The road had been closed since January 1990 when a 600-foot section began sinking toward the ocean after the Loma Prieta earthquake in October 1989.
Over 500,000 cubic yards of earth have since been moved to recarve the roadway deeper into the hillside.
While Stinson Beach remained accessible by a twisting two-lane road known as the Panoramic Highway, the reopening of State Route 1 provides a welcome straight and rapid route to the tiny beach town that has suffered tremendous economic loss during the closure.
Beyond Stinson, visitors can continue north to Point Reyes National Seashore.


A Sense of Fiscal Doom
With just over a week till New York City's new fiscal year begins, City Hall is besieged by protesters and gripped by a sense of impending disaster.
After striving for months to avoid deep cuts in city services, Mayor David N. Dinkins is now facing the prospect of adopting a budget balanced with cuts far more severe than those in the May plan that was called his "doomsday" budget.
Those cuts were meant to be so harsh as to force the state to give more aid and unions to make concessions.
But that help has not come.
And now both the Mayor and the City Council seem intent on passing a $29 billion budget so full of pain that they would immediately begin jockeying to find the money to undo it.


CONSEQUENCES
Having never had an unwanted pregnancy, I can only imagine how terrifying it must be for a young, unwed woman, and I agree with Pogrebin that a woman has a right to make any decision that will preserve her sanity and well-being.
As an adopted child, however, I retain no "legacy of rejection." For me, there are no "lost years" to mourn; I've had 23 very good years so far.
In fact, the only regret I have about being adopted is that I will never be able to tell my biological mother how grateful I am -- grateful for her putting up with the morning sickness, the swollen legs, the labor and, finally, the anxiety of always wondering what had become of me.
But as far as I and my adoptive parents are concerned, it was the right decision, and every day I think of her and thank her for having had the courage to have made it.
REBECCA J. ALLEN
New York, N.Y.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
ON the sweet days of sunny June, when the air is light and the Hudson River shines metallic blue, Monn Paredes and his wife, Annie, like to make their way down to the water's edge in Jersey City to fish and crab and take in some fresh air.
Their favorite spot is a broad, weedy lot, once occupied by a State Department of Defense warehouse, that is wedged between the site of the old Colgate-Palmolive plant and the mouth of the Morris Canal.
They throw out their crab cages and fishing lines from a 20-foot-long makeshift dock and a connecting rickety walkway made of driftwood.


Miss Bianchi Wed To Eric Osborne
Kyria Marcella Bianchi, the daughter of Dr.
Robert Steven Bianchi of New York and Stephanie Balcoff Gordon of San Francisco, was married in New York yesterday to Eric Michael Osborne, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lance Osborne of San Carlos, Calif.
Judge Angela Mazzarelli of New York City Civil Court performed the ceremony at the Explorers Club.
Mrs.
Osborne, 26 years old, teaches fourth grade at Alvarado Elementary School in Union City, Calif.
She graduated from the University of California at Santa Cruz.
Her father is a curator of Egyptian and Middle Eastern art at the Brooklyn Museum.
Her mother is a registered nurse.


Susan C. Flynn Is Married
Susan C. Flynn, the communications director for Listening Library Inc. in Old Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Richard C. Carnes, a financial consultant in Darien, Conn., at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford, N.Y., by the Revs.
John B. Kauta and Santino Titta.
The bride, 28 years old and a graduate of the University of Colorado, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Flynn of Pound Ridge, N.Y.
Mr.
Carnes, 27, graduated from Syracuse University.
He is a son of Dorothea Foster Carnes of Darien and W. Robert Carnes of Stamford, Conn.


Focus: New Buffalo, Mich.; Chicagoans Rediscover a Shore Resort
A RISING second-home market in Michigan communities clustered on the southern edge of Lake Michigan is renewing the regional importance of the area, known as the South Shore, which has long been familiar to Chicagoans as a vacation spot.
Early in the century, Chicago's South Siders went to Michigan and North Siders went to Wisconsin for the summer.
The Irish and Lithuanians transplanted the ethnic character of their South Side neighborhoods in the South Shore townships: Union Pier was Lithuanian and Grand Beach was Irish.
Though those communities have changed, they still retain their ethnic flavor.


Nina L. Bronfman Is Wed to Matthew T. Collins
Nina Liane Bronfman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry Bronfman of New York, was married yesterday to Matthew Thomas Collins, the son of Florence Collins of Flushing, Queens, and the late Francis Collins.
The Revs.
Thomas J. Curley and Joaquim Olendzki officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Blessed Sacrament in New York.
Mrs.
Collins, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
She is an administrator and computer consultant at Behavioral Associates, a psychological group practice in New York.
Mr.
Collins, 23, is a bond analyst at Morgan Stanley in New York.
He graduated from New York University.


Topics of The Times; Not a Republic
At least one old-time New Yorker had his memory jogged when the State Legislature last week permitted a raise in a notary public's maximum fee from 25 cents to $2.
There was a time, he recalled, when every stationery and cigar store had a "notary public" sign in the window, but nobody explained to children what a notary public was or did.
Out for a walk one day with his grandmother, whose native tongue was German, the New Yorker, then a child, was suddenly impelled to ask her what a notary public was.
Grandma thought for a minute and then responded, "It is a kingdom."


Sherry and The Society: The Lessons
The recent announcement that Fred Sherry will resign as artistic director of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center at the end of the 1991-92 season came as no surprise to anyone who has followed that organization's recent history.
The story behind the official story, so far as one can deduce, is interesting in itself.
But the broader implications for anyone who wishes to move a conservative arts organization in a progressive direction make it of more than parochial concern.
Mr.
Sherry has a poor bedside manner.
He may have been the best doctor in town, able to perform brain surgery blindfolded.
But he put off his patients, who eventually sought kindlier, if perhaps less clinically astute, practitioners.


I Do? I Do?


More Revenge for the Red Sox, And Another Loss for the A's
Carlos Quintana highlighted a five-run third inning with a two-run double as the Boston Red Sox beat Oakland, 9-5, today, sending the Athletics to their sixth loss in seven games.
Greg Harris (3-7) gave up three runs on five hits in six and one-third innings as he beat Oakland for the second time this month.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
I'LL THINK ABOUT THAT TOMORROW  By Evelyn Keyes. Dutton, $21.95.


Ellis Island and Beyond
THOUGH it was closed as an institution in 1954, Ellis Island has not gone away but has, rather, become a tourist attraction.
And while the extraordinary faces documented by Lewis Hine seem to have disappeared from the population, the memories of the experience have lived on unto the present generation.
For almost a decade, nostalgia for the steerage days has been fanned by Klaus Schnitzer, who teaches in the fine arts department of Montclair State College and is himself an immigrant (from Germany, in the post-Ellis Island era).
His latest effort is "The Ellis Island Artifact Project" at the Montclair Art Museum here.


Foreign Affairs; Whining, Excuses, Hysteria
If I were a Japanese leader listening to all the anti-Japanese whining and hysteria and double-standarditis in the U.S., I might become an America-basher.
Americans have turned Japan-bashing into a cottage industry from Congress to the Harvard Business Review to Detroit to the C.I.A. to Main Street and to a recent book hawking a future war with Japan.
The Japanese are finally getting frustrated and angry about all this, and may start bashing back.
The bashing business (Europeans joining in) could spiral out of control with the most serious consequences, despite the commendable efforts of President Bush and Prime Minister Kaifu.


Q and A
Home Stays Abroad
Q.
Would you know of organizations through which travelers are put in touch with families abroad who they can stay with? -- Marlene Catrone, Smithtown, L.I.
A.  Here are some organizations that provide contacts for home stays abroad.
U.S.
Servas Committee, 11 John Street, Room 407, New York, N.Y. 10038; (212) 267-0252.
This organization provides names of hosts for two-night stays at no charge in about 100 countries; travelers arrange the visits themselves.
It is often possible to stay longer than two days, Servas says, suggesting making offers like teaching your hosts English or watching their children.
Travelers pay $45 a year; it is suggested that those who wish to be hosts contribute $15.
Servas requires that one of its membersfirst interview each candidate personally to determine if he or she shares the organization's goal of world peace through mutual understanding and is "open-minded."


Owner of Killer Dogs Given Maximum Prison Sentence
The owner of two pit bulls that killed a woman last year was sentenced Friday to two years in prison despite tearful claims of remorse.
The sentence was the maximum allowed for the owner's conviction of criminally negligent homicide.
The dogs, owned by Edwin Hill, a former police officer, attacked and killed his next-door neighbor, Betty Lou Stidham, a 57-year-old schoolteacher.


Do Extend Nuclear Plant Life
To The Editor:
George Sterzinger's comments on "First-Generation Nuclear Retirement" (Forum, June 2) make neither economic sense nor engineering sense.


Susanne Dari Lieberstein Is Engaged
September wedding plans for Susanne Dari Lieberstein and Gregory Martin Daniels, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aaron Daniels of New York, have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley H. Lieberstein of Westport, Conn.
The prospective bride, 26 years old, is the director of specials and variety series at ABC-TV in Los Angeles.
She and her fiance graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in the patent-law firm of Ostrolenk, Faber, Gerb &amp; Soffen in New York and a director of the Federal Circuit Bar Association in Washington.
Her mother, Judith Lieberstein, is a school psychologist with the Stamford (Conn.) Department of Public Health.


Police 'Nuisance' Crackdown Starts With Bronx Vice Raid
Mayor David N. Dinkins and Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown closed what they said was a Bronx house of prostitution yesterday, calling it the first target in a neighborhood-by-neighborhood campaign against public nuisances or illegal operations like drug houses and chop shops.
With reporters, hundreds of neighborhood residents and a phalanx of police officers looking on, Mr.
Dinkins and Mr.
Brown used the city's padlock law -- and a six-inch chrome-plated padlock and chain -- to seal the basement apartment at 20 West 190th Street as part of the Mayor's Safe City, Safe Streets campaign.


Indians Say Libya Gave Them $250,000
The Warrior Society, a militant Mohawk faction here that is linked to gambling and violence, asserts it has received a $250,000 award from Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya.
A delegation of three Warriors accepted the award on June 11 in Tripoli, Libya, according to a news release by the pro-Warrior Mohawk Nation Office at Kahnawake, south of Montreal in Canada.


For India's New Leader, a Host of Staggering Problems
AT Congress Party headquarters, a crumbling white stucco villa near downtown New Delhi, the politicians, hangers-on and wheeler-dealers embraced one another on the lawn when word circulated that a Prime Minister had finally been selected.
Forget that P. V. Narasimha Rao had been chosen "unanimously" by the party following a series of secret meetings by the leadership in five-star hotels and private homes.
Forget that India's dominant party had crushed a rival's attempt to hold a secret ballot among the estimated 330 Congress Party members of Parliament to actually select a Prime Minister.
"The party is finally united, there's a consensus,"' insisted Ratnaker Pandey, a lawmaker from the Hindu holy city of Benares.
"All is forgiven! All these efforts to divide the party by some ambitious people are forgiven!"


The Theme-Park Kingdom
I'M not usually one to complain about any development in tourism that increases my chances of finding a decent bathroom.
But I'm a little taken aback by the transformation of a country into a theme park.
I realize it happens everywhere, but Thailand has elevated marketing to an art form.
My husband and I spent three weeks traveling around the realm recently, and I still can't decide what was more spectacular -- the scenery or the proliferation of tourist facilities.
Disneyland is divided into Frontierland, Fantasyland, Tomorrowland and Adventureland.
The Thai equivalents are Trekland (in the north, with its popular attraction, the Golden Triangle -- Opiumland), Beachland (from Pattaya to Songkhla), Sexland (Patpong in Bangkok), and Ruinsland (the fallen cities of Sukhothai and Ayutthaya)


Bush Defers an Emergency Plan to Provide Vaccines for Children
In a Rose Garden ceremony last week, President Bush said he was sending a team of senior officials to six cities "to learn why kids aren't getting immunized" against measles and other diseases.
But now the White House has deferred action on an emergency plan to buy vaccines and distribute them to cities and states.
The plan, completed in May by a committee of Federal health and welfare officials, would cost $91 million, and the Administration has decided to wait at least until next year to request money for the program.
The White House says that Mr.
Bush requested $258 million for immunizations in January, an 18 percent increase over the previous year, and that the extra $91 million sought by the Public Health Service and other agencies is not needed at this time.


Carley C. Rand, Teacher, Is Wed
Carley Coudert Rand, a third-grade teacher at Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School, and Carl Christopher Weatherley-White, an associate at Credit Suisse, both in New York, were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee officiated.
Mrs.
Weatherley-White, 30 years old, graduated from Connecticut College and Teachers College of Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Rand of New York.
Her father, a former justice of New York State Supreme Court, is a partner in the New York law firm of Coudert Brothers.
Her mother, Paula Coudert Rand, is a musician who plays Renaissance and baroque woodwinds with early-music groups.
The bride's grandfather the late Frederic R. Coudert Jr. served six terms as a Republican Congressman from Manhattan.


South Korean Ruling Party Sees Election as Vote for Stability
South Korea's governing Democratic Liberal Party has characterized its overwhelming victory in local elections this week as a vote for political stability.
The elections Thursday for councils in the provinces and big cities came after several weeks of violent anti-Government demonstrations.


'The Litigation Explosion'
To the Editor:
I am distressed and disheartened that a former Chief Justice of the United States could give vent to as many injudicious statements as Warren E. Burger did in his review of "The Litigation Explosion" by Walter K. Olson (May 12).


Anthems to Benefit an 1827 Organ
THREE anthems by Boston-born William Billings (1746-1800), generally credited with being America's first native-born composer, are part of tonight's concert at 7:30 P.M. at Middle Haddam Congregational Church, another in a series of benefits to help raise funds for the restoration of its 1827 Thomas Appleton organ.
Richard Donohue, director of music at South Congregational Church in Hartford, will also be conducting the South Church Recorder Consort and Chamber Chorus in instrumental and vocal works of Purcell, Handel, Mozart and Vivaldi.
For information, call 267-6425 or 633-1382.
The American Music-Theater Group is holding its First Annual Benefit Miniature Golf Tournament, beginning at 5 P.M. on Thursday at Putter's Paradise on the Berlin Turnpike.
For the event Ron Kuivila, a Connecticut composer, has concocted an installation that the sponors say "will create sound out of the motion of the golf balls via video cameras." With more conventional means, namely voices and piano, the ensemble is also planning excerpts from Scott Joplin's opera "Treemonisha" as well as songs and keyboard pieces of the ragtime era.


'The Litigation Explosion'
To the Editor:
Former Chief Justice Warren E. Burger still fails to recognize the value marketing and advertising provide to consumers of legal services.


State Sends Champions To Senior Olympics
MORRIS RUBELL of Stamford was 53 years old when he started playing tennis.
Two years later he and his partner were runners-up in mixed doubles in the city's tennis tournament.
Now, at the age of 78, Mr.
Rubell is going to even bigger things, playing in the doubles event -- with Lenny Levine, also of Stamford -- in the National Senior Olympics, which starts on Friday in Syracuse.
But as a late bloomer, Mr.
Rubell pales in comparison to another Connecticut athlete who will be competing in Syracuse, Mary Haines of Newington.
Mrs.
Haines started distance running eight years ago, when she was 68.
Five years later, competing in the 70-to-74 age group in the first National Senior Olympics in St.
Louis, she won the 5-kilometer race and finished third in the 10-kilometer event.
In Syracuse, Mrs.
Haines, now 75, will be a strong contender in both of those races.


Ms. Deely and Patrick Stansfield Wed
Catharine Burton Deely, a vice president of corporate affairs for Citibank in Los Angeles, and Patrick Michael Stansfield, the production supervisor for the singer Neil Diamond, were married yesterday at her parents' home in Stockbridge, Mass.
Douglas Pope, a friend and associate of the bridegroom, conducted the ceremony under special license from the State Legislature.
The Rev.
Alanson Bigelow Houghton, an Episcopal minister, assisted.
Mrs.
Stansfield, 41 years old, graduated from Boston University and the Johnson Graduate School of Management at Cornell University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Sedgwick Deely of New York and Stockbridge.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of Citibank in New York.


Robbers Break Through Ceiling and Kill Merchant Opening Safe
Ivan Kochnover locked two doors behind him before he opened the safe at his Brooklyn check-cashing business yesterday morning.
But the robbers didn't come through the door.
When the police arrived later, called by an employee of the Nostrand Check Cashing Service, Mr.
Kochnover, 46 years old, was found dead, lying handcuffed on the office floor, shot once through the chest, his gun beside him and between $150,000 and $200,000 taken from the safe he had opened.


Whose America Belongs in Public School?
THE sweeping mandate for changing the teaching of history and social studies in New York's public schools that was announced last week has begun a years-long process that could profoundly alter the message students receive about what kind of country they live in.
While many curriculum revisions scarcely get public notice, this one is likely to be the subject of intense debate because of the way it would offer American history and culture from a number of conflicting points of view.


Relations With Iran Shouldn't Depend on Hostages in Lebanon
To the Editor:
The Bush Administration, you report, has said it "would not move to improve relations with Iran until Teheran used its influence to obtain the release of six American hostages held by pro-Iranian groups in Lebanon" (news article, May 29).
Although the Central Intelligence Agency has concluded that Iran's clout with the Lebanese kidnappers is limited, Washington chooses the linkage approach, premised on total Iranian control of surrogates in Lebanon.


Leslie Crawford Has Wedding
Leslie Blackinton Crawford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Crawford of New Vernon, N.J., was married yesterday in Little Compton, R.I., to Bill Michael Dunlevy, a son of the late Patricia Casey Dunlevy of Miami.
The Rev.
Beverly Edwards performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Dunlevy, 28 years old, is a personnel representative at the Los Angeles advertising firm of Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a managing director of J. &amp; W. Seligman, the money-management company in New York.


Dollar Retreats Against the Yen
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
138.90
140.75
154.85
per Dollar
German Mark
1.8020
1.7949
1.6745
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1433
1.1432
1.1789
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6265
1.6329
1.7330
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$365.50
$366.75
$349.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Lead Is Found in Water at Quayles' Residence
Marilyn Quayle, wife of Vice President Dan Quayle, says initial tests have found high levels of lead in water from some taps at the Vice-Presidential mansion in Washington.
"We've gotten some reports back that weren't real heartening," Mrs.
Quayle said Friday in an interview in Orlando, where she attended a Republican fund raiser.
"We had higher lead counts than what was supposed to be there in some of the different spigots, but it wasn't all over the house.


Soviets Remember Those Killed by Hitler's Troops


Lisanne F. Brown Weds Scott Aiges
Lisanne Frances Brown, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George Brown of New York, was married in New York yesterday evening to Scott Aiges, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley L. Aiges of Fort Lee, N.J.
Judge Megan Tallmer, a justice of the New York City Civil Court, performed the ceremony at the Patrick O'Neal Loft, a private reception hall.
Ms.
Brown, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Barnard College and is studying public health at Tulane University.
Her father is a vice president and the director of programs at the Population Council in New York.


'Showboat,' Plying the Decades, Finds a Welcoming Port
THE indifference and endurance of the Mississippi River and the passion that rules the lives of those who live and work on its banks are the focus of "Showboat," the musical classic by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein based on Edna Ferber's novel.
Now at the Bayway Arts Center in East Islip through July 13, "Showboat" first steamed onto Broadway in 1927 and ended up as the third-longest-running musical of the 1920's.
Although it has had many revivals over the years and has been made into at least three film versions, it still retains its charm and sparkle.


Review/Rock; Troubadour Dylan Style
For the last several months, record industry word of mouth has touted Michael McDermott, a 22-year-old folk-rock singer, songwriter and guitarist from Chicago as a major new talent.
Mr.
McDermott, who performed at the Lone Star Roadhouse on Wednesday evening with a four-member band, belongs to a genre that has a special place in the hearts of middle-aged record executives and rock critics.
A wiry, tousled-haired troubadour in the tradition of Bob Dylan, he plays acoustic guitar and harmonica and writes and sings poetically ambitious songs whose phantasmagoric imagery strongly recalls Mr.
Dylan's mid-60's effusions.


Economic Austerity Vowed for India
Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao told India tonight that it faced a serious economic crisis that could only be resolved by hard decisions, new foreign investment and an end to the inefficiency that cripples the country's growth.
In his first speech as India's leader, Mr.
Rao struck a pro-Western, pro-investment, open-market note -- a marked change from the policies and language that have stamped the dominant Congress Party for decades.


Delectable, Tenacious Angling in Tropical Setting
Fierce, repetitive roars by howler monkeys may not be everyone's notion of an ideal vacation wakeup call, but on the Parismina River on Costa Rica's Caribbean coast, this is as common as the crowing of a rooster in an American barnyard.
These and other monkeys, along with caimans (a Central American crocodile), tree sloths, iguanas, parrots, toucans, orioles, butterflies, and sundry other tropical wildlife, called this jungle home long before the area was known to harbor some of Central America's best sportfishing.


Of Salesmen, Servants And Other Deceivers
I've always thought I could lose my head for Elaine May.
Back in the 1960's, when she and Mike Nichols were perpetrating acts of improvisational madness, I almost never watched him.
Oh, I knew he was critical to their functioning as a comedy team.
But I couldn't help myself.
She was the loose cannon, the wild card, the knuckle ball headed for home plate.
You were never certain what she was going to do next.
Whatever it was, I didn't want to miss it.
I even liked it when all she was doing was tossing back her hair.
Consequently, it pains me to note that, with one possible exception, the liveliest aspect of "Mr. Gogol and Mr. Preen," Ms.
May's new comedy at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center, is the cover illustration on the Playbill.
Two men appear to be doing battle with an octopus, except that it's not an octopus that has wrapped itself around their waists, bound up their legs and reared a nasty-looking head.
It's a vacuum cleaner and, to the victims' astonishment, the vacuum cleaner hose is what's tying them together.


Talking Decisions; To Buy Or Not to Buy a Unit
MANY rent-regulated New York City tenants who refused to buy their apartments when the buildings they were in were converted into co-ops or condominiums are again being tempted to buy.
The difference now is that the offers seem irresistible.
Alex and Etta Kramer, for example, are being offered their one-bedroom apartment at 300 West 72d Street in Manhattan for $32,925, about a third of the $95,000 insider price quoted by the sponsor in 1983.
In the other boroughs similar units have been lowered to $5,000 or less.


Following the German Lead
To the Editor:
In "Demystifying the Japanese Mystique" (Forum, May 26), Charles Wolf Jr. seeks to apply Occam's razor to existing scholarship upon the subject of Japanese competitiveness, but I think the article itself can be "simplified."


On the Street; In Fiddling Fettle On Fifty-Seventh
Photos: Dressed in summer finery and carrying their small violins and cellos, these young music students didn't have to ask how get to Carnegie Hall.
They were about to perform on the 100-year-old stage in year-end school recitals and dance performances.
The young ballerina below walked up West 57th Street to her Carnegie Hall debut in costume and holding her father's hand.
One of the fiddlers three at lower right took along a stuffed toy.


Topics of The Times; The New World at City Hall
Bravo to the City Council for exercising common sense in designating historical landmarks.
Using its new power under the revised City Charter, the Council has reversed New York City's Landmarks Preservation Commission and voted to deny landmark status to a Manhattan row house.
Beth Israel Hospital owns the house at 327 East 17th Street and planned to replace it with an AIDS hospice.
But preservationists and some members of the community objected.
They wanted the building preserved because


There's No Stopping Europe's Airbus Now
Five years ago, when Airbus Industrie was still an unproven underdog, many airlines hesitated to order its aircraft because they were uncertain that Airbus would be around in a few years' time.
But Airbus is still alive and kicking.
The European aircraft consortium has captured 30 percent of the world market and is gunning for close to 40 percent.
It has shoved McDonnell Douglas aside to take the industry's No. 2 spot, and its rapid ascent even has some Boeing officials worrying about their company's survival.


Hearing Voices Is the Good Part In Writing a Play
I like to write for actors.
Specific actors.
Actors with voices.
Actors with a discernible presence.
"We had faces then," Gloria Swanson proclaimed in "Sunset Boulevard." We still do.
Playwriting is like composing.
We write the notes, but we need the great virtuoso interpreters to sing our songs.
A play in manuscript is just a blueprint for something only actors can bring to life.
When we go to the theater, we're not seeing that manuscript; we're seeing a production.
I don't write literature.
I write plays.
I collaborate with actors, directors, designers and producers.
We all depend violently on one another.
The arts are something you practice all by yourself.
I'm in show business.
I deal in body contact.


Travel Advisory; Hotel Outlook For Spain's Events in '92
Some visitors to Expo '92 in Seville next year may have to stay two and a half hours outside of town, but there will be rooms for everyone, according to Emilio Casinello, president of the State Corporation for Expo '92.
A total of 75,000 beds are expected to be available in Seville, where construction of 20 hotels is under way, said Mr.
Casinello, who was in New York two weeks ago to discuss the three main attractions in Spain in 1992: Expo '92 in Seville (April 20 to Oct. 12), the Olympic Games in Barcelona (July 25 to Aug. 9) and music, art and dance events (throughout the year) in Madrid, named Cultural Capital of Europe for 1992.
Current hotel capacity in Seville is about 10,000 beds.
The new hotels will more than double that, he said, and 50,000 beds will be available in homes and apartments of residents.
Another 100,000 beds will be offered in homes and apartments within an hour and a half of the city, and 600,000 more beds are two and a half hours away on the Costa del Sol.
In Barcelona, 20 hotels are being built, and, as in Seville, residents will open their homes.
The overflow for Olympics visitors will be on the Costa Brava, about an hour away, with about 170,000 beds in hotels and resorts.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
The Captivating Singular Voice
Peter Levi reminds us that the most characteristic and compelling feature of poetry, the individual voice of the poet, is a relatively recent addition to the art.
His comments are in "The Art of Poetry: The Oxford Lectures 1984-1989" (Yale University).


Vindicated
In 1985, Jeffery Collins was earning $115,000 as director of therapeutic products for a Shell Oil subsidiary.
But when his secretary found and turned in a copy of a memo he had written encouraging safe-sex rules for a party planned by Mr.
Collins's gay sex club, executives at Shell and his employer, Triton Biosciences Inc. of Alameda, Calif., dismissed him.
Last week a judge returned a $5.3 million judgment against Shell and Triton, ruling they had violated their procedures and broken state law in firing Mr.
Collins "solely because he was a sexually active homosexual." "This case presents the relatively new issue of how far a corporation may go in demanding that its managerial staff, in their respective private lives, deport and conduct themselves in a manner acceptable to and meeting the corporation's concept of propriety," said Judge Jacqueline Taber of Alameda County Superior Court.
Mr.
Collins now earns about 20 percent of his former salary working as a dog shipper in a veterinary clinic.


Please Stop Bashing Detroit
To the Sports Editor:
I'm just a little sick and tired of the news media, and sportswriters in particular, trashing Detroit and the Pistons; in fact, criticizing most Detroit enterprises.
It seems that the only good things to come out of Detroit were Joe Louis and Tommy Hearns.


Wall Street; Rates Down, Offerings Up in One Note Category
The arcane market for asset-backed securities is popping with new issues, according to Clifton Lewis, an analyst at the Capital Markets Assurance Corporation, a bond insurer based in New York.
Asset-backed securities are notes secured by pools of consumer loans, most commonly those made to shoppers who carry an unpaid credit-card balance.
Issuance may be up because interest rates on asset-backed issues are down, ranging between 90 and 125 basis points above comparable Treasury notes, Mr.
Lewis said.


Sara Hendey Is Married
Sara Louise Hendey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Hendey of White Plains, was married in South Dartmouth, Mass., yesterday to Finn Olof Wilhelm Brote, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Olof Brote of Norrkoping, Sweden.
The Rev.
Gildon Stillings officiated at the Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Brote, 27 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College and is studying law at Tufts University.
Mr.
Brote, 31, is a management consultant with the Boston Consulting Group.
A graduate of the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, he has a master's in engineering from Dartmouth College and an M.B.A from the University of Pennsylvania.


Gay Bias Lacks Clarity
To the Sports Editor:
Joseph Smith's response to Robert Lipsyte's "Gay Bias Moves Off the Sidelines" (The Times, May 24) lacks clarity.
Why does he say that knowing a girls' basketball team "does not tolerate gays" is "necessary information" for the straight player and her parents?
Is he afraid a gay coach would not treat a straight daughter fairly?
Is he afraid the gay coach or gay teammate or both would try to seduce a straight daughter?
Is he afraid a gay coach would talk dirty and smoke cigars?
Or is he merely reporting the fears of others, fears he has heard in his position as director of the Women's Basketball News Service in Elmhurst, Queens?
CLARK PIPER New York


CAMPUS LIFE: Dartmouth; Alumni Office Recognizes Gay Organization
Dartmouth Col lege's alumni af fairs office hasagreed to give what it calls "symbolic" recognition to a separate alumni organization for homosexuals.
The recognition, which follows public protests and a letter-writing campaign, stops short of providing staff or financial support from the college, in Hanover, N.H.
It came in a letter from the director of alumni affairs, Michael Choukas Jr., to Charles T. Edwards, the chairman of Dartmouth Gay and Lesbian Alums, known as D-GALA, which is based in New York City.


Linda Ibert and Stuart Leibowitz to Wed in Fall
October wedding plans for Linda B. Ibert, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Ibert, and Stuart Leibowitz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Leibowitz of Riverdale, the Bronx, has been announced by his parents.
Miss Ibert, an accountant at Raytheon in Sudbury, Mass., graduated from Louisiana Tech University and received an M.B.A. from Louisiana State University.


These Three Are Worth Watching
Talent needs testing to gain stature.
Last April in Atlantic City, the reputations of three young, undefeated and frequently praised heavyweights were diminished when they met opponents superior to those they had been facing.
Riddick Bowe (against Tony Tubbs) and Tommy Morrison (against Yuri Vaulin) escaped with victories, but serious questions were raised about their abilities.


Political Talk
High-Wire Politics
To his chagrin, New York State's Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, is often ignored by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and even Mr.
Regan's fellow Republicans.
But at the moment, the Comptroller would just as soon be forgotten.


Sunday Outing; Cherries Are Ready a Little Earlier
The cherry orchards of the Hudson Valley are bursting with rich, red, ripe sweet cherries, about two weeks ahead of an average year because of a hot May and favorable weather so far in June.
"The quality is the best I've seen in 8 to 10 years," said Russell Bartolotta Jr., who operates Klein's Kill Fruit Farm here with his family.
"It's been the best May for growing fruit in years."


Go Casual, Go Dressy: It's a Summer Choice
Going to the country for the weekend?
Or to the shore?
Or just hanging around town?
Whatever your plans, chances are the dress code will be casual.
On Saturday and Sunday, the work week is left behind along with its briefcases, tailored suits and high-heeled pumps.
With the Fourth of July weekend less than two weeks off, there's little time left to stock up on T-shirts, shorts, swimsuits and all the other necessaries.
If you're planning a summer vacation, get organized now or there won't be any warm-weather clothes left in the stores.
A good place to start is at the Gap, which has stores everywhere filled with basics like jeans, shorts, T-shirts and camp shirts.
Basic, yes, but also up to the minute.
With plaid expected to be a major trend for fall, you can be the first on the block with the Gap's cotton shorts in a choice of red, green, blue, pink or yellow plaids ($34).
They are knee-length, but can be rolled up shorter.
To go with them, there are cotton-and-spandex tank tops ($20) in white, black or navy or an oversize camp shirt in white, purple, cranberry or green linen and cotton ($32).


On Language; Greenhorn
THE HEAVY HITTERS OF THE East Hampton, L.I., media-theatrical-legal establishment were supping at the beach house of Mort Zuckerman of U.S.
News.
When the conversation veered to the assimilation of minorities in America, Mort Janklow, the literary agent, used the word
greenhorn
to denote an immigrant from Eastern Europe at the turn of the 20th century.
Richard Reeves, the columnist (this is beginning to read like a Liz Smith column; also present at the dinner were the irrepressible Peter Stone, author of the new Will Rogers musical, and the dour Lloyd Cutler, counsel to the President in the Carter Administration; dare I put the names in boldface and eat a peach?) -- at any rate, Reeves asked, "What's the derivation of
greenhorn
?" Janklow guessed it had something to do with
animal husbandry
, an archaic phrase that many now take to be a derogation of married life.
The group at Nuthin' Dune, too lazy to pick up a dictionary, sent the query to me.


Wanted: A Little Less Respect
It is time, once again, to ponder the fate of a building by Louis Kahn.
It's only a little more than a year since a coalition of architects, architectural historians and others joined forces to defeat a plan by the trustees of the Kimbell Museum in Fort Worth to expand that Kahn masterwork in a way that would have done serious damage to it.
Now the focus shifts to the Salk Institute for Biological Studies on the California coast, where plans are now afoot to construct an addition to another Kahn masterpiece: after the Kimbell brouhaha, it should come as no surprise that the news has sent Kahnophiles into a tizzy.
The Salk Institute is a building that makes you want to caress concrete.
Here, in this laboratory complex overlooking the Pacific Ocean, the profound magic Louis Kahn exerted over materials, space and light can be felt in its purest form.
To come here is to see at once great power and immense restraint; this
is
architecture, as glorious, as magnificent, as awesome as in any cathedral.


Fashion; Beauty and the Boot
A shift of shoe silhouette can bring a fresh proportion to the most familiar fashions.
This fall's ankle-high boots give a new kick to everything from tailored suits to evening attire.
Chanel's biker boot may seem clunky, but its leather is soft and supple.
And shapely heels, bright colors and unexpected details give others a modern beauty.


Columbia Vacancy
To the Editor:
An interesting footnote to your Streetscapes column on May 12 on the Columbia president's house  [ "An Elegant 1912 Home With a Vacancy Sign Out" ] .
President Seth Low, who decreed that in the future the university's president should live on the grounds, lived in a town house on 64th Street and Madison Avenue, as was mentioned.
As the article also pointed out, the last president to occupy the house was William J. McGill, who retired in 1980.
The article also notes that Michael Sovern, Mr.
McGill's successor, decided to continue to live in his East Side apartment.


Q.&amp; A.: 'A Mecca for Disaster'; In an Urban Battle Zone, a Doctor Calls It Quits
FOR the vast majority of its patients, the way into Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center in the South Bronx is the crowded, often chaotic emergency room.
Last year, Lincoln's "E.R." treated 125,000 people, making it one of the busiest in the overburdened system run by the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation.
Next year, because of budget cuts to the hospital's outpatient clinics, pharmacy and support services, it expects to treat many more people with even less help.


New Teams, Not Some Owners, May Be Getting the Raw Deal
Given the reaction to Commissioner Fay Vincent's decision on the allocation of the $190 million in National League expansion money, it's surprising that a lynch mob of American League owners hasn't visited 350 Park Avenue in Manhattan.
Initially, the American League owners focused on the split -- $3 million for each of them, $12.33 million for each National League club.
Now, however, they dwell on what they say is the inequity of each American League club's losing three players in the expansion draft for its $3 million.


Goobers Take a Southeast Asian Twist
MOST Americans eat their peanuts from the can with a beer chaser or in the sandwiches taken to school.
But peanuts make wonderful flavorings for sauces to go with meat, chicken or shrimp.
They are also good with noodles and stir-fried vegetables.
Peanuts show up frequently in Southeast Asian recipes, particularly those of Indonesia and Thailand.
Len Allison, of the late, lamented Huberts and now the chef and owner of Onda in Manhattan and eponymously named Len Allison at Dering Harbor, a restaurant on Shelter Island, makes an addictive Thai-inspired dish he serves in both restaurants, consisting of peanuts, shrimp, bean sprouts and rice stick noodles in a delicately spicy dressing.
It is extremely simple to prepare and is perfect for a light summer lunch or dinner.


Traffic Alert
Lexington Avenue Street Fair: Lexington Avenue will be closed today from 23d to 34th Street from 10 A.M to 6 P.M.


Wages of Genius
The collection plate went "thunk!" at St.
Rose of Lima Church in Newark last week.
The pastor Msgr.
William J. Linder, was named one of 31 winners of this year's MacArthur Foundation fellowships, and will receive $330,000 over the next five years.
The fellowships, awarded by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation of Chicago, are intended to support the work of gifted people.
Monsignor Linder was cited for his efforts to improve housing, education and health care in poor neighborhoods in Newark.
The New Community Corporation, which he founded in 1968, has built housing developments with 2,400 apartments, including $4 million in transitional housing for the homeless and a shelter for battered women.
Monsignor Linder, who said he would use the money to search for new ideas to improve job opportunities in Newark, seemed amused at winning a "genius prize," as the MacArthur awards are sometimes called.
"Now we're in trouble," he said.
"I guess the cycle stops here."


Kayak Odyssey in Alaska
WE had been in our kayaks not more than 20 minutes, paddling out into Icy Strait at the beginning of a five-day sea-kayaking tour in Alaska, when there was a loud whoosh nearby and a tall spray of water shot into the cool air.
We turned and suddenly a huge, dark glistening form rose from the water nearby, showed a large fin and dived again.
It was a humpback whale, which played cat and mouse with our six tiny kayaks for the next half hour as a bald eagle circled overhead and sea otters and seals popped their heads up from the water to peer at us quizzically.
The encounters were an exhilarating start to a kayaking tour of the waters and forested islands near Glacier Bay in southeast Alaska, an adventure that offered a close-up glimpse of some of Alaska's great natural wonders, a world of whales, seals, grizzly bears, mink, bogs, meadows and wildflowers all set in a vastness and near pristine desolation that persists despite the advancing depredations of the timber, oil and mining industries.


U.N. Index on Freedom Enrages Third World
The publication by a United Nations agency of a new index showing that the world's poorest nations are generally also the least free has provoked a storm of outrage among third-world countries.
The storm erupted here this month at a meeting of the governing council of the United Nations Development Program, an independent agency through which the world's richer countries last year channeled some $1.4 billion in technical assistance to the third world.


A Day for Funds, Fun and Focusing On Hudson Spirit


Path to the Big Leagues Is Easier to Run
CONNECTICUT may never rival the Sun Belt states in the mass production of major league baseball players, but some players and coaches say the road to the big leagues from the state is becoming easier to travel.
Players from Connecticut who have made it to the majors or who are working their way up through the minor leagues say that playing in a northern climate with a limited baseball season may even be an advantage, although they agree that there is nothing like a little luck to help them on their way.
Rob Dibble, for example, a star relief pitcher for the World Champion Cincinnati Reds, grew up in Southington, where he was on the All-State team in baseball and soccer for two years.
Mr.
Dibble, 27 years old, said that playing only four months a year helped him when he first began to compete with players from other parts of the country.
"So many of the kids from states where they play baseball year-round were kind of sick of the game," he said in a recent interview.
"But I was hungry to play. It gave me an edge mentally, because for them it was routine. For me it was exciting, and I worked harder."


Political Memo; Cuomo, Novelty Long Gone, Faces Up to 3d-Term Slump
Just six months into his third term, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's popularity has plummeted, by his own estimates.
After more than eight years in office, he is facing problems that critics increasingly say are of his own making.
And as New York's budget extravaganza nears its angry denouement, the Governor's dominance of the state government, once unchallenged, no longer seems quite so secure.


New Jersey Wedding For Lisa Feuerherm
Lisa Feuerherm, the daughter of Kurt K. Feuerherm of Rochester, was married yesterday in Baptistown, N.J., to Norbert Turek, the son of Janet L. Ozzard of Bridgewater, N.J., and the late Norbert E. Turek.
The Rev.
Donna DiSchiullo performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Universalist Fellowship.
Ms.
Feuerherm, who is 33 years old and is keeping her name, is a designer of women's clothing for Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father retired as a professor of fine arts at the Rochester branch of Empire State College.


New Yorkers, etc.
It's easy to say that it's impossible to know everything, and that it's therefore more than unlikely that anyone would or could be right all the time.
It's very easy to say.
But assuming the accuracy of the statement, the other side of the coin is admitting to being wrong at least occasionally.
And that is another cup of tea, a horse of a different color and a completely different matter.
Why this should be so, goodness only knows.
It's just a matter of a few innocuous words.
It's not even necessary to express regret or remorse with an "I'm sorry" or "I apologize." The other person is looking for only two words: "You're right." Anything extra is merely lagniappe.


Mass Measles Vaccinations Given in Bronx
More than a thousand infants, children and adults were vaccinated against measles at a Bronx beach yesterday in a test run for what could become a mass campaign against the disease, which has staged a virulent comeback in the city this year.
Eleven deaths and 3,280 cases have been reported in New York City in 1991, the greatest number of deaths since the development of a vaccine in the early 1960's, according to the Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.


CORRECTION
An article on the Technology page last Sunday about a $3 million portable stage to be used this summer for outdoor musical performances in New York City misidentified the group that first used it there.
It was the New York Philharmonic, not the Metropolitan Opera.


Alison Smith Marries John Shoemaker
Alison Avery Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Baldwin Smith Jr. of Glen Head, L.I., was married yesterday to John Prevost Shoemaker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin V. Shoemaker of Chatham, N.J.
The Rev.
Charles Newbery officiated at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I.
Mrs.
Shoemaker, 24 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University and is a varsity lacrosse coach at the Beaver Country Day School in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Her father is a vice president of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11
Some 300,000 Albanians cheered and chanted "U.S.A.!,U.S.A.!" as they listened to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d tell them that "freedom works" and urge them to move forward toward democracy.
Page 1


Best Schools Have White Affirmative Action; Entry Rate Declines
To the Editor:
"Without Fanfare Blacks March to Greater High School Success" (front page, June 9) is encouraging but has several errors and tells only part of the story.
Black high school students have been increasing their school completion rates since the mid-1970's.
In 1976, for example, the completion rate for blacks was 67.5 percent, and it has improved each year and is now at 76.1 percent.
Contrary to your suggestion that test scores for blacks have not risen so fast, according to reports from the College Board, black Scholastic Aptitude Test scores have gone up 49 points and lead all groups in gains during the period 1979-89.


Reactor Tests Hair and Nails of Zachary Taylor for Arsenic
Scientists irradiated parts of the remains of President Zachary Taylor in a uranium-fueled reactor on Friday to determine whether the nation's 12th President died of arsenic poisoning.
The hair and nail samples tested were taken earlier this week after the remains were exhumed in Louisville, Ky.
The samples were placed in the Oak Ridge National Laboratory's high flux isotope reactor, the Department of Energy's most powerful research reactor, and bombarded with neutrons.


Catherine Brooks Weds Charles Laing
Catherine Turner Brooks, the daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
Peter Brooks of New Haven, and Charles Parsons Laing, a son of Nira W. Laing and Andrew C. Laing, both of Edinburgh, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
James C. Martin officiated at the West Tisbury Congregational Church on Martha's Vineyard.
Mrs.
Laing, 24 years old, graduated from Smith College, where she also received a master's degree in education.
She will be a first-grade teacher at the Greenwich Country Day School in the fall.
Her father is the Tripp Professor of the Humanities at Yale University.
Her mother, Margaret Brooks, owns Audubon Associates, a real-estate agency in New Haven.


Corrections
A picture caption on April 21 about the Mississippi Delta referred incorrectly to the bridge shown.
It is on the Mississippi River linking Helena, Ark., with Highway 49 near Lula, Miss., and not with Clarksdale, Miss., which is farther south. (A caption for the same photo on May 26, with a letter to the editor, referred incorrectly to the Mississippi. It does not pass Clarksdale, which is on the Sunflower River.) The errors were pointed out in several letters from readers dated May 26 and later.


CONSEQUENCES
As a feminist, I agree with Pogrebin's position on pro-choice and her belief that adoption should not be heralded as the answer to an unwanted pregnancy.
As an adoption counselor, as well as an adopted person, however, I find her subjective views on abortion and adoption issues disturbing.
Her "waves of God-grateful relief" that the abortion she once had will prevent a daughter or son ever "looking" for
her
, as her friend's 32-year-old child did recently, shows deep insensitivity to the feelings of all those caught in the ambiguities inherent in the adoption situation.


Louis E. Yavner, 80, Ex-New York Regent
Louis E. Yavner, a former member of the New York State Board of Regents and City Commissioner of Investigation in the La Guardia administration, died yesterday at Peekskill Community Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died as a result of a heart aneurysm, his wife, the former Viola Levenson, said.


Ms. Wallis Wed To C. J. Kittredge
Nancy Eastland Wallis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Roberts Wallis of Portland, Me., was married in Vineyard Haven, Mass., yesterday to Christopher John Kittredge, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Kittredge of Dalton, Mass.
The Rev.
Cynthia Briggs Kittredge, a cousin of the bridegroom, officiated at Grace Episcopal Church.
The bride, 27 years old, is the real-estate manager for Ivanhoe Inc., a development and investment company in Boston.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is the president of Westerly Management, a marketing consulting concern in Portland.


Corrections
A report in the Postings column on June 9, about Landmarks Preservation Commission awards, identified a recipient in the South Street Seaport Historic District incompletely.
It was the Seamen's Church Institute, honored for its new Seafarers' Center and headquarters at 241 Water Street, not just for the ship chandlery at No. 243.


Choices, Choices, Choices
The bewildering selection of labels, repertory and prices has made the classical recording industry seem like a flea market.
Now, another half-dozen series are being added to the scene.
All are from Elektra International Classics and intended to sell at budget prices (under $7 for CD's, under $4 for cassettes) or at mid-range (under $10 for CD's; no cassettes are planned).
The new series enter a fragmented and confusing marketplace in which all-digital disks can be found for under $3 and historical analog recordings sell for as much as $20.
Elektra's Erato label is introducing four new names.
The budget-priced Residence series, which was inaugurated in May, features composers and the music they wrote in specific places, such as "Bach in Berlin" and "Handel in London." The three others, all mid-priced, are Emeraude, Libretto and Hommage.


Travel Advisory; To New York in Viking Style
Gaia, a copy of a Viking ship, is sailing to North America from Norway and Iceland to commemorate the millennium of what is believed to have been the discovery of Vinland, or Newfoundland, by the Viking explorer Leif Ericsson.
The voyage has also been planned by the governments of Norway and Iceland to focus attention on environmental issues.
The 78-foot-long ship with a single square sail is scheduled to arrive Aug. 2 in L'Anse-aux-Meadows, Newfoundland, recognized as the first documented Viking settlement in North America.
Gaia, along with two other copies of Viking vessels, will continue to St.
John's, Newfoundland, on Aug. 9; Halifax, Nova Scotia, Aug. 28; Boston, Sept. 11; Newport, R.I., Sept. 20; New York (South Street Seaport), Sept. 25, and Washington, D.C., Oct. 9, which is Leif Ericsson Day.
There will be festivities at each port.


Social Events
Funny Short Movies June 24 -- Proceeds from the premiere of seven new short comedy films produced by Frank Chindamo will benefit the Professional Comedians Association, a nonprofit national organization.
The movies will be shown at 8 P.M. at Singalong, 17 West 19th Street.
Rhonda Hansome and Larry Amros are the hosts.
There will be a raffle.
A donation of $2 is requested.
Information: (212) 643-5233.
Block Party
June 24 -- A block party at 6:30 P.M. on West 13th Street, between Greenwich and Seventh Avenues in Greenwich Village, with entertainment, food and an auction, will benefit the Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center, 208 West 13th Street.
Mayor David N. Dinkins and Borough President Ruth Messinger of Manhattan are expected to attend.
There will be performances by Lavender Light: The Black and People of All Colors Lesbian and Gay Gospel Choir and by the Flirtations, an a cappella group.
Kate Clinton, a comedian, is the master of ceremonies.
Tickets $50; (212) 620-7310, or at the door.


CONSEQUENCES
I would like to applaud Letty Cottin Pogrebin for the Hers column "Consequences" (June 2).
I had an abortion when I was 20 years old.
Fortunately, abortions were legal in 1975.
Still, the decision was not easy.
The recent Supreme Court ruling excluding federally funded clinics from discussing abortion as an option in family planning frightens me, as do all the states that have reduced access to safe and legal abortion.
I cannot fathom why such a personal and difficult decision is once again being turned into a broad political and religious issue.
MARINA MARTIELLI
Southampton, L.I.


THE REGION: Deadlines Loom; The Budget Trimmers Find No Easy Answers
New York City
About 8,000 city workers were informed last week that they would be laid off by July 1.
Hardest hit were the Human Resources Administration, with 2,416 laid off; the Health Department, with 1,380; the Parks Department, with 1,321, and the Sanitation Department, with 940.
Sanitation workers began a slowdown in protest, and the Board of Health warned Mayor David N. Dinkins that it might block cuts in medical care.


Ms. Bostock Wed To Daniel Waters
Victoria Christine Bostock, the product-development coordinator at Clinique International in New York, was married yesterday to Daniel Eugene Waters, who received an M.B.A. from Harvard University this month and is to join Morgan Stanley in New York in July.
The Rev.
Donald W. Poole officiated at the Rye (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Waters, 28 years old, graduated from Duke University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy J. Bostock of Rye.
Her father is the chairman of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, the advertising agency, in New York.
Her mother, Merilee Bostock, is an interior designer in Rye.


The Cultivated Gardener; No Time to Grow Trees? Try Angelica
There's something to be said for BIG.
Especially if it's an herb that looks like a 10-foot lollipop tree.
I met my first Angelica archangelica last week, and my initial reaction was one of amazement.
My second, lust.
I want one.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending June 8 MANHATTAN Carnegie Hill 525,000 25 East 86th Street


Dana Pollan Married To Mitchell Brian Stern
Dana Kendall Pollan and Mitchell Brian Stern were married last evening at the home of her parents, Corky and Stephen M. Pollan, in Sharon, Conn.
Rabbi Jon Hadden officiated.
Ms.
Pollan, who is keeping her name, is 28 years old and a graduate of Hampshire College.
She is a partner in the Pollan-Austen Fitness Center in Manhattan.
Her father is a financial consultant in Sharon.
Her mother is a contributing editor of New York Magazine.


Cuba
To the Editor: Albert Sanchez (Letters on Travel, April 28) complains that growing numbers of American visitors to Cuba, drawn by the novelty and attractive rates, are breaking United States law and "ignoring the human rights abuses." Perhaps he does not know that the vast majority of these visits are legal, conforming to the exemptions granted under Treasury Department rules.
Aware that 40,000 children worldwide die daily of malnutrition and preventable diseases, Cubans feel that the first human right is the right to live -- to live with dignity.
Their infant mortality is now below 11 per thousand, besting the rates of all third-world and many industrial countries.
Their life expectancy, 74 years, compares with 49 years for black males in Harlem.
Despite 30 years of trade embargo by the United States, the advances made by Cuba are startling, as are the determination, spirit and enthusiasm so obvious to visitors.
NANCY RICE Highland, N.Y.


Seles Stays Silent on Her Withdrawal From Wimbledon
Questions surrounding the abrupt withdrawal of top-seeded Monica Seles from Wimbledon persisted today, but at the player's request, even the tournament chairman, Alan Mills, was left unenlightened as to the nature of the "minor accident" she cited in announcing her decision Friday.
Unconfirmed reports placed the 17-year-old Seles in Vail, Colo., on Thursday, at the clinic of Dr.
Richard Steadman, the same orthopedist who performed arthroscopic surgery on Martina Navratilova's knees last November.


Daredevils at the Entrance Ramp
EVERYONE has a hostility-on-the-highway story on Long Island, where driving ranks only behind eating and sleeping as a necessary bodily function.
But lately the stories seem to be growing in frequency and ferocity.
Take the case of Dawn Mangini of West Islip, a petite young woman who was beaten up by a 300-pound man over a tailgating incident.
She spent last Monday in criminal court waiting for her automobile assailant to be sentenced for third-degree reckless assault.


Quotation of the Day
"Clearly no one regrets more than I do the appearance of impropriety produced as a result of the events surrounding my recent travel. Obviously some mistakes were made. Certainly I regret that my own mistakes contributed to this controversy." -- John H. Sununu, White House chief of staff.  [ 1:6. ]


Ms. Murphy Wed To E. E. Shindell
Colleen Anne Murphy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Murphy of Alexandria, Va., was married in New York yesterday to Ervin Elliot Shindell, a son of Sydney Shindell of Jacksonville, Fla., and the late Pearl Shindell.
The Rev.
Robin Capoor, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Stanhope hotel.
Ms.
Murphy, who is 33 years old and is keeping her name, is the director of corporate communications for Time Warner Direct in New York.
She graduated from the University of Richmond and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father is a retired Army major.


Mutual Funds; Drawbacks to Asset Allocation
Spurred by the 1987 stock market crash, mutual fund marketers created a new product that promised investors protection from wild swings in the financial markets: asset-allocation funds, which can invest in a mix of cash and domestic and international stocks and bonds.
Many of the funds have built three-year track records, and investment advisers are saying they have not lived up to their promise.
In most cases, they say, there are better and cheaper ways for risk-averse investors to protect themselves against gyrations.


Amy Freundlich, Lawyer, Marries
Amy Suzanne Freundlich and Mitchell Cole Sussis, associates at New York law firms, were married last evening in Morristown, N.J.
Rabbi Peter Kasden officiated at the Headquarters Plaza Hotel.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar F. Freundlich of West Orange, N.J.
Mr.
Sussis is a son of Linda Sussis of New York and the late Irving Sussis.


Doubleheaders Set For Challenge
This year's Atlantic Coast Conference-Big East Challenge will be composed of four consecutive doubleheaders Dec. 2-5.
Boston College and Miami will not participate from the Big East.
Clemson will sit out on the A.C.C. side, while Florida State, a new member of the A.C.C., will take part.
This is the first time an A.C.C. member will not participate.


Wine; Sparkle Plenty
SOME YEARS AGO, I FOUND myself in the witness box in a New York City courtroom, limning -- under oath -- the sterling qualities of Tiffany &amp; Company, the famous jewelers and silversmiths.
I had written a reasonably favorable profile of the store that had appeared on the front page of the journal by which I was then employed.
The store had caught two fellows bottling some noxious stuff in a Brooklyn garage and calling it "Tiffany" perfume.
The store sued, and I was asked to come in and vouch for the Tiffany name, which, the store argued, could be damaged by the backroom
parfumiers
.


Fernandez Sharp in Tune-Up
Sid Fernandez, in his first game since fracturing the ulna in his left arm in spring training, worked three scoreless innings tonight against the West Palm Beach Expos of the Florida State League.
Fernandez, the left-hander who has long been a vital component of the starting rotation for the Mets, gave up one hit and walked one while striking out four for the St.
Lucie Mets.
He threw 44 pitches, 26 for strikes.


INSIDE
Harsh Words and Cuts
The City Council accused Mayor Dinkins of a failure of leadership as it finished proposals to slash $476 million in services in addition to the $1.5 billion proposed by the Mayor.
Page 25.


Speculations About a Woman's Life
A WRITER, blocked to the point of dysfunction, is obsessed with getting at the "nasty secret thoughts" and "little sins" of his 90-year-old great-aunt.
Her life, he imagines, was the stuff that steamy romantic novels are made from, and he is determined to re-create it, or to fabricate it.
Mario Vargas Llosa's autobiographically based play, "The Young Lady From Tacna," which is being produced by the Princeton Repertory Company, begins -- and ends -- with the agonized speculations of Belisario, the writer, about his great-aunt, Mama-E.


Evening Primrose Requires a Firm Hand
THE evening primroses are in bloom.
These sunny yellow flowers with their up-facing petals (four of them) provide bright spots throughout the summer.
Their golden yellow color is a delightful asset.
Some gardeners also call this plant sundrop, which is a little closer to reality.
But this plant is an aggressive grower.
It needs discipline.
Where once there were just a few of these delightful flowers, there often are many.
In a few years, gardeners often wish they had never planted it.
The plant spreads and grows and in no time appears to be all over the place.


DATA UPDATE
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
May
Apr.
May 90
Rents
169.3
-1.7
7.8
Homeowner's costs
169.2
1.0
2.9
Fuel and utilities
104.5
0.2
3.6
(Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics) *Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.89
9.77
10.32
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.30
7.31
8.57
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.72
9.61
10.14
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.25
7.25
8.29
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.75
9.61
10.20
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.12
7.07
8.44
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
10.17
10.00
10.49
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.72
7.75
8.72
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
6.40
6.30
8.05
National Mortgage
9.24
9.24
9.84
Contract Ratep
(Source: HSH Associates) *Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.


BEST SELLERS: June 23, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
65
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
2
2
5
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
3
1
7
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
4
5
15
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
4
7
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
6
6
8
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of two perpetrators of an insurance scam.
7
8
2
VORTEX, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $21.95.) A war in southern Africa sometime in the future involves Cuba and the United States.
8
7
18
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman enables them to solve romantic problems. (LP)
9
11
4
IMMORTALITY, by Milan Kundera. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) Through the lives of characters in 19th-century Weimar and present-day Paris, the author reflects on contemporary life.
10
1
THE RUSTLERS OF WEST FORK, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $18.) A frontier novel featuring Hopalong Cassidy, first published in 1951 and long out of print.
11
9
6
THE CROWN OF COLUMBUS, by Michael Dorris and Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $21.95.) A couple who have long disagreed about everything find understanding on a Caribbean research trip.
12
10
11
THE SEERESS OF KELL, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) The fifth volume in the "Malloreon" fantasy saga.
13
13
5
HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT, by Whitney Otto. (Villard, $18.) The reminiscences of eight women, members of a quilting circle.
14 *
1
A SOLDIER OF THE GREAT WAR, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $24.95.) An elderly Italian professor recalls a life spent as soldier, hero, deserter, lover and family man.
15
8
THE NOVEL, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $23.) Life as lived by writers, critics and book editors in Pennsylvania and Manhattan. (LP)
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How the President and his high military commanders made their decisions during the first two years of the Bush Administration.
2
2
31
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
3
3
9
NANCY REAGAN, by Kitty Kelley. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized biography of the former First Lady.
4
4
3
COUNSEL TO THE PRESIDENT, by Clark Clifford with Richard Holbrooke. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the lawyer who served as adviser to several generations of Democrats.
5
5
3
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
6
6
2
REAL PONIES DON'T GO OINK! by Patrick F. McManus. (Holt, $16.95.) A humorist's essays about life's foibles at home and in the great outdoors.
7
9
6
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
8
12
3
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
9
1
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
10 *
13
6
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated on campus.
11
7
4
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) The murder of a young Orange County, Calif., woman and the tangled family relationships that brought it about.
12 *
8
13
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Random House, $22.) A producer's experiences in Hollywood.
13
5
MY FAVORITE SUMMER 1956, by Mickey Mantle and Phil Pepe. (Doubleday, $18.95.) The recollections of the former New York Yankee.
14 *
1
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America, past, present and future.
15
1
UNDER THE INFLUENCE, by Peter Hernon and Terry Ganey. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized account of the Anheuser-Busch beer dynasty.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
5
2
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
2
4
33
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
3
1
THE CARBOHYDRATE ADDICT'S DIET, by Rachael F. Heller and Richard F. Heller. (Dutton, $19.95.) Ways to cope with an addiction to carbohydrate-rich food.
4
1
76
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
5
20
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) The dark and bitter, but ultimately redemptive, autobiography of a Vietnam veteran, the son of a renowned Marine general, who was horribly mutilated in combat.
THE CRISIS YEARS: Kennedy and Khrushchev, 1960-1963, by Michael R. Beschloss. (Edward Burlingame/HarperCollins, $29.95.) A fascinating narrative of the three years during which two theatrically inclined and relatively inexperienced leaders led the superpowers as close to Armageddon as they have ever been.
LOS GUSANOS, by John Sayles. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) This fierce, profuse novel follows an exile family in Miami through a complex history of heroic and disastrous efforts at Cuban liberation.
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese matriarch in San Francisco unfolds the harrowing story of her life in Ms.
Tan's second novel, which poses, in a Tolstoyan tide of events, large questions of fate, circumstance and free will.
INSIDE CENTRAL AMERICA: Its People, Politics, and History, by Clifford Krauss. (Summit, $19.95.) An acute survey by a New York Times correspondent who finds that the region's problems are of native growth, though United States meddling hasn't helped.
PANAMA: The Whole Story, by Kevin Buckley. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) A journalist's history of the bizarre relationship between a bemused United States and the slippery, unsavory but sometimes, alas, useful Panamanian dictator Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.
EXPLORING SPACE: Voyages in the Solar System and Beyond, by William E. Burrows. (Random House, $24.95.) An exuberant paean to American planetary exploration, embedded in a detailed history of the space effort, by a veteran reporter.


If They Can't Call Congress a Pleasure, Some Call It a Day
NOT long ago, a politician who had won a hard-fought battle for a House leadership slot, who was on the path to becoming Speaker, would have been ridiculed for lacking ambition, not to say for being plain dumb, for resigning in mid-term.
But after announcing last week that he will leave the third-ranking House post in September to become president of the United Negro College Fund, William H. Gray 3d was praised by some colleagues for making a healthy decision to put personal needs above political ones.
They and others saw it as part of a growing pattern, the latest example of the drawbacks of serving in Congress outweighing the satisfactions of wielding power and shaping policy.


Air-Conditioners Need Care This Time of Year
ROOM air-conditioners need simple cleaning and maintenance at the beginning of the cooling season and usually again midway through the summer.
Following are the steps involved, together with tips for improving performance and remedies for common air-conditioner woes.
Unplug the air-conditioner before beginning.
Then vacuum the front grille or wipe it clean with a cloth and household spray cleaner.


Meet Attendance Didn't Disappoint
To the Sports Editor:
Although I am pleased that Michael Janofsky recognizes the talent displayed at the USA/Mobil National Track and Field Championships on Randalls Island ("Depth and Intensity of U.S. Talent Reflects in Major Turnovers," The Times, June 17), I beg to differ with his implication that total attendance was disappointing.


Leo Koury Dies at 56; Was Fugitive Since '79
Leo J. Koury, who was wanted for two murders here and had been on the F.B.I.'s 10-most-wanted list since 1979, died of a brain hemorrhage at a San Diego hospital last Monday.
He was 56 years old.
Mr.
Koury had been admitted to the hospital under an alias, William Franklin Biddle.
On Friday, an anonymous caller told an acquaintance of Mr.
Koury about his death, and the acquaintance notified the authorities.


Fading Away
The exposure of his work with the Nazis during World War II did not keep Kurt Waldheim out of the Austrian presidency a few years ago, but there has been some concern lately that his continued presence in that office could keep Austria out of club Europe.
In announcing last week that he would not seek a second six-year term as president, Mr.
Waldheim cited his "due consideration of the interests of the republic." Mr.
Waldheim, who served two terms as Secretary General of the United Nations before returning to Austrian politics in the early 1980's, was shunned by other world leaders after disclosures during his 1986 presidential campaign indicated that he had covered up his World War II service in a German Army unit accused of atrocities in the Balkans.
The World Jewish Congress asserted that he had been "part and parcel of the Nazi killing machine." Mr.
Waldheim has denied that, but was under pressure to stand aside so that Austria can get on with life in the new Europe.


Air-Conditioners Need Care This Time of Year
ROOM air-conditioners need simple cleaning and maintenance at the beginning of the cooling season and usually again midway through the summer.
Following are the steps involved, together with tips for improving performance and remedies for common air-conditioner woes.
Unplug the air-conditioner before beginning.
Then vacuum the front grille or wipe it clean with a cloth and household spray cleaner.


Navratilova Overcomes Sanchez Vicario
Martina Navratilova, the queen of grass-court tennis, fought off another young pretender to her throne today by rallying from an early deficit to defeat Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, 6-4, 6-4.
With the victory, Navratilova gained her 10th championship at the $350,000 Eastbourne tournament, the women's final tuneup for Wimbledon, and the 156th singles title of her career, leaving her one behind Chris Evert's record.


His Past Is Legendary, but Daniels Needs a Future
They came from Brooklyn and Queens, about 30 in number but vocal enough for double that.
They came to cheer a comeback and look for a legend.
"In his own way, he is a legend, like Magic and Michael," an old friend named Ron Naclerio was saying here Friday night.


Travel Advisory; Summer Offers In Caribbean
Every summer Caribbean tour operators and hoteliers join forces in offering discounted travel packages to lure tourists during the off-season.
This year's off-season lull comes on the heels of a particularly slow winter, when the combination of war in the Persian Gulf and the economic crisis in the United States discouraged many would-be vacationers.
As a result, some promotional packages offered this summer have been sweetened more than usual.
Trans World Airlines' tour group, T.W.A.
Getaway, has lowered prices of its packages by about 30 percent compared with last summer.
Among the packages is a three-night, four-day stay at the Sands Hotel and Casino in San Juan, Puerto Rico, for $439, which includes breakfast and dinner each day and round-trip air fare from New York.
More information: (800) 438-2929.


Goobers Take a Southeast Asian Twist
MOST Americans eat their peanuts from the can with a beer chaser or in the sandwiches taken to school.
But peanuts make wonderful flavorings for sauces to go with meat, chicken or shrimp.
They are also good with noodles and stir-fried vegetables.
Peanuts show up frequently in Southeast Asian recipes, particularly those of Indonesia and Thailand.
Len Allison, of the late, lamented Huberts and now the chef and owner of Onda in Manhattan and eponymously named Len Allison at Dering Harbor, a restaurant on Shelter Island, makes an addictive Thai-inspired dish he serves in both restaurants, consisting of peanuts, shrimp, bean sprouts and rice stick noodles in a delicately spicy dressing.
It is extremely simple to prepare and is perfect for a light summer lunch or dinner.


Recent Sales
Goldens Bridge, N.Y. 550,000 67 Shoshone Drive


Nancy Pick Wed To L. R. Douglas
Nancy Elizabeth Pick, a freelance writer and editor, and Lawrence Robert Douglas, a lecturer at Amherst College, were married last evening in Chicago.
Rabbi Herbert Bronstein officiated at the Four Seasons Hotel.
Ms.
Pick, who is keeping her name, is 29 years old and a graduate of Amherst, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree as a journalism fellow at Yale University Law School.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Pick of Northfield, Ill.
Her father is a senior vice president at the Chicago securities firm of Prescott, Ball &amp; Turben.


In Westport, 'Lend Me a Tenor'
SUMMER has begun, but the opening of the Westport Country Playhouse makes it official.
Just like old times, a featherbrained farce is kicking off the playhouse's 61st season and then moving on to other theaters -- in Massachusetts, Maine and New York -- on what's left of the summer stock circuit.
The farce is "Lend Me a Tenor," which offers, in unthreateningly correct proportion, sexual titillation, slamming doors, mistaken identities and other misunderstandings and silly business.
What it does not offer is a fair measure of wit to match the clever construction of the playwright, Ken Ludwig.


POSTINGS: Columbia Dormitory; A New Facade
The facade of Columbia University's East Campus dormitory and office building was not up too long before it started to come down.
Built in 1982 at Morningside Drive and 118th Street, to designs by Gwathmey Siegel &amp; Associates of Manhattan, the 22-story tower was clad in gray-and-red tile panels.
It was praised as "elegant and handsome" in the "A.I.A. Guide to New York City." But "routine inspection" late in 1987 "revealed deterioration of the facade," said Fred Knubel, a Columbia spokesman.
Then, in February 1988, a large panel fell from a stairway in a courtyard.


The Executive Computer; Looking Beyond Innovation, an Award for Results
It is one thing to look at new technologies, and quite another to look at how the technologies are put to use to improve business productivity.
A hammer and chisel are far less interesting than the marble statues created with them; computers and software are simply fancier tools used to create elegant business systems.
Elegant in the sense, for example, of delivering the chips (potato variety) on time.
Or making a better plug faster.
Or delivering the news in four languages.
Last week, these were among the star performances being honored in the annual ceremonies held by Computerworld, a magazine published by the International Data Group Inc., of Framingham, Mass., and the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.


Robin Hood Adds Up To a Thief for the Ages
There are serious questions to be asked about Robin Hood, that 12th-century warrior against injustice and corruption in high places, and the first question is: How come they keep dragging the poor guy out of mothballs?
In the past month alone, we've had
two
additions to the canon.
On June 14, Warner Brothers' "Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves," starring Kevin Costner, opened in New York.
Four weeks earlier, 20th Century Fox, having elected not to fight Mr.
Costner in theaters, shipped its own brand-new "Robin Hood" straight to television, where it played on the Fox network.


Resource to Trace Holocaust Survivors
"Families Start Tracing Holocaust Survivors"  [ March 3 ]  was of particular interest to me, since I am affiliated with the Holocaust Resource Center at Queensborough Community College.
This is the only Holocaust Center serving Long Island, Queens, Brooklyn and Manhattan at the present and the only resource center of its kind associated with CUNY or SUNY.
Those people searching for relatives and friends could have obtained the address of Arolsen, Germany, whom the Red Cross refers to for information, from our center five years ago.
Our library of over 3,000 books concerning the Holocaust also includes "The Gedenkbuch," which lists all of the German Jews, the date and place of their birth and date and place of their death, who perished in the Holocaust.
CLAIRE HERTZBERG Associate Director Holocaust Resource CenterAnd Archives Queensborough Community College


Investigators Say Educator's Dismissal Warranted
Investigators looking into allegations of misconduct against the superintendent of Manhattan's Lower East Side school district say they have enough evidence to warrant his dismissal and the revocation of his New York State teaching certificate.
A report released on Thursday by the Deputy Commissioner of Investigation for New York City schools said that the superintendent, William E. Ubinas, of School District No. 1 had lied to the Board of Education about a 17-year-old drug conviction and that he had involved his Deputy Superintendent, Dr.
Anthony Cavanna, in a conflict of interest by having him sign a guaranty for a $2,000-a-month lease on Mr.
Ubinas's apartment.


Kelly Murray and Michael Kole Marry
Kelly Ann Murray, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Murray of Skillman, N.J., was married at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J., yesterday to Michael Upjohn Kole, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry Lee Kole of Old Fort, N.C.
The Rev.
Joseph C. Williamson, a minister of the United Church of Christ and the dean of the chapel, performed a nondenominational ceremony.
Mrs.
Kole, 22 years old, is a leasing consultant for the Lincoln Property Company in Richmond.
She graduated from the University of Richmond.
Her father is the president of RCP Management, a property management company in Princeton.
Her mother, Meredith Medina Murray, is a property manager for the company.


Brenda Carrus and Leon Lewenstein Are Married
Brenda Carrus, a dental hygienist and consultant to Oxford Health Plans, and Dr.
Leon Lewenstein, an obstetrician and gynecologist, both in New York, were married at the Water Club in New York last evening by Rabbi Lawrence Siegel.
Mrs.
Lewenstein, 45 years old, graduated from Brooklyn Community College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Carrus of Boca Raton, Fla.
The bridegroom, 49, graduated from Long Island University and the University of Bologna Medical School.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Lewenstein of Pittsburgh.


CAMPUS LIFE: Berkeley; 636 Professors Accept Early-Retirement Offer
Under an early-retire ment plan offered to meet a budget crisis, the University of California system will lose 636 faculty members.
Thirty-two percent of the eligible faculty members and 59 percent of eligible staff members have accepted the retirement package offered, said a system spokesman, Paul West.


Nancy Hedges and J. C. Stein 3d Wed
Nancy Ann Hedges, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Hall Hedges of Harrison, N.Y., was married in Rye, N.Y., yesterday to Joseph Conrad Stein 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stein Jr. of Snyder, N.Y.
The Rev.
Nancy Hanna performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ's Church.
Mrs.
Stein, 26 years old, graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.
Mr.
Stein, 27, is an assistant vice president of Citibank in Buffalo.
He graduated from Hobart College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Rochester.
His father is a purchasing manager in Buffalo for Fisher-Price, the toy company.


Any Number of People Could Be No. 1 in Draft
In other years the National Basketball Association draft had a name.
In 1983, it was the Ralph Sampson draft.
The next year, it was the Akeem Olajuwon draft.
In 1985, it was the beginning of the Patrick Ewing era.
There have also been years of the big guards, years of the big forwards and years of the small forwards (there has never really been a year of the small guard since good point guards are few and far between).


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
OLD MOTHER HUBBARD AND HER WONDERFUL DOG.
Illustrated by James Marshall.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $13.95. (Ages 3 and up) The artist who created "George and Martha" and is working his fractured way through classic fairy tales and verses sees Old Mother Hubbard and her dog as one wild and woolly pair.
This looney cartoonish version is full of belly laughs and small delights.


Review/Dance; 'Kuumba' for Kwanzaa
"Kuumba," the program that Janine Williams presented on Friday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, took its title from a word meaning "creativity" -- one of the seven principles of Kwanzaa, a cultural holiday observed by many black Americans.
These dances by young women certainly abounded in creative energy.
"Kuumba" got off to a rollicking start with "Special Guest Appearance by the John F. Kennedy Cheerleaders," in which cheerleaders from John F. Kennedy High School in the Bronx, under the direction of Ms.
Williams, marched down the aisles onto the stage to perform a rhythmic drill.
Although this was often a joyous evening, it was always also a deeply serious one.


Susan Lucci, 11 Times a Nominee, 8 Times a Bride, Up for Emmy Again
WHEN the Emmy Awards for daytime television are shown at 9 P.M. on Thursday on CBS-TV, the question will not be who will be named best leading actress, but will Susan Lucci of Garden City finally capture an Emmy?
Ms.
Lucci, who portrays Erica Kane Montgomery on "All My Children" on ABC-TV, has lost each of the 11 times she has been nominated.
This year, she is competing against Julia Barr of "All My Children," Jeanne Cooper of "The Young and the Restless," Elizabeth Hubbard of "As the World Turns" and Finola Hughes of "General Hospital."  Used to Not Winning
"I am kind of used to not winning," Ms.
Lucci said in an interview.
"But I am still so honored to be nominated. The nomination for the daytime Emmy comes from my peers, and they all work as hard as I do. The fact that they think my work is worthy of notice just touches me."


Mary H. Higgins, Teacher, Is Wed
Mary Hatheway Higgins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Waugh Higgins of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Matthew William Dunne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Lee Dunne of Hudson, Ohio.
Msgr.
William Loughlin officiated at St.
Mary's Church.
Mrs.
Dunne, 26 years old, graduated from Amherst College.
She is a teacher at St.
Timothy's School in Los Angeles.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
Her mother, Judy Higgins, is a teacher at the Greenwich Country Day School.


MARIJUANA FOR ILL IS CURBED BY U.S.
Expressing concern about a recent surge in applications from ill people, the Government says it will stop approving requests to use marijuana for medical purposes like combating nausea and weight loss in cancer and AIDS patients unless another drug is tried first.
In making the announcement on Friday, the Public Health Service said doctors should first treat their patients with Marinol, a drug containing tetrahydrocannabinol, or THC, the active ingredient in marijuana.


Miss Parkinson Weds in Detroit
Stephanie Joy Parkinson, the daughter of Anthony John Parkinson of London and Mrs.
Basil M. Briggs of New York, was married in Detroit yesterday to Dominic John Briguglio 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Briguglio of Scottsdale, Ariz.
The Rev.
William C. Hale performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Briguglio, 23 years old, graduated from Boston College and is a teaching assistant at the Detroit Country Day School in Birmingham, Mich.
Her father is the chairman of Vicarage Motorcars Ltd. in London.


The Pistons Were a Disgrace
To the Sports Editor:
I applaud Ira Berkow for "The Pistons Were a Disgrace" (The Times, May 29).
I have been associated with professional basketball since 1953 and I am unable to remember any other team scraping the bottom of the unsportsmanlike barrel the way the Pistons did this year.
During the 50's and 60's, professional basketball was accepted as a rough game but never dirty and violent, with intent to injure.
I was amazed at the cheap-shot physical play during the Chicago series and to compound matters the Pistons showed little class by not congratulating the victors.
NORM DRUCKER East Meadow, L.I.
The writer, a longtime referee in the National Basketball Assocation, is director of operations of the World Basketball League.


Making a Difference; The Money Man at Baltia
About a year ago, Harold J. Pareti, the president of Airline Economics Inc., a Washington-based consulting firm, was asked to help arrange financing for a group that wanted to start an airline.
Mr.
Pareti, who had helped to get People Express and Presidential Airways off the ground, quickly raised a small amount while the owners of the nascent Baltia Air Lines mobilized for hearings at the Department of Transportation.


In the Parks, a Playground Revolution
THE stillness of the Ward Pound Ridge Reservation in Somers, punctuated only by the occasional shriek of a bird circling overhead, was suddenly shattered the other day by animal noises of another sort.
A group of 6- and 7-year-olds, on a lunch break at the Bergfield picnic area after a class trip through the park earlier this month, caught sight of a free-standing wooden structure that proved irresistible.
With delighted whoops and calls to their first-grade classmates from the Buchanan-Verplanck Elementary School, in the Henry Hudson school district, the children slid down slides, scrambled up a chain climber, swung each other in a tire swing, crawled through inclined tunnels and chased up and down the wooden platforms.


WHITE HOUSE PUTS NEW TRAVEL CURBS ON CHIEF OF STAFF
The White House has imposed strict new travel rules on John H. Sununu after an internal review found that the chief of staff misinformed Administration officials about who paid for his trip on a private jet to a recent Republican fund raiser in Chicago.
The new rules, which were issued on Friday evening, require Mr.
Sununu to arrange his travel for political events through the White House Office of Administration, which will obtain transportation for him, White House officials said today.
The administration office is under Mr.
Sununu's authority as chief of staff, and White House officials said the White House counsel would also review the plans before they were approved.


Glitter and Sleaze of Tijuana Still Beckon to U.S. Servicemen
Each weekend, hundreds of off-duty marines and sailors descend on Tijuana's tawdry Avenida Revolucion.
The street, lined with bars, dance halls and strip joints, caters to the carnal desires of men, especially those whose passions were curbed for months by the Persian Gulf war and the severity of Islam.
Hot pink and blue neon lights blink over the clubs.
Men in white shirts and black ties hustle groups of Americans inside their establishments.
And women in short, tight skirts, who often know only a handful of words in English, few of them repeatable in polite company, openly proposition passers-by.


Peter Ziobro to Wed Miss Van Vranken
Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Frederick Van Vranken Jr. of Laurel Hollow, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Virginia E. Van Vranken, to Peter W. Ziobro, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Ziobro of Mountainside, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Van Vranken, known as Ginia, is an international strategic planning analyst at Case Credit Corporation, the finance arm of Case Corporation, a maker of agricultural and construction equipment in Racine, Wis.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She was presented at the Debutante Cotillion and Christmas Ball and was a member of the New York Junior Assembly.


A la Carte: Island's Wines Move to New Horizons
LONG ISLAND wines continue to come of age.
The Island's status as a major wine-producing region will be enhanced when "The Wines of Long Island," a 160-page book about the area, is published in the summer of 1992.
The book will not only be a history of Island wines, but also a practical guide to the region.
It will include numerous photographs and maps.
The co-authors are Jerome Smith of Belle Terre and Dr.
Philip Palmedo of Head of the Harbor.


Americana


What Really Hurt Natural Gas
To the Editor:
In "Bottom-Fishing in the Gas Patch" (May 19), Thomas C. Hayes overlooked the primary cause of the surplus of natural gas deliverability in the United States.


Alternative to Prison Mends Fences and Lives
DENNIS BROWN patted down the last handful of peat moss around a circle of marigolds, stood back and admired the design.
He wore his baseball cap turned backwards, bubble-gum pink sunglasses and an oversized, sleeveless T-shirt.
The name Essie was etched beneath the rose tattoo on his arm.
"That's my girlfriend," he said, breaking into a grin.
Mr.
Brown said he had worked all morning cleaning and landscaping this triangular green across the street from the Connecticut Prison Association's Alternative Incarceration Center in Hartford.
Before he was arrested and sentenced to serve three years in prison for a larceny conviction, Mr.
Brown had planned to start his own landscaping company, he said.
After spending nine months of his sentence in the state's maximum security prison in Somers, he was accepted into the center's six-month program in May and now lives in one of several apartments managed by the prison association until he can find permanent housing.
Five days a week he participates in supervised community service projects, which range from cleaning parks to painting municipal buildings, and he attends daily psychological and job counseling sessions.


Lee Anne Fahey Is Married
Lee Anne Fahey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Fahey Jr. of Chicago, was married yesterday in Cornwall-on-Hudson, N.Y., to Kirkpatrick MacDonald, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Graeme K. MacDonald of Hillsborough, Calif.
Mayor Edward Moulton of Cornwall-on-Hudson performed the ceremony at the couple's country home.
Mrs.
MacDonald, 45 years old, has her own public-relations concern in New York.
She graduated from the Art Institute of Chicago.
Mr.
MacDonald, 50, is the managing partner of MacDonald &amp; Cie, a New York investment bank.
He graduated from Yale University and received a master's in economics from Oxford University.
His previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bride's.


Making a Difference; Mr. Anders Moves to Washington
All new chief executives like to put their stamps on their companies, but few have done it so thoroughly as William A. Anders, who took over as head of the General Dynamics Corporation on Jan. 1.
Mr.
Anders has jolted the military contractor by bluntly declaring that it faces a rapidly shrinking market, that it must become smaller and more productive and that its managers must focus more on profitability.
Last week, in case anyone had missed the message, Mr.
Anders took another step to make clear the old days are over: He decided to move the company's headquarters from St.
Louis to the Washington area.
The move affects only 275 of the company's 90,000 employees.
But it signals a commitment to getting closer to the company's principal customers at the Pentagon.


Champion of the Deep
A MILE OFF THE Florida Keys, and 80 feet down, the silence is thicker and more majestic than anywhere on land.
There is no splash of surf, no whisper of wind, no hum of insect or avian life.
There is only the long, rhythmic pull of air from our scuba tanks as we glide past the complicated tangles of coral and gently waving sea fans of Molasses Reef.
At this depth, reds and yellows begin to fade and darker colors take on the richness of twilight.
Below us, a six-foot-long iridescent green eel blocks the entrance to his coral cave, watching until we are safely out of sight.
To the left, the reef rolls down into darkness, into what is literally -- even to the most experienced divers, who generally go no more than about 100 to 150 feet deep -- the unfathomable.
I try to imagine diving untethered to 1,250 feet, the record-breaking depth to which the woman I am with, Dr.
Sylvia A. Earle, has ventured.
The recently appointed chief scientist of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and one of the world's foremost divers, Earle was also one of the first three pilots to take a one-person submersible vessel to a depth of 3,000 feet.


Making a Difference; Biting Back
As Apple Computer Inc. began to implement its plan to eliminate 1,500 jobs through layoffs and attrition, the specter of collective bargaining raised its head again last week in the largely nonunion Silicon Valley.
An employee group, which had formed during the last batch of layoffs in February 1990 but later disbanded, reformed and staged a demonstration at the company's Cupertino headquarters.
Many of the protesters are not interested in forming a traditional union, said Richard M. Eames, an Apple engineer and self-appointed spokesman for Employees for One Apple, which numbers about 500.
Instead, said Mr.
Eames, their goal is to create "a communications channel so that we can talk with management rather than have them come to us with directives."


Dr. Joseph Jaksy, 91; Helped Rescue Jews
Dr.
Joseph J. Jaksy, a urologist who saved Jews in his native Czechoslovakia during World War II, died on Tuesday at his home on the Upper West Side.
He was 91 years old.
Dr. Jaksy died of cardiac arrest, his wife, Elizabeth, said.


Flying Free, Frequently
Government reports show that John H. Sununu is hardly alone when it comes to Federal officials who take privately financed trips.
Page 14.


Setting Their Picks
What the N.B.A. teams need in Wednesday's college draft.
Charlotte Hornets...1 How they use the pick is the key to the draft.
The word is that they will keep it and take Larry Johnson of Nevada-Las Vegas, but Allan Bristow, the vice president of basketball operation, has been exploring possible trades.
Nets...2


Clyde H. Farnsworth, Correspondent, Marries Elisavietta A. Ritchie, Writer
Elisavietta Artamonoff Ritchie, a writer, and Clyde Henri Farnsworth, a correspondent for The New York Times, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Mark Mills-Powell, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the home of Sally McGrath in St.
Leonard, Md.
The bride is the daughter of the late Col. and Mrs.
George Artamonoff of Coconut Grove, Fla.
The bridegroom is a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Clyde A. Farnsworth of Mount Vernon, N.Y.


POSTINGS: 3-Way Assemblage; Private-Public Property Auction
When New York City's Division of Real Property was handed the task of selling a vacant Transit Authority electrical substation on 96th Street just west of Broadway, it reached out to the owners of the two small neighboring properties with the idea of a joint venture.
What resulted is an unusual public-private auction offering that joins the city, the Salvation Army and the Mid-Manhattan branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
Going on the block Wednesday will be a parcel comprising the three-story substation at 264 West 96th; the adjoining two-story building, No. 268, where the Salvation Army operates a thrift store -- to be relocated after the sale -- and 23,000 square feet of unused development rights above the N.A.A.C.P.'s offices at No. 270.


'The Litigation Explosion'
To the Editor:
It is wonderful to hear from former Chief Justice Warren E. Burger again and to read his acknowledgment of the modern decline of professional ethics in the law profession.
I also appreciate his acknowledgment that the activities of lawyers have complicated and made more expensive the practice of medicine.
I have long said that were Congress filled with physicians rather than lawyers, law would have been socialized long ago -- and rightly so, for the Constitution guarantees each citizen equality before the law, whereas in medicine it is our professional ethics that have always protected the rights of our citizen-patients.
ROBERT O. BEGTRUP, M.D.
Nashville


Review/Dance; Choreography Verite From Spain
What do people do at night?
Lots of things.
They may come home, eat, drink and relax.
They may roam the streets.
They may have fun or commit crimes or do both simultaneously.
They may also go to bed -- not necessarily to sleep.
Such activities were examined in "La Nit" ("The Night," in Catalan), which was presented on Monday night on an outdoor stage at Battery Park City by Els Comediants, a troupe of actors, musicians, mimes and dancers that was founded in 1971 at Canet de Mar, in the Catalan region of Spain.
The company is now active in the theatrical life of Barcelona, and its New York performances were presented by Dancing in the Streets as part of the New York International Festival of the Arts.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 23


Are Dance Troupes Lost Without The Legends?
As the founding figures of American dance are passing on and financial tightrope-walking is the order of the day for both ballet and modern-dance troupes, the question that commonly hangs in the air is whether dance companies can survive their creators.
A more important question is very different -- namely, whether companies
should
survive their creators.


Judith Pinsker Wed to Benjamin Smith
Dr.
Judith Pinsker and Dr.
Benjamin Noah Smith, physicians at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence, were married yesterday at the Dove Island Inn in Stillwater, N.J.
Mayor Emil Sorensen performed the ceremony.
Dr.
Pinsker, 29 years old, is the chief medical resident at the hospital, where her husband, 30, is an attending physician.
They graduated from Princeton University.
She received her M.D. degree from Harvard University, and he received his from Cornell University.


Pride in Work On Water Supply
Sarah Meyland's Letter to the Editor on May 26, "How Responsible Are Water Suppliers?" reaches disturbing and inaccurate conclusions primarily because it is based upon generalizations that do not apply to the Plainview Water District and a number of other independent water suppliers.
During our tenure as members of the Board of Commissioners of the Plainview Water District, we have taken great pride in the board's commitment to the protection of our ground-water supply.
We have been at the forefront of efforts to close down the toxic Old Bethpage Landfill, defeat the 900-ton-a-day mass-burn incinerator proposed by the Town of Oyster Bay, advocate comprehensive recycling programs and challenge developers and builders when their plans might impact on the water supply or environmental safety of our constituents.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Youthful Drinking Persists; With Teens and Alcohol, It's Just Say When
THE 13-year-old, the daughter of two lawyers, had been drinking for about four years when she showed up for gymnastics practice at her private school in Massachusetts, too drunk to perform.
A 15-year-old boy told a juvenile court judge: "I'm not a problem drinker. I only have a six-pack of beer an evening." A 16-year-old regularly consumed enough vodka and beer to have hallucinations in her kitchen, seeing skeletons, knives and images she took for visions of Satan's realm.
These are the children of alcohol, whose numbers have waxed and waned over the centuries, from the days when ancient Greeks worshiped Dionysus, the god of wine, to London's Gin Lane in the late 18th century, to America's suburban malls and fraternity houses today.
They are the inheritors -- some would say the victims -- of the country's ambivalence about the intoxicant of the ages.


In Defense of Corporate Speakers
To the Editor:
Though I can agree with most of the observations in "At Graduation, Reality and a Lot of Banality" (Executive Life, June 2), in my view, corporate executives far outweigh those to be found in the other groups as public speakers.
They should be in great demand as commencement speakers, since they represent the attainable positions to which so many of the graduates aspire.
LEONARD NADEL East Hills, L.I., June 3


Residents Evacuated During Factory Fire
Residents were evacuated from a three-block area on Friday when a fire broke out at a plastics manufacturing company, fire officials said.
The blaze at the Kaysam Corporation plant, which began about 11:15 A.M., was not brought under control until 5:43 P.M., Deputy Fire Chief Norman Morley said.


Q and A
Staff Reduction
Question: I am a rent-stabilized tenant in a 131-unit co-op.
The co-op owners account for 40 percent of the occupants and rent-regulated tenants the rest.
Until recently, the maintenance staff included a superintendent, two porters and a handyman.
In the last few weeks, however, the sponsor has defaulted on maintenance payments.
To reduce costs he dismissed the handyman with the blessing of the co-op board.
They seem to be reducing services to safeguard their financial investment.
Do they have the right to do this?  . . .
Franklin Schornstein, Jackson Heights, Queens


Commercial Property: Renovations; Primping Up at a Time When the Best Goes Begging
THE buildings were nothing to boast about -- a downtown behemoth plagued by a checkered history and mediocre design, an office building on Second Avenue that looked every bit like the bland apartment house it was once meant to be, and an old warehouse whose thick floors inhibited any thought of rearranging the core.
Now, renovations are under way or nearing completion on these and dozens of other properties, to freshen their appeal at a time when even premier space goes begging.


Building the Best Boxer


Friendships as Big as the Ritz
LETTERS FROM THE LOST GENERATION
Gerald and Sara Murphy and Friends.
Edited by Linda Patterson Miller.
Illustrated. 362 pp.
New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press. $27.95.


A Small Town in the Grand Style
LIKE all great ideas, the Midwest is deceptively simple -- plain, plausible and, ultimately, elusive.
Geographically, it's hard to pin down, a vast, amorphous territory somewhere west of the Alleghenies, east of the Rockies, south of Canada and north of the South.
As a metaphor, it's ambiguous.
Tradition assigns the Midwest a glorious role: the Heartland, Middle America (repository for all the core values), the Nation's Breadbasket.
But for those who see it as nothing more than the endless expanse that makes LAX to JFK a six-hour proposition, it's America with the points of difference shaved smooth, sort of like Johnny Carson's Nebraska non-accent.
We need an Institute of Midwestern Studies to sort these matters out.
In the meantime, the rule of thumb is this: drive inland, and after a while the scenery flattens out, the people get friendlier and funnier, and Paul Harvey dominates the radio.
Behold the Midwest, where the doughnut and pie reign supreme.


Eight People Wounded in Two Separate Shootings
Two women were hit by random gunfire in separate shootings in New York City over the weekend that left a total of eight people wounded, the police said.
One of the victims, a 56-year-old Brooklyn woman, Helen Davis Cook, was shot outside her home in the East New York section late Friday evening.
Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman, said the woman was shot by a 16-year-old Brooklyn youth who was chasing her 21-year-old son.
Mrs.
Cook was hit in the right arm and treated at Brookdale Hospital Center and later released, Sergeant Mohrmann said.


Sunday Menu; An Oriental (or Caribbean) Scallop Salad
Names given to recipes often have more to do with the delights and prejudices of the creator than any obvious connection with the ingredients.
This Oriental scallop salad might as easily have been called Caribbean salad.
In truth there are many culinary elements that the Caribbean and the Far East have in common: ginger, coconut, lemon grass and cilantro.


Tara Robinson and Anthony J. Veith Are Married
Tara Marie Robinson, the daughter of Dr.
Judith Robinson Klein of San Diego and the late Michael Jay Robinson, was married yesterday in Southport, Conn., to Anthony John Veith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Thomas Veith of Pelham, N.Y.
The Rev.
Douglas Nissing officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Veith, 25 years old, sells advertising for Variety in New York.
She graduated from New York University.


Data Bank/June 23, 1991
Housing Starts
May
April
March
Thousands of units, annual rate
982
981
907
Merchandise Exports
April
March
Feb.
In billions
$35.6
$34.0
$33.6
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$40.3
$38.1
$39.1
30-Year Treasury Bonds
June 21
June 14
June 7
Yield in percent
8.50
8.45
8.47
3-Month Treasury Bills
Yield in percent
5.58
5.59
5.57
Cash Wheat Price
No. 1 K.C., per bushel
$2.94
$3.03
$3.04
Electric Power
June 14
June 7
May 31
Millions of Kilowatt hours
60,055
57,871
60,365
Coal Production
Thousands of tons
19,686
19,097
16,345


For Eastern Europe, Security Means More Than Tanks and Guns
AS the Warsaw Pact tumbled toward dissolution in recent months, Western leaders on both sides of the Atlantic stressed their discomfort at filling Eastern Europe's security vacuum by admitting Moscow's former satellites to the North Atlantic military alliance.
And Moscow began warning its old partners against defecting to the former enemy; it has sought to enjoin them, through bilateral pacts, from entering hostile alliances or allowing foreign troops on their soil.


Franklin's Greatest Hits At Early Music Festival
MOST people would not utter the word "music" in the same breath as "Benjamin Franklin." But the founders of the Connecticut Early Music Festival -- John Solum, a flutist, and Igor Kipness, a harpsichordist and fortepianist -- have concocted a concert entitled "The Musical World of Benjamin Franklin," scheduled for 6 P.M. next Sunday, the final day of this year's festival, at the Harkness Chapel in New London.
The starting point for the unusual program was Franklin's success as an inventor.


Sarah Salant and James Gleason Wed
Sarah Meigs Salant, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Salant of New Canaan, Conn., was married in New Canaan yesterday to James Taylor Gleason, a son of Frederick C. Gleason of Groton, Conn., and Mary Taylor Gleason of Westerly, R.I.
The Rev.
T.
Guthrie Speers Jr. officiated at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Gleason, 32 years old, is a brand manager with Kraft General Foods in Glenview, Ill.
She graduated from Bucknell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, who is retired, was a president of CBS News and a vice chairman of NBC.


For Adults Only: Love and Sorrow . . . Lust and Hate
The members of the Los Angeles rap group N.W.A. are despicable, misogynistic swine.
What's worse, they are proud of it.
On their second album, "Niggaz4Life" (Priority 57126; all three formats), they advocate gang rape, forced oral sex and killing prostitutes who don't do what they're told.
"The joke's on you, jack!" they shout gleefully at the end of the album.
"We did it again!"
N.W.A. (Niggas With Attitude) have indeed done it again, but in more ways than one.
Last week, in only its second week of release, "Niggaz4Life" reached No. 1 on the pop album chart (it hit the chart at No. 2, the highest entry since Michael Jackson's "Bad" made its debut at No. 1 in 1987).
Priority is already claiming sales of 1 million copies.
The sound you're hearing is Tipper Gore and other members of the Parents' Music Resource Center renewing their passports.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Scotch Plains
SETTLED in 1684 by dissenters who fled Scotland to escape the persecution of the Church of England, the lush, affluent Union County township of Scotch Plains prides itself on its diversity and tolerance.
"We have more than a dozen houses of worship representing many different faiths, and we are color-blind," said Mayor Alan M. Augustine.


LAWMAKERS GAVE FEES TO DISTRICTS
In a new version of bringing home the bacon, members of Congress donated more than $2 million of their 1990 speaking fees to charities and other institutions, including schools, hospitals, day care centers, old age homes and cultural organizations at home, according to their financial disclosure statements.
Most of the money was donated after the lawmakers' fee totals reached the maximum levels that they could retain under rules in the House and Senate limiting outside income.


Danse Macabre
VASLAV NIJINSKY: A Leap Into Madness.
By Peter Ostwald. (Lyle Stuart/Carol Publishing, $19.95.) Vaslav Nijinsky, the British critic and historian of ballet Richard Buckle wrote, was "ten years growing, ten years learning, ten years dancing, and thirty years in eclipse." Those last gray years aroused the curiosity of Peter Ostwald, a psychiatrist, and prompted this curious biography.
Dr.
Ostwald re-examines the progress of Nijinksy's life with an eye for the roots of the mental deterioration that began around 1914.
Primed by the author's theories and mini-lectures on early 20th-century medical practice, we can reject a doctor's diagnosis of neurasthenia on the occasion of the dancer's first breakdown in 1914 and consider it a "panic disorder" brought on by stress and Nijinsky's rejection by the Ballets Russes entrepreneur Serge Diaghilev, his lover and father figure.
Dr.
Ostwald misses no opportunity to ferret out early signs of madness.
Jean Cocteau observes Nijinsky at a dinner party twisting his head alarmingly.
He is practicing for his "Afternoon of a Faun," says Nijinsky.
Cocteau is reassured.
But not Dr.
Ostwald, who speaks darkly of how "certain of Nijinsky's dance movements were intuitively perceived as pathological." He has done groundbreaking research on the period between 1919 and Nijinsky's death from uremia and chronic nephritis on April 8, 1950.
His professional status has allowed him access to hospital records, medical archives and interviews with descendants of doctors who treated Nijinsky.
The hair-raising chronicle of ordeals disputes much of what Nijinsky's widow Romola has published.
Nijinsky's malady was diagnosed (misdiagnosed, says Dr. Ostwald) as schizophrenia, and also as catatonia, depression, mania.
He was dosed with various powerful drugs to calm him, some of which may have heightened his depression; he was given 228 insulin shock treatments.
His wife dragged him to the best doctors.
She removed him from hospitals or sanitariums, insisting he was well, only to have him readmitted when she couldn't cope.
The picture given by doctors' reports and nurses' diaries is consistent only in its pathos: the once great dancer and choreographer became an object -- now reported as calm and charming, now as raging, now inert, now infantile.
Plowing through the details of his physical ailments and his behavior, one sometimes thinks: Dance history needs this book, but do I have to read it?


Linda Sanders Is Married
Linda Lee Sanders and Michael George Lockhart, financial consultants at Merrill Lynch in New York, were married yesterday by the Rev.
Dale K. Brudvig at Truro Episcopal Church in Fairfax, Va.
The bride, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from the University of Virginia.
She is a daughter of Capt. and Mrs.
Tommy L. Sanders of Fairfax.
Captain Sanders is retired from the Navy.
Mr.
Lockhart, 32, graduated from the University of Delaware.
He is the son of Olga Von Strandtmann of Coram, L.I., and the late George M. Lockhart.


For Triplets, A Quiet Spot In the Country
Three years ago, Arlene, Bernice and Cindy Torres took their first trip to the country -- in fact, their first trip out of New York City.
The East Harlem triplets, who were 6 years old at the time, could not even imagine a place like Hartly, Del.
To girls who grew up in the cramped conditions of a housing project in a city where people and buildings are shoved together, the wide open spaces and green grass of the country town were a little scary.
But by the end of their two-week vacation, they had enjoyed themselves so much, they almost didn't want to come home.


Forest Service Pilot Killed
The pilot of a Forest Service plane who was directing an air tanker's drops of fire retardant on a 40-acre blaze was killed Friday evening when he crashed into Mount Taylor, an 11,301-foot peak 70 miles west of Albuquerque.
Winds gusting up to 25 miles an hour over rugged terrain apparently caused the 48-year-old pilot, Henry Kim, to lose control of his twin-engine Beechcraft Baron.


1 Mystery Plus 2 Detectives Adds Up to 'Mathnet'
It was morning in New York and the detectives were confounded.
The baseball player, who looked suspiciously like the actor John Sayles, had taken a sudden leap from has-been to star at the plate, and they had been around long enough to smell foul play.
Logic told them that nobody has a .718 batting average.
At least nobody human.
Pat Tuesday is her name.
George Frankly is his.
They bounded for the door, some scribbled clues in hand and a few hypotheses in mind.
One more thing: Their holsters were packed -- with calculators, that is.


The Star-Making Machinery, Caught by the Camera's Eye
Pop music fans who find themselves in the SoHo section of Manhattan this month can drop in on the photographic equivalent of a jamboree at the Staley-Wise Gallery, 560 Broadway.
There, "Music: 1930-1990," an exhibition of photographs of popular musicians from the last 60 years, is being presented through July 6.
Included are works by such masters of portraiture as Horst and Arnold Newman, as well as magazine and fashion virtuosos like Wayne Maser, Norman Seeff, Michel Haddi and Herb Ritts.
The results are mixed, with many photographers represented by less than their best works.
But this is not a show about photography or photographers' visions.
It's about icons of popular culture, and how they're manufactured and perfected.


Islers Aim at Liberty Cup Guiding Separate Missions
Peter Isler and his wife, J. J., both world-class sailors from San Diego, are adding an unusual twist to competition in the annual Liberty Cup Match Racing Regatta.
The Islers have accepted invitations to compete as skippers in the four-day race series, which begins Thursday in New York Harbor.
They have competed against each other only once before.


Catching Up With the High Priest Of Criticism
No American art critic has been more influential than Clement Greenberg.
The high priest of "formalism," he set in motion an approach to art that has remained prevalent for nearly half a century.
While such an achievement might seem to have won him the lasting veneration of art-worldlings, he is not particularly popular these days.
In an age that seems increasingly intent on erasing the line between high art and popular culture, Mr.
Greenberg, a staunch separatist, has become the focus of intense resentment.
He's 82 and hasn't written a review in three decades, yet his views are more disputed than those of any other living art critic.
"Hindsight has exaggerated my importance," Mr.
Greenberg observed one recent afternoon, puffing on an unfiltered cigarette and chuckling at the ways of the art world.
"People want to think I was a power broker, a wheeler-dealer."
At home in his Central Park West apartment, Mr.
Greenberg seems less like the intellectual tyrant of legend than a friendly shmoozer.
He has opinions galore, and cannot be accused of having mellowed with age as he sits in bare feet issuing verdicts on everything from Kantian ethics to Julian Schnabel's last show. ("He's not devoid of gifts, but he's minor.") The voice is gruff and raspy, the pronouncements delivered with a pugnacious edge.
Eyeing his visitor's plastic tape recorder, he asks, "Why would anyone buy a piece of junk like that?"
The critic's apartment is an airy, elegant place in which paintings by Kenneth Noland, Walter Darby Bannard and other longtime friends vie for attention with good antiques.
Everywhere, small, marvelous objects -- an ancient Chinese wine vessel, a bejeweled knife, a serenely smiling Egyptian figure -- catch the eye.
Mr.
Greenberg first came to prominence in the 1940's, when he became identified with Abstract Expressionism and created a new language for a generation of art critics.
Writing for small but influential magazines like The Nation and Partisan Review, he championed the work of Jackson Pollock and went on to formulate lofty theories about the development of modern art.
If Mr.
Greenberg can be described as the Moses of the art world, solemnly laying down the laws of painting, he is also its Ann Landers.
He has advised, counseled and coaxed innumerable artists, and was the conscience behind the dry, problem-solving art that emerged in the 60's under the rubric of "color field" painting.
Mr.
Greenberg is not a critic with a flexible approach.
Since 1939, when he published his now classic essay "Avant-Garde and Kitsch," he has been a stubborn defender of "formalism." He sees the art of the past century as a search for pure form, a systematic stripping away of subject matter, illusion and everything else he feels is extraneous to art.
Driven by an internal, inevitable logic, painting evolved to the point where it finally discovered that it wasn't about storytelling or even an artist's feelings, but rather about its own qualities, such as the "flatness" of the canvas.
In much the same way that Pollock elevated American painting to international renown, Mr.
Greenberg is the first American art critic whose work can be put on the library shelf next to Roger Fry, Charles Baudelaire and other great European critics.
Today, no one would describe Mr.
Greenberg as a model of prolificacy.
Stalled for more than two years on a book entitled "Home-Made Esthetics," he complains of being afflicted by a "neurotic languor." Yet his days are not completely idle.
He lectures at universities, judges art contests, and makes himself available to graduate students and scholars.
He receives many queries in the mail, and diligently answers them all.
Dissertations have been written on him, and a biography is under way.
The concluding two volumes of his collected writings will be published next year by the University of Chicago Press -- an event that Mr.
Greenberg regards with a distinct lack of enthusiasm.
"I don't reread my work," he explains.
"It's too painful."
His detractors might agree.
Mr.
Greenberg's conception of modern art is brilliant but notoriously narrow, and it has not gone unchallenged.
As long ago as 1976, Tom Wolfe made merry with the critic in "The Painted Word," portraying him as an absurd theorist to whom "the Freight Train of Art History had a specific destination. . . . Flatness." It isn't surprising that Mr.
Wolfe, an art-world outsider known for his rackety wit, would treat Mr.
Greenberg as a comic figure.
But what is surprising, perhaps, is that the tone of Mr.
Wolfe's criticisms -- hectoring, mocking, rudely dismissive -- is the same tone that nowadays characterizes much of the writing emanating from inside the art world.
At a time when the high-minded ideals of modernism are being replaced by a more relaxed esthetic, Mr.
Greenberg has come to be regarded as an unsavory survivor of the old regime.
Scholars and critics attack articles of his from 40 or 50 years ago as if they had been written just yesterday.
Among the more prominent Greenberg-bashers are leftist professors like Rosalind Krauss and T. J. Clark, who resent the critic for presenting art as a seamless, self-contained bubble floating high above the world of politics.
Robert Storr, the new curator of contemporary art at the Museum of Modern Art, is typical of the younger breed of opponents.
Fortyish and hip, he dismisses the established order without compunction; in a catalogue accompanying the "High-Low" show held at the museum in the fall, he accused Mr.
Greenberg and his followers of trafficking in "intellectual kitsch, a debased form of thinking." Like many others, Mr.
Storr feels that formalism's love of abstract painting to the exclusion of everything else has warped our understanding of modernism, and that new, more tolerant approaches are needed.
Confronted with these charges, Mr.
Greenberg looks surprised.
He says he can't understand why people accuse him of dogmatically defending abstract painting or trying to push art in a specific direction.
"You can't say I'm for one kind of art," he protests.
"The only kind of art I'm in favor of is
good
art.
All other things being equal I prefer figurative art.
But the fact is the very best art of the past 30 or 40 years has been abstract art."
Mr.
Greenberg keeps a close watch on his fellow critics -- and seems to disapprove of nearly all of them.
Most critics today have a "bad eye," he says.
Asked if there's anyone alive who he thinks has a good eye, he replies, "Only the people who go along with me."
Mr.
Greenberg came of age during the Depression years, when the key word was "cause" and everyone had one.
It was a decade of rallies and soap-box orators, and in some ways he epitomizes its talky, opinionated spirit.
"You can't get around without value judgments," he says.
"People who don't make value judgments are dullards. Two or three people I know, I like them, but they're dullards. They have no opinions, not just about art, but about anything. Having an opinion is central to being interesting -- unless you're a child.
"Do wives have to have opinions?" He pauses, stares off as if the question he has asked himself is a weighty one, then resoundingly delivers his reply: "
My
wife has to have opinions." Mr. Greenberg's wife, Jenny, is a playwright, whom he married for the second time last year after a divorce a decade earlier. Their daughter, Sarah, owns the Greenberg-Wilson gallery in SoHo. "She majored in art history against my wishes," her father says dejectedly. "Art became chic."
Mr.
Greenberg observed in the 40's that for American Jewish writers of his generation, literature offered an escape from their immigrant heritage, a flight from the "restriction and squalor of the Brooklyns and Bronxes to the wide open world which rewards the successful fugitive with space, importance and wealth."
This notion of culture as a means of ascent certainly holds true in his own case.
Born in the Bronx in 1909, he grew up in Norfolk, Va., and Brooklyn, the oldest son of a Russian immigrant who owned a clothing store.
From the time he was 4, the young Clement drew obsessively, delighted by his talent for bringing objects and people to life.
His parents didn't share his affection for art.
He glumly describes them as "barbarians" who discarded his every last scrap of artwork -- and who perhaps unwittingly laid the groundwork for their son's famous theorizing on the mutual antagonism between art and the average man.
After graduating from Syracuse University in 1930, where he majored in literature, Mr.
Greenberg settled in New York.
As the Depression cast its bleak shadow on the city, he sat at home unemployed, teaching himself Latin and German, and eventually found work translating books.
A turning point came in 1937, when he was hired as a customs clerk by the Federal Government.
Assigned to the Appraisers Store division of the Customs Service on Varick Street, he began to spend idle hours at the office composing essays on culture.
They soon found their way into the pages of Partisan Review, the unofficial house organ of that brainy and querulous group known as the New York Intellectuals.
Mr.
Greenberg emerged on the art scene when it was still fairly small.
In the early 40's you could visit all the galleries in town in just a morning, and critics belonged to the isolated, impecunious world of the artists themselves.
Mr.
Greenberg, who lived in Greenwich Village, soon got to know nearly all the young artists.
Among them was an obscure painter named Jackson Pollock, who was earning a pittance on the W.P.A.
Federal Art Project -- and struck him as the one American painter whose work could stand up to the great Europeans.
The critic praised him extravagantly and at first hardly anyone noticed.
But in much the same way that the French critic Felix Feneon became linked with Georges Seurat, and the British critic John Ruskin with J. M. W. Turner, Greenberg's name eventually became inseparable from Pollock's.
Together they symbolize the romance of an era in which critics and artists believed that American painting could finally outshine the art of Paris, and were right.
While Mr.
Greenberg was prescient in his support of Abstract Expressionism, his later allegiances have generated less enthusiasm.
In 1959, after becoming a consultant to the French &amp; Company gallery on Madison Avenue, he organized shows by Morris Louis, Kenneth Noland, Jules Olitski, Larry Poons and other spearheads of the "color field" school of painting.
The movement reached its zenith in the mid-60's, when people talked of a Greenberg school and the artists' abstractions increasingly pre-empted space in galleries, museums and art magazines.
Today, it might be argued that Morris Louis is the only painter of the group whose reputation seems fully deserved, yet Mr.
Greenberg is loyal to his favorites.
Mr.
Olitski, he says, is the "greatest living painter," towering above everyone else.
Besides offering written criticism, Mr.
Greenberg is an avid practitioner of the ritual known as the studio visit.
He routinely visits artists at work to dispense advice.
And what does he tell them?
"You say," he replies, 'That's good' or 'That's not as good' or 'That's not good enough.' You never say, 'That's bad' in an artist's studio."
It has often been said that Mr.
Greenberg tells artists how to paint, a charge he adamantly denies.
Yet he does have a knack for friendly intrusion.
After Morris Louis died in 1962, Mr.
Greenberg, with the approval of the artist's widow, completed a few Louis paintings by deciding where to cut off the stripes.
In 1974 controversy erupted when Mr.
Greenberg, this time in the role of executor of an estate, was publicly accused of stripping the paint from several unfinished David Smith sculptures.
"They looked better with the naked metal," he says without apology, adding that he removed only primer.
Asked whether any limits govern a critic's relationship with artists, Mr.
Greenberg thinks for a while.
"What you can't do is write in praise of a girlfriend," he replies, referring perhaps to Helen Frankenthaler, a second-generation Abstract Expressionist whom he dated in the early 50's.
"People think I've written about Helen, but I haven't."
One of the hallmarks of Mr.
Greenberg's style is his elephantine self-assurance.
His "Art and Culture" (1961), a campus classic that brings together his key writings, has taught a generation of students that the formalist path to modern art is the only path.
Nonetheless, it is not churlish to wonder whether Mr.
Greenberg ever doubts his own ideas.
Even his admirers might concede that formalism is frustratingly limited.
Shouldn't art speak to something larger than its own limitations?
What is to keep art from becoming trivial if it refuses to grapple with age-old themes like morality and nature and death?
Faced with such questions, Mr.
Greenberg moans loudly.
"Those are questions asked by square people!" he says.
Does he think art has any connection to an artist's life?
"I only make one demand of art -- that it be good," he replies.
"How it gets to be good I don't care."
And is it wrong to want art to instruct us in living and in dying?
"The mission of art is to be good according to its own lights," he says solemnly.
"It has no other mission."
There is a poignancy to his reply, to his stubborn adherence to the old orthodoxies.
Or maybe it is just the poignancy of old age.
Nearly all the artists whom Mr.
Greenberg championed in his youth are gone now, and the days when he knew virtually everyone in the art world are long over.
It's incredible, a visitor tells him, that he has managed to outlive so many members of his generation.
"Incredible?" he says, exhaling a plume of smoke.
"No one uses that word correctly anymore."


Eighth-Grade Parties: Tuxedos, Gowns and an Uneasy Air
"THIS is hysterical," said Joan Froelich, 19 years old, as she watched the young people in strapless gowns and tuxedos posing unself-consciously before a phalanx of video cameras.
"No way are these kids eighth graders," she said.
But they were.
Ms.
Froelich, a sophomore at Scranton University in Pennsylvania, had returned to her old elementary school to watch a time-honored rite of passage: the eighth-grade Pierrepont School graduation party.
But this was not the same event Ms.
Froelich remembered from six years ago.


Narrow Notions of Greatness at the Modern
"Not so long ago the 1980's were in full bloom. No decade since the 1920's has experienced so drastic a change in attitude and spirit so soon after its end."
This perceptive, if widely held, opinion appears on a text panel at the beginning of the exhibition "Seven Master Printmakers: Innovations in the Eighties" at the Museum of Modern Art -- and it seems completely out of place.
Perhaps the words are an attempt to compensate for bad timing or to inject some historical awareness into the project, because "Seven Master Printmakers" acts as if the 1980's, at their glitzy, market-run worst, were still going full tilt.


Not-So-Antique Hawaiian Shirts
"DAVID," calls the clerk at Bailey's Antique and Thrift Shop in Honolulu.
"This man was a bellhop on the Lurline!" David Bailey hurries over; in his line of work, it's interesting indeed to meet a man who, more than 50 years ago, worked on a legendary ocean liner that brought visitors to Hawaii.
He cordially greets the straw-hatted man and then, with a grin, gets right to the all-important question: "Where are your shirts?"
The 3,000 square feet of Bailey's Antique and Thrift are crammed with collectibles and vintage clothing, but the store's chief claims to fame are Hawaiian shirts (also called aloha shirts) and other types of Hawaiiana.
It boasts of having the "world's largest selection of antique aloha shirts and rhinestone jewelry." Hundreds of the colorful, patterned shirts are jammed onto circular racks; a few dozen with star quality hang overhead, away from pilfering fingers.


Goobers Take a Southeast Asian Twist
MOST Americans eat their peanuts from the can with a beer chaser or in the sandwiches taken to school.
But peanuts make wonderful flavorings for sauces to go with meat, chicken or shrimp.
They are also good with noodles and stir-fried vegetables.
Peanuts show up frequently in Southeast Asian recipes, particularly those of Indonesia and Thailand.
Len Allison, of the late, lamented Huberts and now the chef and owner of Onda in Manhattan and eponymously named Len Allison at Dering Harbor, a restaurant on Shelter Island, makes an addictive Thai-inspired dish he serves in both restaurants, consisting of peanuts, shrimp, bean sprouts and rice stick noodles in a delicately spicy dressing.
It is extremely simple to prepare and is perfect for a light summer lunch or dinner.


Grimly, Graduates Are Finding Few Jobs
CORPORATE recruiting on most college campuses in Westchester declined this spring, and for the latest graduates the job search is harder than it has been in years.
"I filled out 11 job applications, had seven interviews and so far I've been turned down by six companies," said a 21-year-old communications major who graduated this month.
He would not allow his name to be published because he feared he might sound like a "loser."


Best Schools Have White Affirmative Action
To the Editor:
"Harvard?" they repeat.
Acquaintances and even "close" friends seem surprised to hear where I will be going in the fall.
I wonder if it is a strain for them to utter a "Well, congratulations. That's great!"


Even in 'New South Africa,' Apartheid's Legacy Lives On
As South Africa embarks upon a turbulent transition to nonracist democracy, it reaps a whirlwind sown by the inequalities and cruelties of more than four decades of apartheid.
Since President F. W. de Klerk proclaimed what he called "the new South Africa" 17 months ago, public transport, hospitals, beaches, parks, libraries and swimming pools have been declared open to all races.
Parliament, from which blacks remain excluded, has scrapped laws reserving land and neighborhoods for whites and classifying all South Africans by race.


CAMPUS LIFE: Wisconsin; Korean Company Uses Campus As Film Backdrop
A feature film that will give audiences in Korea a look at what American campus life is like is using more than 100 University of Wisconsin students as extras.
The Patmos Production Company of Seoul shot campus scenes Thursday and Friday for "My Beloved Agnus," a film that follows a Korean lawyer's investigation into the murder of a Korean graduate student studying in the United States.


Technology; Plugging the Gap Between E-Mail and Video Conferencing
Call it software for brainstorming.
In an attempt to mimic the process of solving problems by throwing people together in a room, a start-up company here has developed the first computer program that lets people in far-flung locations work simultaneously on a single problem.
Created by Group Technologies Inc., the program is designed to fill gaps left by electronic mail and video conferencing.
In what amounts to a conference call over a computer, it allows participants to work together simultaneously on the same document.
Each person can change or add material -- a word, paragraph, notation or a graph -- while seeing what the others are doing.


In-Flight Movies
To the Editor: The article about in-flight movies ("On Airline Screens, Bombs Away," Travel, May 19) stated that one would only see films like "The Grifters" on an airliner "in your dreams."
Well, my wife and I were wide awake as we watched "The Grifters" on an Aer Lingus flight from Shannon to New York recently.
And it wasn't a last-minute substitution; it was on the movie schedule printed in the in-flight magazine.


Trial Set in Cross Burning
The white supremacist Tom Metzger and three other men have been ordered to stand trial for burning a cross on a hillside eight years ago.
A July 12 trial in Superior Court was set for Mr.
Metzger, leader of the White Aryan Resistance, and the others, the district attorney's office reported Friday.
Mr.
Metzger and the other defendants are charged with one count each of felony conspiracy.
A fifth man pleaded no contest on May 20 to one count of felony conspiracy.
The men are accused of burning a cross on Dec. 3, 1983, in a racially mixed suburb near Los Angeles.


Barbara Moran Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Moran of West Babylon, L.I., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Barbara Ellen Moran and Jonathan Patrick Reese, a son of Mrs. and Mrs.
Walter J. Reese of West Babylon.
Miss Moran, 23 years old and a graduate of Dowling College, teaches kindergarten at Parliament Place Elementary School in North Babylon, L.I.
Her father is a lieutenant in the New York City Police Department in Brooklyn.


Best Schools Have White Affirmative Action; Good and Great Books
To the Editor:
Eric Alterman worries (letter, June 15) that I mischaracterized an article he wrote for The Nation in referring to a comment made by Mortimer Adler, editor of the Great Books series.
Since this is the first I've heard of his article, I can allay his worries on this score.


Maura Griffith to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
John Bradshaw Griffith of Boston have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Maura Pendleton Griffith, and Gregory Thomas Moffatt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Moffatt of Cherry Hill, N.J.
Ms.
Griffith, 25 years old, and her fiance, 31, received J.D. degrees last month from Georgetown University.
Both graduated from Georgetown.
Mr.
Moffatt has a master's degree in philosophy from Fordham University.


The Tonys Of Tomorrow?
To the Editor:
Bravo to Frank Rich for finally posting Broadway's ultimate closing notice  [ "The Great Dark Way: Slowly, the Lights Are Dimming on Broadway," June 2 ] .
The Great White Way will be resuscitated only when theater owners start paying as much attention to what appears
on
their stages as they do to the value of the real estate
beneath
them.


The Drug War the P.O.W.'s May Have Won
TWO years ago, the murder of a leading presidential candidate prompted Colombia's Government to declare all-out war on the nation's powerful cocaine mafias.
Soldiers arrested thousands of people and seized hundreds of ranches, airplanes and urban estates.
Last week, Pablo Escobar Gaviria, the trafficker accused of ordering the 1989 assassination of Luis Carlos Galan and of being the godfather of the Medellin drug business, surrendered for trial.


Ossining Architects Join Team to Return Soviet City to Glory
AN ambitious project to create a new tourist center in Odessa, the Soviet port on the Black Sea, has found a base in this Hudson River town.
How Gershon Palevski, an Ossining architect, found himself immersed in the dreams of Soviet planners is a story of imagination, vision and a kind of naivete.
For the last year, Mr.
Palevski, a native of Vilnius, Lithuania, and his partner in the architectural firm of Studio RAI here, Lucio Di Leo, have been working on a master plan to rehabilitate Odessa.
The plan was conceived by a Soviet artist and designer, Eugeniy Olenin, whom Mr.
Palevski met on a trip to the Soviet Union last year.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a screened-in patio that we recently enclosed with sliding panels of clear vinyl.
The screens are on the outside.
No matter what we try, we cannot seem to get the vinyl panels clean.
They always end up streaked and spotted.
Perhaps the screens have stained the vinyl.
Any suggestions?
A.
You have discovered the big drawback to vinyl.
It is hard to keep clean.
If the screens are aluminum, this could be part of the problem, but if they are plastic or fiberglass, they probably are not the problem.
To clean the vinyl properly, you will have to either take down the screens so you can work on them, or you will have to remove them to get at the outside of each panel.
Then clean with a soft cloth and sponge dipped in mild detergent.
If this is not enough, buy one of the plastic cleaners that are sold for this purpose in marine-supply and auto-accessory stores.
Use according to directions, and then apply a protective coating made for vinyl, which these stores also sell.


Nordiques Take Lindros in Draft But Will He Return the Compliment?
When he introduced the top choice in the National Hockey League draft to the Memorial Auditorium audience today, the announcer said, "Ladies and gentlemen, Eric Lindros of the Quebec Nordiques!"
While it is true that the Nordiques now hold the rights to the world's greatest 18-year-old player, it is not a sure thing that they can persuade him to turn down other options like playing under corporate sponsorship for the Canadian Olympic team or joining the planned Continental Hockey Association.


England
To the Editor: My wife and I recently spent three nights at the Apsley House Hotel in Bath, England.
We were with English friends.
The room rate included dinner.
Each night, after dessert, the waitress asked if we wanted coffee at the table or in the lounge.
When it came time to pay the bill I was surprised to see that we had been charged $2.50 a person, each night, for a total of about $15 a couple for the three nights.
At no time were we told that coffee was not included in the meal, nor was there anything on the menu to indicate otherwise.


Paula G. Murphy, Designer, Weds
Paula Graham Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Wilfred Murphy of Wellesley Hills, Mass., was married in Centerville, Mass., last evening to Theodore Harkness Ashford 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ashford Jr. of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Joseph R. Fahey, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Calhoun W. Wick, an Episcopal priest, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Victory Church.
Mrs.
Ashford, 26 years old, is an interior designer with Cullman &amp; Kravis in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is president of Barry Murphy Company Inc., a discount securities concern in Boston.


Nashua Journal; On Docket, Long Wait For Sound Of a Gavel
It looks like a courthouse.
The three-story brick-veneer building, which was completed last fall at a cost of $6.9 million, has the usual accompaniment of courtrooms, cell blocks, library space and judges' chambers.
Security guards patrol its corridors, and lights illuminate it at night.


This Year's Economist
First there was Abel Aganbegyan.
Next, Leonid Abalkin.
Then, in quick succession, Nikolai Petrakov, Stanislav Shatalin and Grigory Yavlinsky.
In six years, President Mikhail Gorbachev of the Soviet Union has used, then rejected, one economic adviser after another, making him look fickle.
But a closer look reveals a deeper truth.
The progression of advisers represents a breathtaking evolution in economic sophistication.
In 1987, Mr.
Aganbegyan could express little more than a formless recognition that centralized planning had to give way to markets.
Last week, Mr.
Yavlinsky presented Mr.
Gorbachev a sophisticated plan to turn ossified socialism into a market economy within a few years.


Making a Difference; Playing for Keeps at a Squeezed Columbia Gas
John H. Croom rolled the dice in a big way last week.
He said Columbia Gas System Inc. would stop making dividend payments and would even consider filing for bankruptcy unless it could renegotiate high-priced supply contracts with gas producers and keep its bank credit lines intact.
Mr.
Croom, who is chairman, president and chief executive of the big pipeline company, offered the gas producers $600 million in securities in a Columbia subsidiary to abandon contracts signed when natural gas was scarce and expensive.
Their only other choice, he said, was to stand in line as unsecured creditors in a bankruptcy proceeding that might not yield them anything more.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a map caption with the Sunday Outing article on June 9 misstated the location of seven locks on the old Delaware and Hudson Canal.
They are in the hamlet of High Falls, N.Y., not along the Hudson River.


For Adults Only: Love and Sorrow . . .
First love, young love, puppy love -- pop songwriting is full of heady adolescent passions, from the rush of infatuation to the devastation of heartbreak.
But as the years roll by, it's harder for either singer or listener to feel like a virgin; sooner or later, experience puts love and lust in wry, wary perspective.
Love no longer guarantees eternal bliss; loneliness no longer seems like the worst possible condition.
Instead, there are hedges, gradations, compromises, scars.
While aging male singers with a touch of self-consciousness (Jackson Browne, Sting, Neil Young) tend to refocus from domestic chronicles to social issues, Ms.
Raitt, who is 41 years old, has made it her business to find (and sometimes write) love songs she can sing with a straight face as an adult.
In her new songs, love still offers redemption, comfort and pleasure, but it's no easy panacea.
"Gonna get into it, baby," she promises in one of four songs she wrote or co-wrote for "Luck of the Draw" (Capitol 96111; CD and cassette), "down where it's tangled and dark." Over modal funk laced with slide guitar, she continues, "Gonna tell the truth about it/ Honey, that's the hardest part."


Struggle for Woods
ICKEY WOODS, the Cincinnati Bengal running back who has seen limited action since knee surgery two years ago, is determined to achieve a complete recovery.
But as he is discovering, the comeback trail he has chosen is a fast track and uphill all the way.
Since April, Woods has been training on a hydraulic treadmill with a top speed of 26 miles an hour and a maximum elevation of 40 degrees.


Alison Gerstell Is Married
Alison Davis Gerstell, a daughter of A. Frederick Gerstell of Beverly Hills, Calif., and Barbara K. Gerstell of Greenwich, Conn., was married in Greenwich yesterday to Stephen Myers Buscher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert W. Buscher of Snowmass, Colo.
The Rev.
Richard Stearns officiated at the First Presbyterian Church.
The couple, both 29 years old, are graduates of Connecticut College.
Mrs.
Buscher is an assistant vice president at Christie's in New York.
Mr.
Buscher received a master's degree in management from Yale University and is to join Bankers Trust in New York in August.


Council, Blaming Dinkins, Cuts Deeper
The leaders of the New York City Council yesterday angrily accused Mayor David N. Dinkins of a failure of leadership, as the Council completed a list of proposals to make $476 million in service cuts on top of the $1.5 billion in cuts already proposed by the Mayor.
"The administration has abdicated its responsibilities," the Council leaders said in a statement issued by Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone and his 10-member negotiating committee after a caucus at City Hall.


Reviews/Theater; Japanese Adaptation Of a Greek Classic
The New York International Festival of the Arts more than lives up to its aspiration as a crossroads of culture with the Japan Society's presentation at the Juilliard Theater of "Dionysus," a Japanese adaptation of a Greek classic with an injection of Shakespeare along the way.
This short (less than an hour and a half, with no intermission) but dramatically staged interpretation of Euripides's "Bacchae" is the handiwork of Tadashi Suzuki, founder and director of the Suzuki Company of Toga, whose previous American visits have won critical acclaim with productions of classics by Shakespeare, Chekhov and others.


Best Schools Have White Affirmative Action; 'By Popular Demand'
To the Editor:
Your May 29 front-page epilogue to efforts to integrate higher education in the United States gives the impression that the persistence of racially separate institutions in tax-supported higher education is an exclusively Southern phenomenon.
But a visit to central Brooklyn will confirm that is not the case.


Travel Advisory; South Korea Extends Tax
Foreign visitors to South Korea will soon have to start paying a 10 percent tax on hotel accommodations.
The tax is not new for Koreans: they have been paying it for 12 years while the Korean Government, in an attempt to stimulate tourism, exempted foreigners.
The exemption will end July 1.
Hotel rates in Seoul are currently among the highest in Asia, generally comparable to rates in Hong Kong.
The hotel tax will come on top of a 10 percent service charge already added to hotel bills in Korea.


Sally Thompson Weds Ted Mattis
Sally Ann Thompson, a hotel sales manager in Atlanta, and Louis Wadsworth Mattis 2d, a student there, were married yesterday at the Independent Presbyterian Church in Memphis.
The Rev.
John Sartelle officiated.
Mrs.
Mattis, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Mississippi and works for French Quarter Suites.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dick W. Thompson Jr. of Memphis, where her father heads Systematic South, a computerized billing company, and Thompson &amp; Gibson, real-estate developers.


Editors' Notes
A review of "Boss of Bosses" by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins, on page 11 of The Times Book Review today, identifies the authors as agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Both men resigned from the bureau on June 12; the resignations were made public after The Book Review had gone to press.


Cary Benedict Has Wedding
Carolyn Russell Benedict, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward G. Benedict of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday to Claude Lewis Collins, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John R. Collins of Signal Mountain, Tenn.
The Rev.
Leonard Freeman performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Collins, 25 years old and known as Cary, graduated from Williams College.
Her father is a vice president of Bankers Trust in New York.
Mr.
Collins, 25 and known as Lewis, is the promotions director for the Los Angeles Dodgers.
His mother, Linda Collins, teaches biology at the University of Tennessee in Chattanooga.
His father is a gastroenterologist in Chattanooga.


Louisiana's Anti-Abortion Crusader
On Thursday, two days after he had led a successful fight to override the Governor's veto of the state's tough new anti-abortion law, Representative Sam Houston Theriot rose to cast a loud no vote.
The bill in question this time would have deprived a family of its food stamps if one of the children was a habitual truant.
"This kind of stuff is stupid," said Mr.
Theriot, referring to the bill, which was defeated by a wide margin.
"What about the other children in that family who will suffer? We are targeting the wrong targets when we go after the innocent, the poor, black people."


CAMPUS LIFE: Texas A &amp; M; Debunking Myths About the 'Killer' In Killer Bees
Scientists at Texas A &amp; M University are trying to clear the name of some of their laboratory subjects.
"Africanized bees shouldn't be called killer bees," said Leon Praetorius, the director of the college's Honey Bee Identification Laboratory.
"They're just honeybees with a bad attitude. These bees won't put up with people messing with them, but that doesn't mean that they actually seek out people to kill."


Corrections
An article on June 2 about Crete referred incorrectly to a school in Athens and one of its teachers.
It is the British School at Athens; the teacher is L. Hugh Sackett, and he is not the head of the school.


THIGH ANXIETY
Penelope Green's Beauty column "Thigh Anxiety" (June 2) is a great relief to those of us who have our vanities but not the luxury or inclination to spend money on experimental treatments.
As Green daringly observes, cellulite creams, gels, lotions and potions don't work, despite our wishful hopes.
The only answer to the dreaded C-word is a low-fat diet and exercise, especially those designed for thigh and buttock areas.
I have repeatedly seen this work, albeit, slowly.
If you want to improve circulation (for good measure), scrub your bottom upward, with a scrubby luffa and your favorite soap.
SHADI SHEYBANI
New York, N.Y.


U.S. Opposes Antarctic Mining Ban Now
An agreement to protect the Antarctic from mineral exploitation for at least 50 years suffered a setback today when the United States said it would not endorse such a ban now.
Among the 26 Antarctic Treaty nations with full voting rights that had subscribed to the agreement when it was drafted here in April, only the delegation from the United States returned to the Spanish capital this week without Government approval.
That disappointed many of the 39 treaty members and environmental delegates who had hoped for a formal signing on Sunday, the 30th anniversary of the coming into force of the Antarctic Treaty.


Goobers Take a Southeast Asian Twist
MOST Americans eat their peanuts from the can with a beer chaser or in the sandwiches taken to school.
But peanuts make wonderful flavorings for sauces to go with meat, chicken or shrimp.
They are also good with noodles and stir-fried vegetables.
Peanuts show up frequently in Southeast Asian recipes, particularly those of Indonesia and Thailand.
Len Allison, of the late, lamented Huberts and now the chef and owner of Onda in Manhattan and eponymously named Len Allison at Dering Harbor, a restaurant on Shelter Island, makes an addictive Thai-inspired dish he serves in both restaurants, consisting of peanuts, shrimp, bean sprouts and rice stick noodles in a delicately spicy dressing.
It is extremely simple to prepare and is perfect for a light summer lunch or dinner.


Recent Sales
Freehold 136,500 28 Willowbrook Road


For Alcuin, Punctuation Wasn't the Point
To the Editor:
"Postal Scanners Can Parry Commas' Blows, After All" (front page, June 10) states that the grammatical laws of an English monk named Alcuin "survived for 12 centuries, but this year they were superseded by an edict from the United States Postal Service." Alcuin can be credited with innovations in the written language, including a standard for lower-case letters and attention to transcribing texts accurately, but punctuation did not evolve into its current form until nine centuries after Alcuin's death.


Ambassador to U.S. Warns Israel That New Settlements Imperil Aid
The Israeli Ambassador to Washington warned his Government today that it would have to choose between building more settlement housing in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip or receiving additional United States aid for the resettlement of Soviet Jews.
"Sometimes there are moments when governments must face issues and take hard decisions one way or another," Ambassador Zalman Shoval said in a radio interview here.
"The Israeli Government, when it has all the data in hand, will have to decide if it prefers settlements or aid."


Ms. Henneberger, a Reporter, to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Henneberger of Mount Carmel, Ill., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Melinda Bleidt Henneberger, and William Irwin Turque, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Turque of Trenton.
Ms.
Henneberger, 33 years old, is a reporter at New York Newsday.
A graduate of the University of Notre Dame, she received a master's degree in European studies from the University of Louvain in Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
Her father is the chairman of the Security Bank and Trust Company in Mount Carmel.
Her mother, Freida Lawrence Henneberger, owns Things Past, an antiques and gift shop in Mount Carmel.


This Week: Beetle-Picking
Patrol the rose garden for Japanese beetles, picking them off and putting them in a can of soapy water.
If the leaves show evidence of black spot, spray them with a solution of one tablespoon baking soda to one gallon of water, plus a few drops of Ivory liquid.
Apply every 7 to 10 days.
H.
Marc Cathey, the director of the National Arboretum in Washington, suggests planting the following summer-flowering shrubs for all-season color and interesting seed heads: butterfly bush (Buddleia species), bluebeard (Caryopteris species), hydrangea, crape myrtle (Lagerstroemia species) and chaste tree (Vitex Agnus-castus).


Bridge
One of the most unusual bridge contests does not require anyone to touch a card.
It is the Bols Bridge Tips competition, sponsored by the Dutch liqueur manufacturer and organized by the International Bridge Press Association.
Eight experts from various parts of the world each offer a piece of advice, technical or practical, and a hand that illustrates it.
Prizes are awarded for the best contributions, as judged by the members of the association.
The 1990 contest was recently concluded.
Joyce Nicholson of Australia advised players to take an important card that must be preserved and hide it in an abnormal place, perhaps in the middle of another suit.
This makes it less likely that the card will be played inadvertently.
Jens Auken of Denmark urged players to watch carefully for the "kill point" in a deal: the moment of crisis that calls for thought.


John J. Gorman, Priest, 79
The Rev.
John J. Gorman, a Roman Catholic priest in the Brooklyn Dioscese for 54 years who served as director of the Vatican Pavilion at the New York World's Fair in 1964-65, died on Wednesday at Lutheran Medical Center in Brooklyn.
He was 79 years old and lived at the Monastery of the Precious Blood in Brooklyn.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


POSTINGS: On the Block in Atlantic City; 41 Jersey Dwellings Offered by R.T.C.
For the first time, the Resolution Trust Corporation, charged with selling off the assets of the nation's failed thrift institutions, has scheduled an auction of properties in the New York region.
On the block next Saturday and Sunday will be 41 houses and condominiums -- 10 of them designated for low- and moderate income buyers -- and 142 boat slips, all in New Jersey.


CONSEQUENCES
Women choose abortions for a number of reasons, and while they are reasons that I cannot support, there are some I can understand.
Perhaps the repercussions of being pregnant and unmarried in the social climate of 1958 might have been enough of a reason for Pogrebin to abort her child, but her rationalization for rejecting the adoption alternative is more repugnant than the idea of abortion itself.
It is alarming to hear an idea espoused that includes the notion that it is better not to let a child live than to let it live -- and be loved -- by someone other than yourself.
MICHAEL TWOMEY GREASON
New York, N.Y.


A Week's Merriments Benefit 5 Good Causes
The Guggenheim Museum's children's program, Learning Through Art, was the beneficiary on Wednesday of a cocktail party and exhibition of children's drawings celebrating music.
Awards were presented to musicians who have been inspirations to children: the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis; the singer Suzanne Vega; Mbongeni Ngema, director of "Sarafina," and the artists Larry Rivers and Arman.
Natalie Lieberman, founder of the program, was the hostess at the party at the Louver Gallery in SoHo.
On Tuesday, Stella Reichman celebrated her 70th birthday with a party at the Regency Whist Club with guests drawn from the worlds of theater, fashion and society.


POSTINGS: Mortgage Service; Checking Out Index Changes
Recent studies have shown that mortgage lenders sometimes make mistakes when they compute changes in interest rates on adjustable mortgages.
This has made many borrowers wary, and they are more interested than ever in following the various indexes that adjustable mortgages are based on.
To help them out, two mortgage auditing and publishing firms have opened mortgage index telephone information lines that help borrowers keep their lenders honest.
Knowing the latest index value, and when it changes, can have a major impact on a homeowners' costs.
Since the mortgage interest rates tend to lock into a new rate for a year or more once changed, a bank making a rate change too early or late, or picking the wrong rate, as has often happened, can result in mischarges compounded over months or even years.


Comic Mozart


Public &amp; Private; Goodbye, Diorama History
Into this office comes a postcard from a reader (male) who asks the question:
"Has any corpus femalus ever contrived and composed any work of art remotely qualified to be placed within one hundred meters of the great masters: Da Vinci, Titian, Velasquez, Botticelli, Dante, Shakespeare, Michelangelo, Picasso, Goya, Eisenhower, MacArthur, Caesar, Alexander the Great, Darius, Genghis Khan, Sala-deen, Shelley, Milton, Byron, Einstein . . ."


Stranger Than Fiction
Anyone who reads the press these days will instantly recognize Woolf's complaint.
The air is thick with charges and countercharges on the part of journalists, historians and biographers obsessed with the elusiveness of truth.
Robert A. Caro publishes "Means of Ascent," the second volume of his Lyndon Johnson biography, and the political commentator Sidney Blumenthal publishes a cover story in The New Republic enumerating "The Epic Errors of Robert Caro" -- which Caro rebuts in an afterword to the paperback edition, provoking Blumenthal to a lengthy response in the letters column of The New York Times Book Review.
Janet Malcolm publishes "The Journalist and the Murderer," an account of the lawsuit by Jeffrey MacDonald, a doctor convicted of killing his entire family, against Joe McGinniss, who had written a book about the MacDonald trial -- only to end up before the United States Supreme Court, defending a book
she
wrote. (The high court agreed to rule on whether Masson v. The New Yorker magazine -- the libel suit against her by Jeffrey M. Masson, the psychoanalyst unflatteringly depicted in Malcolm's "In the Freud Archives" -- should go before a jury.)


Ms. Allen Weds David Patterson
Deborah Kent Allen, an architect in Boston, and David Delano Patterson, a lawyer there, were married yesterday at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Jamestown, R.I.
The Rev.
Frederick J. Spulnick performed the ecumenical service, assisted by the Rev.
William J. O'Neill, a Roman Catholic priest.
Ms.
Allen, who is 44 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in architecture from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a senior architect at TAMS Consultants.
She is a daughter of Elisabeth C. Allen of Jamestown and the late Max G. Allen, a professional engineer who was president of M. G. Allen &amp; Associates, a building contractor in Warwick, R.I.
Mr.
Patterson, 44, graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from Northeastern University.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Willing Patterson of Rosemont, Pa.
His father, who is retired, was the director of shipping and purchasing for the American Friends Service Committee in Philadelphia.


Corrections
The Streetscapes column last Sunday, about 13 West 131st Street, misidentified the owner of the neighboring lots at Nos. 7, 9 and 11.
He is Joseph F. Soviero 3d, not L. Joseph Overton.


Yeltsin's Back -- But Without the Bluster
WELL, it had to happen sooner or later.
The era of endearing Soviet bad behavior in America -- banging shoes, racing cars, flirting with movie stars, slugging down whisky, begging to go to Disneyland -- seems to be over.
The pounding and yelling had a certain colorful charm that is missing from the new style of visiting Soviet leaders, who strive for the earnest and brisk demeanor of debaters in a high school civics class and engage in carefully planned moments of spontaneity.


Small Pleasures and Lazy Days
"THE longer I live here the less I know what time it is, and it really doesn't matter." The speaker is a young woman who, with her husband, runs a bed and breakfast 40 or so miles south of Omaha.
She always know what the rainfall is, though, because this is farm country and last night's/this morning's/tomorrow's presumed precipitation is what fuels conversation in these parts.
The bed and breakfast is about a mile outside Nebraska City, a small town (population 6,547) with some fine houses, a granary on the Missouri River and a main street whose small, flat-roofed buildings cower under a big, empty sky.
Even here, many miles east of where the land gets higher and the air gets drier, one expects the great American West to be over the next hill.


Prairie Landscapes Preserved
MY husband and I visited our first prairie on June 10, 1989.
We were flabbergasted.
Because it was a day of such unforeseen pleasure I committed the date to memory.
Long before stepping foot on a real prairie, we had recognized, like the good ecocitizens we are, that North America's grasslands are critical habitats worthy of preservation.
We lamented that hardly any of this native turf is left.
But, frankly, prairies had always looked dull to us.
We weren't expecting to fall flat on our faces in love with them.
As we stood there on our first prairie -- it was Hayden Prairie, a 240-acre preserve in northeastern Iowa just west of Chester -- we were reminded of the flaw of passing judgment, whether on a face or a landscape, based on a fleeting view.
For generations of Americans brought up on vistas of tidy lawns and geometric fields of amber grain, prairies as seen from the window of a car appear to be a little frowzy.
They look abandoned.
They haven't been abandoned, of course.
Rather, they have somehow managed to escape the attention of Homo sapiens.


Don't Mess With Them
On the theory that no kung fu hero would think twice about vanquishing a dozen villains at once, the Denver Broncos may not need a full squad next season.
That's because several key players are entering kung fu training, and if the run-of-the-mayhem kung fu movie is any guide, the shrieks alone should be enough to drive their opponents off the field.
It seems that the reigning kung fu champion, CHRISTOPHE CLARK, is a Bronco fan who lives in Denver.
And when he offered his services to Coach DAN REEVES, Reeves didn't think twice before hiring him.
After all, the Broncos, who had made it to three Super Bowls in four years before dropping to a 5-11 record last season, clearly needed some help.


Their Corsets Were Stuffed With Bank Notes
THE TATTERED CLOAK
And Other Novels.
By Nina Berberova.
Translated by Marian Schwartz. 308 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
May durable goods in percent
2.9
.5
June consumer confidence in percent
74.5
74.5
Mid-June auto sales in millions
5.9
6.2
Wednesday
First-quarter G.N.P. in percent
-2.6
-2.6
First-quarter G.N.P. deflator
5.1
5.1
Thursday
448
425
May personal income in percent
0l.1
0.4
Friday
May leading indicators in percent
0.6
0.3
Monday: Wholesale trade *
Group of 7 meeting in London  Tuesday: Bundesbank Council meeting  Friday: Agriculture prices  (Sources: Bloomberg Business News; I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Chang Deserved More Credit
To the Sports Editor:
Coverage of the Chang-Connors tennis match at the French Open emphasized the amazing and gutsy performance of 38-year-old Jimmy Connors.
What was less lionized was the behavior of young Michael Chang, who conducted himself with nobility, first when the crowds cheered Jimmy's every winner and gave him several standing ovations, and second by his actions when Connors had to bow out because of physical pain.
His demeanor in going over to shake Jimmy's hand, not in triumph, but in mutual sadness, and then leaving the court so as not to intrude on the great outpouring of emotion between the spectators and Connors was truly touching.
RUTH MAHLER New Vernon, N.J.


Over 40, Not Blond
FIGHTING FOR AIR
In the Trenches With Television News.
By Liz Trotta. 395 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


Summer Hotel Deals: Good Buys Abound
THE recession's toll on the travel industry is producing something that you might not believe possible: a brand-name New York hotel room in the range of $100 before taxes.
Across the country, too, big-city hotels are posting offers -- $49, $69, $89 -- in line with motel prices.
Low occupancy rates for the year to the end of April -- 57.5 percent against the industry's general break-even point of 65 percent -- mean "it's going to be a long summer" for the industry, in the words of Mark Lomano, of Smith Travel Research of Gallatin, Tenn.
But the empty rooms mean travelers can get a really good buy if they focus on the trends.
If your vacation plans are still amendable, consider these facts.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a screened-in patio that we recently enclosed with sliding panels of clear vinyl.
The screens are on the outside.
No matter what we try, we cannot seem to get the vinyl panels clean.
They always end up streaked and spotted.
Perhaps the screens have stained the vinyl.
Any suggestions?
A.
You have discovered the big drawback to vinyl.
It is hard to keep clean.
If the screens are aluminum, this could be part of the problem, but if they are plastic or fiberglass, they probably are not the problem.
To clean the vinyl properly, you will have to either take down the screens so you can work on them, or you will have to remove them to get at the outside of each panel.
Then clean with a soft cloth and sponge dipped in mild detergent.
If this is not enough, buy one of the plastic cleaners that are sold for this purpose in marine-supply and auto-accessory stores.
Use according to directions, and then apply a protective coating made for vinyl, which these stores also sell.


Managing; Putting a Practical Spin on Training
In conventional management development, training is training, doing is doing and never the twain do meet.
Would-be mechanics get cars to fix and aspiring cooks stir pots on the stove.
Yet the briefcase crowd still gets plunked in classrooms and plied with theory.
But managers at today's down-sized corporations are so loaded up with work that few have the luxury of training for training's sake.
As a result, many companies are truncating the classroom parts of management training and are instead opting for "action learning," a hybrid technique in which classroom training is immediately followed by sessions in which the trainees use what they learn to tackle actual projects and problems that their companies have identified as requiring attention.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 23, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
2
5
SECRETS OF THE MORNING, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.95.) A young music student is haunted by the ghosts of her lovers, present and past.
3
4
ONCE A PRINCESS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.95.) A woman in Mississippi is visited by the European prince to whom she was affianced.
4
5
"G" IS FOR GUMSHOE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.95.) On her 33d birthday, the private eye Kinsey Millhone finds herself on a hit list.
5
36
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
6
3
THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $5.99.) Murder and chicanery amid the mansions of California's Orange County.
7
15
RED DRAGON, by Thomas Harris. (Dell, $5.95.) An F.B.I. agent hunts a serial killer.
8
8
MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.99.) A woman journalist's coming of age in the 1960's and 70's.
9
4
HAMMERHEADS, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.95.) The Coast Guard versus the drug cartel.
10
3
IMPULSE, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) A woman's search to find her father, who wronged her mother, leads to romantic adventures.
11
8
FAMILY PICTURES, by Sue Miller. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.95.) The good and bad times of a large Chicago clan during the past 40 years.
12
1
SECOND CHILD, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) A horrible crime committed 100 years ago comes back to haunt a quiet Maine village.
13
9
THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Doomsday brings horrors to America.
14 *
1
THE OUTLAWS OF MESQUITE, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $3.99.) Eight short stories about the old American frontier.
15
9
AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick Dunne. (Bantam, $5.99.) Manners, morals and murder in Los Angeles's high society.
16 *
1
DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $5.95.) Dirk Pitt moves fast to save America from a Japanese extremist.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
2
83
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
3
4
BY WAY OF DECEPTION, by Victor Ostrovsky and Claire Hoy. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An account of the operations of Mossad, the Israeli spy service.
4 *
14
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
5
398
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
6
9
MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) The craft of baseball.
7
38
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
8 *
45
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) The Arab-Israeli conflict over the past decade.
9
4
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers are distinguished and rewarding.
10
1
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
11 *
124
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
47
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2 *
14
THE REVENGE OF THE BABY-SAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
27
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
4
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
5
2
LIFE 101, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $5.99.) Advice about coping with the human condition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Why We Need the Bolshoi
So, the Russians really are coming.
On Tuesday evening, Moscow's Bolshoi Opera sets up shop in the Metropolitan Opera House for its first New York appearance since 1975, and only its second ever.
On the bill are Tchaikovsky's "Yevgeny Onegin" -- in nothing less than the world premiere of a new production -- along with his "Maid of Orleans" and Rimsky-Korsakov's hybrid opera-ballet "Mlada," to be performed in repertory through July 6.
The troupe then decamps for Wolf Trap Park, near Washington, for performances from July 11 through July 15.


Correction Officer Faces Murder Charge
A 32-year-old New York City correction officer, James Isabell, was arrested on Friday and charged with murdering a Florida man found dead in a rented car in the Bronx in January.
Detectives in the 47th Precinct in the Bronx said the victim, Steven Varri, 41, of Miami Beach, was shot once in the right cheek after a dispute.
Another man, David Brey, 29, was arrested in the killing shortly after Mr.
Varri was killed.


Chicago Gets Hot as a Site for Film Making
For years Chicago was a pleasant afterthought in Hollywood, the source of gangster movies or period pieces or the Chicago-specific productions that did not lend themselves to New York or Los Angeles.
Now Chicago is becoming the first choice for a generation of film makers who are escaping the expense and congestion and cliches of the coasts or are seeking unvarnished realism.
The result has been an explosion of film activity here in the last few years.
Major producers and directors like John Hughes and Ron Howard are turning to Chicago to create all-American stories of ordinary people, people who may not eat tofu and use cellular telephones but who bring in big numbers at the box office.


Richard Pactor: Textile Designer
"I work with raw materials, as a builder does with a building," Richard Pactor said.
"They use steel and cement. I use wool, polyester, cotton and silk."
Mr.
Pactor is a ringmaster of fabric styling.
A 30-year veteran of the textile business, he is now executive vice president of product development for Forstmann &amp; Company, the textile manufacturer in Manhattan.
His job is not only to design cloth, but to meld, mold and manage the work of 20 stylists creating fabrics for women's and men's clothing.


Missy Meyer and James Weisgerber Are Married
Martha Lindsay Meyer, a pharmaceuticals sales representative for Lederle Labs in Newark, and James Curtis Weisgerber, a sales director for the Congoleum Corporation, a maker of floor coverings in Lawrenceville, N.J., were married yesterday in Cranford, N.J.
The Rev.
Bruce Williams performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Weisgerber, who is known as Missy and is 36 years old, graduated from Wake Forest University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Meyer of Cranford.


Filipino Farmers Feel Smothered by the Ash
The rice crop is dead, buried beneath a foot of volcanic ash and rock, and the farmers who struggle here in the shadow of Mount Pinatubo wondered aloud this afternoon whether their soil might ever be fertile again.
Felix Manalac, a 62-year-old farmer who has tended rice fields in San Matias for a third of his life, kicked at a small mound of the gray-black ash that destroyed the summer harvest.


British Baroque


Miss Baton Wed To Sean F. Lydon
Elizabeth Marks Baton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Scott Baton 2d of Ligonier, Pa., was married there yesterday to Sean Francis Lydon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Lydon of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
James B. Simons performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
Michael's of the Valley.
Mrs.
Lydon, 26 years old, is a management consultant with the Boston Consulting Group in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University, and she and her fiance received M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.
Her father is the chairman of Chestnut Ridge Foam in Latrobe, Pa.


CAMPUS LIFE: Penn State; Poster's 46 Slurs Ridicule Bigotry By Insulting All
Pennsylvania State University administrators are meeting bigots, racists and chauvinists on their own terms, or at least 46 of those terms neatly spelled out and listed on 5,000 posters being distributed systemwide in the last two weeks.
No one escapes unslurred -- not Caucasian, black, Hispanic, Asian or Middle Eastern people; not women or homosexuals; not the elderly, the religious or the handicapped.
American Indians come in for a share of insults, as do people of European or Russian ancestry.


Freer Expression May Unlock Deeper Changes
BEFORE South Africa's three-chamber Parliament wound up its annual session last week, a mixed-race legislator rose to read aloud the names of 73 black detainees who had died in police custody under mostly dubious circumstances.
The hush in the joint session gave way to mutters of recognition when the legislator, Luwellyn Landers, called out the name of Steve Biko, the black-consciousness advocate who became a martyr of the struggle to end apartheid when he was fatally beaten during police interrogation on Sept. 12, 1977.
For years, Parliament, from which blacks remain excluded, was the nearest thing to an open forum in which other opponents of apartheid like the human rights campaigner Helen Suzman could speak out.
Even so, they were sometimes shouted down, and it is a measure of how much South Africa's climate has mellowed that Mr.
Landers's dramatic gesture elicited no shock from white legislators.


300,000 ALBANIANS POUR INTO STREETS TO WELCOME BAKER
Some 300,000 Albanians, chanting "U.S.A.! U.S.A.!" jammed into the main square of Tirana today to hear Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d tell them that "freedom works" and to urge them to move forward toward democracy.
It was the first visit ever by a senior American official to this tiny Balkan country, which in March became the last in Eastern Europe to begin instituting democratic reforms.
The Albanians, who for four decades were virtually isolated from the outside world, swarmed over Mr.
Baker's motorcade.


Monster Movies: Humans Always Win
WHILE growing up, Ted A. Bohus experienced the ritual adventures of any adolescent boy: the countless hours reading horror comics and staring in amazement at Rod Serling's "Twilight Zone" weekly television series as it unfolded on his family's black and white set.
But most of all he remembers sitting in a cool movie theater on hot summer afternoons being terrified by monster movies so popular in the late 1950's and throughout the 60's.


Red Sox Retain Winter Haven Site
The Boston Red Sox and the city of Winter Haven, Fla., have agreed on a one-year extension of their lease through 1992 for spring training there.
The Red Sox had previously announced that the team would seek another Florida site for spring training.
But a statement released by the Red Sox on Friday said that the extension "in no way" affects other discussions and negotiations with other Florida locations about moving the spring camp there after 1992.


Southeast Asia
To the Editor: In March my wife and I, through Adventures in Paradise, a branch in New York of a Bangkok travel agency, traveled in Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam.
After spending two days at the Oriental Hotel in Bangkok waiting for visas, we proceeded to Vientiane, Laos.
Thence to Phnom Penh, where we found a modern hotel, the Cambodiana, which overlooked the Mekong River Delta.
We also spent four days in Siem Reap touring Angkor Wat.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 10 of the Arts and Leisure section today refers incorrectly in some copies to a dance being performed by the choreographer Merce Cunningham.
It is "Trackers," not "Travelers."


S. J. Jones Weds Ms. Christenson
Susan Chandler Christenson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William N. Christenson of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Stephen Justin Jones, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Jones of Northampton, Mass.
The Rev.
C.
Carter Via performed the ceremony at the Reformed Church of Bronxville.
The couple, both 26 years old, graduated from Williams College.
Mrs.
Jones's father is the associate dean for student affairs and a professor of clinical medicine at New York Medical College.
Her mother, Elizabeth White Christenson, is an art therapist at the Westchester County Medical Center.


Dollar's Rise a Crucial Issue for Group of Seven
When finance ministers and central bankers of the seven leading industrial democracies meet here on Sunday, they are likely to agree that the dollar's rise against other currencies is causing problems for the European and Japanese economies, private economists say.
Proposals for promising aid to the Soviet Union, if it tries to develop a free-market economy, are also expected to be discussed by officials from the so-called Group of Seven: Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the United States.
But the British officials hosting the gathering play down the possibility that a decision on aid will be made.
That issue will be left to the mid-July summit meeting here, at the end of which Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev will meet with leaders of the seven countries.
Invitation to Soviets Is Possible
However, the Soviets could be immediately offered associate membership in the International Monetary Fund, British officials said.
That would enable the I.M.F. to give the Soviet Union technical assistance in reforming its economy but would not allow the Soviets to receive I.M.F. money.


'The Litigation Explosion'
To the Editor:
Our legal system has become accessible to a far greater portion of Americans than the former Chief Justice is comfortable with.
Both Warren E. Burger and Walter K. Olson criticize lawyers as a key factor in clogging the courts and doing economic harm, without recognizing the healthy expansion of law-defined rights.


A Critic's Power and Burden
To the Editor:
If, indeed, the lights are dimming on Broadway as Frank Rich laments, is it truly possible that Mr.
Rich still believes he is not at least partly responsible?
As a theater artist working in New York for over 10 years, I have witnessed firsthand countless plays that producers have felt forced to close because of a Frank Rich pan.


Autumn Wedding For Pamela Duca
Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Duca of Southboro, Mass., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Pamela Jean Duca and Claiborne Thornton Marshall, a son of Thornton Woodbury Marshall of Huntington, L.I., and Judith Carrington Green of New York.
The couple are both 26 years old and graduates of Skidmore College.
Miss Duca is the marketing manager of Epoch Data Inc., a computer sales company in New York.
Her father is the president of First Data Systems, a computer consulting firm in Marlboro, Mass.
Her mother, Maria Duca, is a career development specialist for the Metrosouthwest Employment and Training Administration in Norwood, Mass.


Pretoria and Blacks Discuss Strife
Representatives of the South African Government, the African National Congress and the rival Inkatha Freedom Party sat down together for the first time today to discuss how to end violent clashes between black factions.
The Government, the African National Congress and Inkatha have had bilateral discussions but not broader talks together.
The participation of Inkatha and the congress were considered essential to the talks because their supporters have been involved in most of the violence.


Capturing the Range of Nature in an Exhibition on Wave Hill
A "NEW POVERTY" in the museum scene has been replaced by resourcefulness.
There has always been fund raising, of course, but now the need is for income to replace lost Federal and local funds.
As a result, development officers are blooming like desert flowers (which may explain the surge in duplicate and irrelevant mailings) but there are other, firmer implications of privatization, like art auctions and museum exhibitions sponsored by galleries.
Even so, it is a bit of a shock to hear that Wave Hill, the Riverdale mansion where Teddy Roosevelt summered, Mark Twain lived and Toscanini stayed, is now considering weddings as a source of income.
Not that the economic strain is visible: this estate overlooking the Hudson never looked better and the exhibition on view in the Glyndor House and Wave Hill itself might have been designed for those who love it but are not up to walking its 28 acres.
Titled "Wave Hill Pictured," it brings some of these acres indoors by way of photographs in black and white and color.


Miss Gilroy Wed To Richard Eby
Catherine Louise Gilroy and Richard Kerr Eby, geologists, were married yesterday in Francestown, N.H.
The Rev.
Daniel K. Poling conducted the Dutch Reformed ceremony at the Old Meeting House.
Mrs.
Eby, 34 years old, graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in hydrology from the University of Virginia.
She and her husband work for Geraghty &amp; Miller, an environmental consulting firm with headquarters in Plainview, L.I.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Peter H. Crawford and Thomas Gilroy, both of New York and Francestown.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Hughes Hubbard &amp; Reed.
Her mother is a governor of the National Arts Club.


Westport Country Playhouse Opens With a Farce
SUMMER has begun and the opening of the Westport Country Playhouse makes it official.
Just like old times, a featherbrained farce is kicking off the playhouse's 61st season and then moving on to other theaters -- in Massachusetts, Maine and New York -- on what is left of the summer stock circuit.
The farce is "Lend Me a Tenor," which offers, in unthreateningly correct proportion, sexual titillation, slamming doors, mistaken identities and other misunderstandings and silly business.
What it does not offer is a fair measure of wit to match the clever construction of the playwright, Ken Ludwig.


Classics, Jazz and Folk Start Off the Season
THE musical signs of summer continue to proliferate as the Caramoor Festival enters its first full week of concerts, the Westchester Choral Society brings back its Summer Sings and the county parks come alive with the yearly cycle of ethnic celebrations.
In Katonah, chamber music rule this week.
Even the usual symphonic program at 8:30 P.M.
Saturday features an Orchestra of St.
Luke's scaled down to Baroque proportions, the more authentically to play concertos and suites by Bach, Telemann and Vivaldi.
Today at 5:30 P.M., the Emerson String Quartet, a perennial favorite at Caramoor, returns bearing tonal gifts of Mozart, Beethoven and Dvorak.
More Beethoven -- the Septet in E flat -- highlights the first Thursday afternoon recital by the St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble, along with Ravel's Sonatina for Flute, Viola and Harp and a work new to me, "Litany of Sins" by Anthony Davis.


Brooklyn College Series
Alicia de Larrocha, the Alvin Ailey Repertory Ensemble, Rosemary Clooney, Ballet Hispanico and the Moscow Philharmonic Orchestra will be among the performers in the 1991-92 season at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College, Nostrand and Flatbush Avenues in the Flatbush section.
The Hartford Ballet will open the series on Oct. 12.
Information: (718) 434-4242.


Canada
To the Editor: I read the item "New Tax (and Refunds) in Canada" (Travel Advisory, March 3) with great interest since two friends and I planned to go to Montreal and Quebec City by train in late May.
I especially liked the line about how the Canadian Government ". . . has attempted to avoid the snares and delays that plague the European system."
I saved the receipts from our lodging and intercity train travel, and at the train station in Montreal I asked a ticket agent for a tax-refund form, but he didn't know anything about it.
I asked at least five other agents; one agent said he had heard about it but didn't know what I should do.
He said that United States citizens normally stop at the customs building at the border or obtain a refund at the customs counter at the airport.
No provisions have been made for the roughly 500 passengers a day who take the train back to the United States.


Everything's Up-to-Date in 1830
THE BIRTH OF THE MODERN
World Society 1815-1830.
By Paul Johnson. 1,095 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $35.


T. E. Davis Weds Karin Engstrom
Karin Zoe Engstrom and Timothy Emmett Davis, lawyers in Philadelphia, were married yesterday at Christ's Lutheran Church in Oreland, Pa., by the Rev.
Michael Carlson.
Mrs.
Davis, 28 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul F. Engstrom of Ambler, Pa.
An associate at Pepper, Hamilton &amp; Scheetz, she graduated magna cum laude from Smith College and cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania Law School.
Her father is a vice president of the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia.


Free Trade: No Longer Just a Case of North Versus South
TRADE politics in the United States does not just fail to follow party lines.
It also no longer follows the traditional boundaries of regions.
Rather, the nation has become a quilt of different views on free trade, with patches of strong advocacy sometimes adjacent to strong opposition.


IMMIGRANT UNREST ALARMING FRENCH
Mantes-la-Jolie, Sartrouville and Vaulx-en-Velin were little-known towns and boroughs until television cameras recently brought them abruptly into French homes as the scenes of violent clashes between the police and young, mainly Arab immigrants.
Today they have become symbols of growing French fears of a larger mutiny by the rootless children of North African immigrants whose frustration at their empty and often-jobless lives in bleak outer-city ghettoes is growing day by day.


In Taxes on Real Estate Where Is The Limit?
EVER since Peter Minuit swapped about $24 in fripperies for land over which the Manhattoes -- the first participants in New York's tribal politics -- held a disputed claim, people have been debating the true value of the city's real estate.
Now, 365 years later, the debate has been elevated from the abstract to the concrete: are the property taxes that New York City or its precursors began imposing in 1654 approaching their legal and practical limits?
That debate will be joined this week when the City Council is expected to deal with Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposal to raise real estate taxes by $776 million to balance the $29 billion budget for the fiscal year beginning a week from tomorrow.
The Council has acknowledged that an increase is necessary, but has refused to budge beyond $300 million.


Marcus L. Griffea: Fashion Entrepreneur
When Marcus L. Griffea first visited New York from his home in Elyria, Ohio, he was fascinated with the neighborhoods.
To him, the residents of each area had a distinctive look, style and attitude.
Two years ago he moved to Manhattan, working as an art director at advertising agencies.
When he decided to strike out on his own, Mr.
Griffea, now 28 years old, knew what he wanted: to use his creative talents as a fashion entrepreneur.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE DOOR IN THE AIR
And Other Stories.
By Margaret Mahy.
Illustrated by Diana Catchpole. 106 pp.
New York: Delacorte Press. $13.95. (Ages 10 to 14)
DANGEROUS SPACES
By Margaret Mahy.  154 pp. New York:  Viking. $12.95. (Ages 10 to 14)


Tech Notes; The 15-Second Hand Treatment
It sometimes seem as though there is no task so simple that technology cannot improve on it.
Now there is a machine for washing and disinfecting hands.
It was designed by Meritech, a Denver company, to remove microorganisms and disinfect hands in compliance with United States Agriculture Department cleanliness standards.
The machine is mainly intended for the food-service and health-care industries, and models are already installed in a handful of restaurants and hospitals.
Electronics concerns, food processors and pharmaceutical companies are also potential customers.


DiMaggio's Streak Is Overblown
To the Sports Editor:
Your day-by-day account of Joe DiMaggio's 56-game hitting streak has already proved what a spurious record that is.
Teammates going to unusual lengths to allow him an extra time at bat, hits that may very well have been errors.
The only record those 56 games should hold is that they are the most publicized 56 consecutive games.
SIDNEY HARRIS New Haven


Perspectives: Tenant Selection; Shaping the Occupancy of Gut Rehabs
CONCENTRATE housing renewal within an area and the investment will result not only in saving individual buildings, but also in lifting the entire neighborhood.
That theory has begun to pay off now that occupancy has begun in the West Bronx at one of the largest gut-rehabilitations of city-owned apartments undertaken by the Department of Housing Preservation and Development in the 80's.
It is bringing about the restoration of 893 apartments in 14 large buildings, some with elevators and some without, in a once blighted, high-density location west of the Grand Concourse, a few blocks south of the Cross Bronx Expressway.


Ramos Signs for 3 Years With Team in Spain
After what amounted to a seasonlong tryout, TAB RAMOS has made the grade in Spanish soccer, at least enough to win a three-year contract with Figueras, the second-division team he joined last August.
The 24-year-old Uruguayan-born midfielder, who starred for St.
Benedict's Prep in Newark and later for North Carolina State before becoming a standout on the 1990 United States World Cup team, went to Figuera in a loan arrangement with the United States Soccer Federation.


Taking the Turbocharge Out of the Indianapolis 500
Shortly after this year's Indianapolis 500, Tony George, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway president, said he was considering a rule change, possibly as early as 1993, that would eliminate the current turbocharged engines and replace them with the same 3.5-liter non-turbocharged (or normally aspirated) engines used in Formula One and the world sports-car championship.
The purpose, George said, would be to encourage more auto manufacturers to participate in his race.


Wall Street; The Not-So-Subtle Lure of Spinoffs
Newly minted equity issues are piling into the market like new cars off the assembly line.
Typically, they offer investors the thrill of a fresh start, with products that may still be on the drawing board and revenues that are little more than a gleam in the chief executive's eyes.
Meanwhile, shares of Fisher-Price, the well-worn toy manufacturer, are also expected to come to market in the next week or so.
Once independent, Fisher-Price has been a division of the Quaker Oats Company for 21 years.
But the arrangement has been neither happy nor profitable, and last year, Quaker decided to polish up the toy unit's balance sheets and return it to the marketplace as a spinoff, effective July 1.


90's Pets, the More Exotic the Better
Janine Marquardt unloaded a cardboard box from an aluminium freight container at the Lufthansa Cargo Terminal at Kennedy International Airport the other day, reached inside and pulled out a large plastic bladder filled with water that also contained 100 eight-inch-long snakefish.
"That's our public," she said. "Today they love exotics."


More Pluribus, More Unum
Multiculturalism.
That jawbreaking word has already caused huge controversy.
The furor is sure to continue now that a committee of scholars has recommended revisions in New York State's school curriculum that would place greater emphasis on cultural diversity.
But the report should be read with care and an open mind.
It squarely faces a tough question: Should public schools stress the common elements that define America or the differing cultures that often divide it?
The committee's answer is that a revised curriculum can wisely encompass both.
It's now up to State Education Commissioner Thomas Sobol to follow that sensible counsel.


Aunt Polly's Place in History
The "Jerseyana" column of May 12 was an interesting vignette from New Jersey history -- until the final paragraph.
Then, lo and behold, it suddenly and inexplicably took a tangent of a specific ethnic character.
Was this an example of "creative history" -- an attempt to manufacture American kinship with a particular ethnic group?
The authentic incident of a New Jersey woman captured by the Indians 200 years ago can stand on its own without a modern-day counterpart.
If the writer thought he needed an analogy, the one chosen was not appropriate.
Aunt Polly might have had her problems, but she was not the victim of a holocaust.
The American Indians were.


Business Diary/June 16-21
COMPANIES  Disloyal American Buyers Are Detroit's Latest Challenge


Review/Dance; Indian View Of Humanity And Divinity
The way India's art can unite the sacred and the secular was memorably demonstrated in the solos that Alarmel Valli danced last Sunday night at St.
Mark's Church.
Miss Valli scattered flowers and bounded lightly in "Pushpanjali" and "Alarippu," her opening dances of invocation.
Her arms rippled like gently flowing rivers.
When she sustained poses, they had a sculptural dignity.
No matter what she did, she was lovely to behold.
Yet even as she enchanted the senses, this Indian dancer made one aware of divine as well as human beauty.


On the Block, Glossy Survivors From the 18th Century
Rare when they were made, American 18th-century furnishings with lacquerlike japanned finishes continue to be uncommon commodities on the antiques market.
In recent months, however, two pieces have become available for sale in New York, focusing attention on the fewer than 50 surviving period chests, clocks and chairs with this Oriental-style decoration, which imitates the hard, shimmering finish of Japanese lacquering.
Last October, a William and Mary highboy was exhibited by Israel Sack, a Manhattan dealer, at the International Antique Dealers Show in New York.
Its price tag of $2.75 million was one of the highest for any object at the fair.
Although not sold at the show, the flat-topped cabinet with trumpet legs, all lavishly embellished with exotic birds, flowers and pagodas in Oriental landscapes, was bought in March for $1.5 million by the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts in Richmond.


Italian Fare Surpasses Low-Key Setting
LA VILLA, just off the Post Road in the center of Westport, is the kind of modest-looking place that arouses few expectations.
A tiny storefront, with a mere 11 tables, La Villa's decor is simple in the extreme, relying on a soothing, unobtrusive gray-rose color scheme and rose-tinted cafe curtains that shield the front windows from those waiting in line for the movie around the corner.
Yet, this low threshold of expectations works in La Villa's favor.
In spite of a moderate-to-large menu, one is pleasantly surprised (read startled) at the high quality and fresh preparation of the food served.
Just after you sit down, a little dish of lightly browned, crisp paper-thin wheels of zucchini is served with a spicy marinara dip -- which is zesty enough to be scooped up with the crusty Italian bread offered, thankfully, without recourse to foil-wrapped butter pats.
To our delight, the dishes were even better than they sounded on the menu.
And in addition to the printed menu, there are usually specials each evening.


The Executive Life; What's in a Voice -- Or, Worse, Is Not
Until recently, Cynthia Whitney hadn't minded her voice.
Friends praised its husky tone as soothing.
Some even called it sexy.
But the reaction changed when Ms.
Whitney began doing more public speaking after taking a marketing job with the Geometry Asset Management Company, a New York investment firm.
"People would ask about my sore throat," she said.
"I didn't want clients to think I was sick."
So she contacted Dr.
John Haskell, a specialist in voice disorders at Columbia University.
He found that she was breathing too fast, which caused her vocal cords to form nodules, small bumps that prevent vocal cords from closing properly.
After three months of voice therapy, Ms.
Whitney says, clients no longer offer her lozenges and tissues.
"My voice sounds much healthier," she says.
"I'm not hoarse anymore."


Design; Cottage Industry
It has all the familiar trappings of an American summer house -- the welcoming front porch and shingled facade, the rose-covered pergola and gabled roof lines -- all the romantic totems of seaside colony architecture in the Northeast.
The image is positively picture perfect, right down to the immaculately clipped hedges, the pristine, white window frames and the springer spaniel frolicking on the front lawn.
Yet this Long Island house also represents something of an architect's folly: an elaborate renovation of an utterly charmless property.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a screened-in patio that we recently enclosed with sliding panels of clear vinyl.
The screens are on the outside.
No matter what we try, we cannot seem to get the vinyl panels clean.
They always end up streaked and spotted.
Perhaps the screens have stained the vinyl.
Any suggestions?
A.
You have discovered the big drawback to vinyl.
It is hard to keep clean.
If the screens are aluminum, this could be part of the problem, but if they are plastic or fiberglass, they probably are not the problem.
To clean the vinyl properly, you will have to either take down the screens so you can work on them, or you will have to remove them to get at the outside of each panel.
Then clean with a soft cloth and sponge dipped in mild detergent.
If this is not enough, buy one of the plastic cleaners that are sold for this purpose in marine-supply and auto-accessory stores.
Use according to directions, and then apply a protective coating made for vinyl, which these stores also sell.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
When It's Hot and Dry
Q.
My rooftop deck is hot and dry most of the summer.
I hate the idea of spending all my time watering, so what plants should I use?
Jonathan Byrne, Pittsburgh, Pa.


Sunday Brunch; Three Choices for Breakfast or Brunch
Sunday breakfast, catering to the earlier-than-brunch bird, is available, but often hard to find.
Restaurants of every nationality now offer brunch menus, from smoked fish plates and Italian frittatas to sushi plates and Indian curries.
Here are two places for breakfast and one of the better brunch spots.
Brasserie


Did the Pentagon Papers Change Anything?
To the Editor:
A postscript to A. M. Rosenthal's celebration of The Times's publication of the Pentagon Papers 20 years ago (column, June 11):


Samuel D. Magavern, Lawyer, 85
Samuel D. Magavern, a lawyer in Buffalo for more than 50 years and the former chairman of the State Board of Social Welfare, died on May 28 at his home in Buffalo.
He was 85 years old.
He died of pneumonia, said his son, William.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Eduardo Perez, first baseman, and assigned him to Boise of the Northwest League.


Recent Sales
Bay Shore 135,000 1391 Peters Boulevard


When Minorities Start Becoming Majorities
ALL over the country, political maps are being redrawn in the redistricting process that follows every national census.
But nowhere is the bargaining more intense than in Texas, where the calculus of redistributing power among black and Hispanic voters and the old white political establishment may presage changes to come in the rest of the United States.
In Houston, Dallas and San Antonio, just as in Boston, New York and Chicago at an earlier time, a numbers game is being played to satisfy new communities whose growing populations allow them to demand a bigger share of political life.


All Hail the Newest Cesar (Chavez)
In the 1950's, when Groucho Marx was asking losers on "You Bet Your Life" who was buried in Grant's Tomb, this boxing question had just about the same degree of difficulty.
Back then, if you asked any fan with a passing interest in the fights who the best all-round boxer of the day was, the answer would come back unhesitatingly, often accompanied by the same sort of faint smirk that Groucho's question routinely drew.


Gems of Americana, in Bath
GOING to England to see an American museum may seem like a strange idea.
But the American Museum in Britain at Claverton Manor, an 1820 English mansion in the glorious hilly countryside two miles outside Bath, offers an esthetic experience to compare with the city's Royal Crescent and Roman baths.
Does that sound chauvinistic?
Part of the attraction is the English setting.
But for Americans, this museum would be worth visiting if only to eavesdrop on the bemused comments of the many British visitors experiencing its extensive collection of Americana, ranging from the colonial period to the early 20th century.


Corrections
A front-page chart last Sunday with an article about adults who live with their parents misstated a figure for 25-to-34-year-old women.
According to a 1990 Census Bureau survey of living arrangements, 8.1 percent of all women in that age group live with parents, not 9.5 percent.


After Calling a Boy Out, The Umpire Dodges Bullets
A teen-age umpire for a boys' baseball league went right back to officiating after an angry coach allegedly fired several gunshots at him during a game.
Police officers said today that they were holding 31-year-old Curtis Fair for firing at 16-year-old umpire Roderick Fisher Jr. after the teen-ager called a boy on Fair's team out at home.
Patrolman Lionel Settles said he did not believe Fair had been charged today, three days after Fisher made the call involving a 9-year-old player during a Khoury League game.


Baseball's Realistic Adversary
AS the labor leader who created the free-agent market for baseball players that provoked today's multimillion-dollar salaries, Marvin Miller was the burr under the baseball establishment's saddle for almost two decades, the adversary to almost anything and everything that the commissioner's office and the club owners did.
He was always a realist, never a romantic.
And nearly 10 years after he retired as the executive director of the Major League Baseball Players Association, he still is.
This time as an author.
Until now, the establishment may have mistakenly assumed that Marvin Miller had strolled off into the sunset.
But judging by "A Whole Different Ball Game: The Sport and Business of Baseball" (Birch Lane Press, $21.95), it's still high noon.


Darling Trades Talk for Action
The notion that the Mets might soon trade him is not a foreign one to Ron Darling.
It is, however, a disturbing one.
"I do not want to leave," Darling, the senior member of the Mets in length of continuous service, said recently.
"I have a great affection for New York and a real and valuable connection to it."


Fantasies Vs. Daily Life
To the Editor:
Jon Pareles's review of my educational videotape, "Dreamworlds," raises many important issues  [ "Sex, Lies and the Trouble With Videotapes," June 2 ] .
But in this letter I can only address the core of his critique -- that my video (1) is unrepresentative of music videos, (2) decontextualizes the images out of their "real" meaning, and (3) attributes too much power to images in influencing the social world.
Or to put it another way: there's nothing there, I cheat and it's not important anyway.


Alice Bloomer to Wed Jonathan Woods
Mr. and Mrs.
David Eardley Bloomer of Oley, Pa., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Alice Frances Hamilton Bloomer, and Jonathan Tufts Woods, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Franklin Woods of Cohasset, Mass.
Miss Bloomer, 26 years old, is a merchandise coordinator at Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is the president of the Survival Equipment Company in Oley.
Her mother, Siddie Shepard Bloomer, owns the company.


Giving Advice For Mortgage Problems
"Rising Foreclosures Portend Wide Problems"  [ May 5 ]  omits a critical right for consumers facing foreclosure.
Following receipt of an acceleration letter demanding payment of the debt and before any foreclosure action, banks, by law, must send a notice of the availability of financial counseling to any homeowner who is delinquent due to an involuntary loss or reduction of employment.
Suffolk Housing Services, a private nonprofit fair-housing agency, is also a H.U.D.-approved housing-counseling agency.
S.H.S. counselors help homeowners apply for H.U.D. assignments of F.H.A.-insured mortgages and provide mortgage counseling in conventional and Veterans Administration mortgages.


Martha Gillham Is Married
Martha Virginia Gillham, a child-development specialist at Bellevue Hospital, and John David Mahoney, a vice president at Grace Environmental, a subsidiary of W. R. Grace &amp; Company, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenneth O. Jones and the Rev.
Robert B. O'Connor, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Mahoney, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Texas and has a master's degree from the Bank Street College of Education.
She is the daughter of Richard D. Gillham and Margaret M. Gillham, both of Odessa, Tex.
Her husband, 29, graduated from the University of Tennessee and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Mahoney of Wilton, Conn.


At the Sight of Grass, Edberg And Becker Can Smell a Title
Defending Wimbledon champion Stefan Edberg can't actually see the center court grass from his London penthouse and hasn't traversed it in nearly a year.
But when he closes his eyes he can remember exactly how it felt beneath his sneakers as he deployed a gossamer game to dethrone Boris Becker and claim his second title here.


Unmade in Japan
For a while it seemed that Takako Doi, the first woman to lead a major Japanese political party, would lead the Japanese Socialists to a new era of popularity and power.
The soft-spoken politician brought a new style to Japanese voters accustomed to gruff deal-cutters.
"No one in postwar politics has brought politics so successfully into people's living rooms," a colleague said recently.
Three years after Ms.
Doi took over the chronically out-of-power party in 1986, the Socialists had their best electoral showing ever, doubling their seats in the upper house of Parliament and breaking the Liberal Democrats' dominance.
But the Socialists were unable to match those gains in lower house elections last year -- and therefore unable to fulfill some promises to their new supporters -- and took a beating in local elections two months ago.
Ms.
Doi took the blame.
Announcing her resignation as leader of the Socialists last week, she said, "I decided right after the elections that I must step down."


Other Brokers in Japan Are Linked to Scandal
Japan's new stock scandal widened today with reports that two more brokerages had paid big clients compensation for investments that lost money.
The Kyodo News Service quoted Finance Ministry officials, who were not identified, as saying that the Daiwa Securities Company and the Yamaichi Securities Company paid more than $72 million to some large customers to cover stock losses.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Living in the Cemetery
NONIE LEWIN'S nearest neighbor is Robert Gorman.
He died in 1975.
Her other neighbors -- the Pennys, the Wernes and the Hugheses -- have also gone to their final resting places, which happen to be in front of Ms.
Lewin's living-room window.
Ms.
Lewin lives in a cemetery, and she loves it.
"I feel so comfortable here," she said as she served watermelon balls a few feet from Mr.
Gorman's remains.
"Death is just another stage that we all experience."


Diamante: New Facets for High Tech
I AM a gadget guy, always have been.
My wife complains, when we go shopping, that I always head for the most complex video recorder, the dishwasher that talks, or the camera that has an incomprehensible array of settings.
And she's right.
As a child, I loved toggle switches.
I was thinking about that, sitting there in my dark driveway and trying to button up the Diamante's sunroof.


A Bounty of Food Festivals
AFTER a winter of pale, imported substitutes, Midwesterners are inclined to find any number of excuses to enjoy farm-fresh produce and fresh-baked goods.
Aside from taking to the fields themselves or merely seeking out a roadside stand or urban market, attending at least one or two of the region's many food festivals is a favored tradition during the summer months.
Traveling across the region from festival to festival, a visitor is inclined to discover some common themes.
With contests ranging from seed spitting to corn shucking and plate lunches made and served by church groups, a typical gathering offers urban visitors a modern-day tour of small-town life.
And, in an era when so many agricultural products bear little resemblance to their fresh origins, buying from the farmer has its attractions.


Travel Perks Are Widespread in Capital
The travel habits of President Bush's chief of staff, John H. Sununu, have spawned renewed criticism of the travel perquisites of high Federal officials, especially the extent to which private organizations finance the trips of policy makers.
Reports filed with the Office of Government Ethics show that during March alone, companies and organizations outside the Government paid for at least 85 trips by employees of the White House and other executive branch agencies.


Fat Gabe and the Nature of Fiction
To the Editor:
I am highly sympathetic to the difficulties reviewers face.
And really, protesting a bad review is probably one of the most pointless activities on the face of this earth.


Indifference To Culture
To the Editor:
What Frank Rich expresses when he deplores the exclusion of work by excellent producers like Joseph Papp, Lynne Meadow and Andre Bishop for Tony competition is that all theater is really one theater, each part nourishing and depending upon the others, no matter how experimental or escapist.
But by giving an appreciative picture of the accomplishments of Papp, Meadow, Bishop, etc., Mr.
Rich overlooks the dark side of the situation: that the theaters run by those producers are as endangered as those on Broadway, not to mention the many others that are even more venturesome and vulnerable and serve as the laboratories and seedbeds of the art.


Provence
To the Editor: Alan Riding's article "Savoring Provence" (Travel, April 14) was an excellent guide to that fascinating region.
I would also recommend visiting the museum and Chartreuse at Villeneuve-les-Avignon.
When the Pope moved to Avignon, Villeneuve became a residential area for the princes of the church.
Founded in 1356 by Pope Innocent VI, La Chartreuse is an unusual church with double nave, austere cloister and 14th-century frescoes.


Appeals Court Returns Achille Lauro Case
Overturning a lower court's decision that the Palestine Liberation Organization could be sued in New York, a Federal appeals court ruled on Friday that the issue needed further study.
The case arose from lawsuits filed in 1985 and 1988 by former hostages who were aboard the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro in the Mediterranean in October 1985.
The ship was taken over by terrorists led by Mohammed Abbas, the head of a P.L.O. faction called the Palestine Liberation Front.
One hostage, Leon Klinghoffer of Manhattan, was shot as he sat in his wheelchair.
His body was then dumped overboard.


Lisa W. Foderaro, Reporter, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Sal J. Foderaro of Rumson, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Lisa White Foderaro, and Fred Don Pollard 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pollard 3d of Canton, N.Y.
Miss Foderaro, 27 years old, graduated from Brown University.
She is a metropolitan news reporter for The New York Times.
Her father is the editorial page editor of The Asbury Park Press in Neptune, N.J.
Her mother, Jane Foderaro, is a retired newspaper editor.


Fern Smerling Wed to Louis Ginsberg
Fern Smerling, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian Smerling of Valley Stream, L.I., and Louis Ginsberg, a son of Sydelle Ginsberg of Merrick, L.I., and the late Selvin Ginsberg, were married last night in New York.
Rabbi Martin J. Zion performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club.
Both are associates at New York law firms.
Mrs.
Ginsberg, 24 years old, is with Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she also received a J.D.
Her father is the vice chairman of the Dreyfus Corporation, which manages mutual funds, in New York.


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
Who among us in recent years has not taken note of the prevalent American cynicism about politics and politicians?
Who among us has not murmured something about a plague on both their houses?
Is there anybody we can trust?
No, not even in the White House, two new thrillers tell us.
In DIRTY LAUNDRY by Marc Smolonsky (Walker, $21.95), organized crime has control over some of the most hallowed figures in American politics.
In THE SERPENT'S CROWN by John J. McKeon (Walker, $19.95), computer technology devised at the highest levels of the United States Government sabotages a Presidential candidacy just before the election.


A Flirtation Comes to Fruition
In March 1969, Go magazine reported that John Lennon and Paul McCartney were writing a symphony.
"I feel personally that we are veering toward a more classical form of composition," Mr.
McCartney was quoted as saying.
Nothing came of that, but 20 years later, Carl Davis, an American conductor and composer who lives in London, persuaded Mr.
McCartney to accept a commission from the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, which is celebrating its 150th anniversary this season.
With help from Mr.
Davis, who is credited as co-composer, Mr.
McCartney produced the "Liverpool Oratorio," an eight-movement, 90-minute work for orchestra, chorus and soloists.
Its first performances will be on Friday and Saturday at the Liverpool Anglican Cathedral, and its London premiere is scheduled for July 7 at Royal Festival Hall.


Chess
The difference between a quiet, stubbornly contested maneuvering game and a lightning attack is the combination, chess's analogy to a one-two punch in boxing.
Usually, a combination begins with the sacrifice of a piece or a pawn to break down the defenses of the enemy king, so that the follow-up punches will come with greater force.
Occasionally, however, a nonsacrificing stab begins the attack.
Moreover, an initial strike may be followed by a quick, forcing interlude of maneuvering before the decisive blow can be struck.
Almost any mix of direct hit and contrivance is possible.


Researcher Using Captive Primates In Behavior Study
Wendy Wood is spending her days patiently observing the behavior of chimpanzees as they forage for food and defend territory in their lush green environment -- just north of downtown Los Angeles.
A graduate student at the University of Southern California, Ms.
Wood, 39 years old, is the university's first Jane Goodall Fellow and possibly a pioneer in applying occupational therapy techniques developed for institutionalized humans to chimpanzees in captivity.
The goal of her studies at the Los Angeles Zoo is to benefit primates and, eventually, her fellow humans.


Apartheid: Building It, Undoing It
1899-1948: Beginnings
Independent republics set up by Dutch settlers are defeated in the Boer War, 1899-1902, and united with Britain's colonies; when the Union of South Africa comes into being in May 1910, the constitution reserves virtually all political power for whites.
In 1912, the South African Native National Congress (later the African National Congress) is founded.
In 1913, African rights to own land are restricted and areas for African occupation (which later become "homelands" under apartheid) are demarcated; mass evictions of Africans from white-owned lands follow.
In 1923, blacks are prohibited from living in towns except when whites require their services, a restriction enforced by the use of internal identity passes.
During the 1920's, an alliance of white workers and conservative farmers becomes politically dominant, while a major but ultimately abortive effort is made to unionize African workers.
During World War II, the ruling United Party shows some openness to liberalizing industrial color bars, but opposition nationalists take a harder line on segregation and stir Afrikaner resentment against the Government for its wartime support of Britain.


Board Is Facing Major Change
THE County Board of Legislators is facing in the November elections what could be the most far-reaching changes in its 21-year history with the certain departure of the most powerful Republicans and its most vocal and active Democrat as well as the possible defeat of three other legislators.
The departing Republicans, John E. Hand of Yorktown Heights, and Diane A. Keane of Rye, will open the way not only for new faces on the Board but also for a new leadership pattern.
Mr.
Hand became chairman of the Board of Legislators and Mrs.
Keane the majority leader in a political upheaval that produced a coalition and an era of cooperation unique in the Board's short history.


New &amp; Noteworthy
GENE DREAMS: Wall Street, Academia, and the Rise of Biotechnology, by Robert Teitelman. (Basic Books, $10.95.) A journalist explains why the biotechnology industry has been better at cloning dollars than at coming up with useful products.
"Whether explaining difficult biological concepts or tortuous financial stratagems, Mr. Teitelman writes with lucid grace and an insider's grasp," Natalie Angier said here in 1989.
DOGEATERS, by Jessica Hagedorn. (Penguin, $8.95.) In Marcos's Philippines, a middle-class schoolgirl and a male prostitute and drug addict make their way in a world where the lives of the very rich may be even more squalid than those of the very poor.
In 1990 our reviewer, Blanche d'Alpuget, said of the novel: "The chapters of its discontinuous narrative are like fractals, those mathematical forms that present a series of overlapping shapes, endlessly repeated. The whole book is an elegant geometry of chaos."


Belts to Wear When the Living Is Easy
Summer belts embrace a state of mind as much as a waistline.
They convey an attitude that is relaxed, cool, easy.
Belts of loosely braided leather or woven of straw offer ventilation.
Saks Fifth Avenue carries a four-inch wide belt by DeVecchi woven of ivory silk cord and laces of sun-bleached raffia for $130.
An all-silk cord style in olive is a another option by DeVecchi ($135).
The buckle on each is a burnished gold circle.
Try them with a linen camp shirt and skirt.


Thomas O'Brien, 67, Authority on Aquinas
Dr.
Thomas C. O'Brien, a leading authority on the works of Thomas Aquinas and the editor of a 60-volume English translation of the 13th-century theologian's "Summa Theologica," died on Tuesday in Chambersburg, Pa.
He was 67 years old and lived in Chambersburg.
Dr.
O'Brien died of lung cancer, said John Page, executive secretary of the International Commission on English in the Liturgy.
Dr.
O'Brien had worked with the commission since 1979.


The Fight to Save Children Shifts to the Statehouse
IN California, children aren't the only ones who get report cards.
For the last three years, an advocacy group has been giving the state itself a grade on how its policies treat children.
Each year, its handsome report has flashed across the television news, summarizing its findings in a single letter -- a fat, red, glowing "D."
The report, and the group that issues it, Children Now, lie at the intersection of two of the most prominent trends in social policy.
One is the emergence of children's issues as one of the nation's foremost social concerns.
The other is the ascendance of state governments as places with social policy clout.


Harold Brockey, Retired Executive, 82
Harold Brockey, retired chairman of Rich's department stores, died Friday at his home.
He was 82.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
Brockey was chairman and chief executive of Rich's from 1972 to 1978.
He succeeded Richard Rich, grandson of the founder, and was the chain's chairman when it merged with Federated Stores in 1976.
After the sale, he served for a time as a vice president and board member of Federated.


Candida Smith Married to Carroll Cavanagh
Candida Nicolina Smith, a daughter of Jean Freas of New York and the late David Smith, was married yesterday in New York to Carroll John Cavanagh, a son of Mona Cavanagh of East Norwalk, Conn., and the late Carroll J. Cavanagh.
The Rev.
James Covington officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls.
Ms.
Smith, who is 35 years old and is keeping her name, is a dancer and choreographer.
She graduated from Kirkland College.


Boy Scouts Try to Keep Identity as Outsiders Knock
The Boy Scouts of America, one of the most revered of the nation's institutions, today finds itself accused of something quite undemocratic: discrimination on grounds of religion, sex and sexual orientation.
This is not a dispute over political correctness.
The dissidents are not trying to alter the program of skills and homey virtues that the Scouts have taught to four generations of American boys.
Rather, they simply want to join the organization, and the Scouts do not want them.


Coins
Sometimes, little things have big histories.
Got a nickel?
Look at it, feel it.
Jefferson's on the front and Monticello's on the back and it does not buy much anymore.
It's not even made of pure nickel, but of a copper-nickel alloy, three parts copper to one part nickel.
Even its name means tricky, coming from Kupfer-nickel, tricky copper, a name given to an arsenical nickel ore whose red color tricked European miners into thinking that they had found copper.


Miss Schubert Has Wedding
Maria Louise Schubert, a daughter of Mrs.
Walter B. Schubert of Maplewood, N.J., and the late Mr.
Schubert, was married yesterday in South Orange, N.J., to John Lee Saltonstall 2d, a son of David Saltonstall of New York and Mrs.
Paul C. Cabot Jr. of Westwood, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas Grogan and the Rev.
Gordon Tremaine, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Sorrows Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Saltonstall, 31 years old, is a sales promotion supervisor for Estee Lauder in New York.
She graduated from Rosemont College in Rosemont, Pa.
Her father was a member of the New York Stock Exchange.


France Deports Author Exiled From Morocco
Ignoring protests from human rights groups, the French Government has deported a prominent Moroccan political exile to Gabon for "reasons of state" after he refused to halt publication of a book highly critical of King Hassan II of Morocco.
The expulsion of the exile, Abdelmoumen Diouri, on Thursday came just days after Morocco's Interior Minister, Driss Basri, held talks here with his French counterpart, Philippe Marchand.
Mr.
Diouri, who lived in France since 1971, was accused by the French authorities of having close ties with Libya, Iraq and Palestinian militants.


Ms. Mitchell Wed To A. D. Constan
Katherine Brooke Mitchell, a daughter of Michael W. Mitchell of New York and Brooke Mitchell of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married in Scarsdale yesterday to Andrew Davis Constan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel D. Constan of Dayton, Ohio.
The Rev.
Philip Washburn and the Rev.
Gary Brown officiated at the Scarsdale Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Constan, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a student at the Columbia University Law School.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Stockholm
The shores of the 14 islands that make up Stockholm are lined with so many boats -- over 100,000 -- that it seems impossible to squeeze in another motorboat, sailboat or yacht.
On Friday afternoon in summer most boats leave, and the traffic jam when they return on Sunday night is something to behold.
Stockholmers love the sea and will wax lyrical about their archipelago at the slightest provocation.
Many travel no farther for their summer vacation than to one of the 24,000 islands and skerries in the Stockholm archipelago, which extends about 45 miles east of the city into the Baltic Sea.
There they rediscover the simple life as they imagine their forefathers to have lived it.
For visitors from abroad, an island vacation in the Baltic provides an opportunity to socialize with Swedish families, taste home cooking, watch tow-haired children cavort in the chilly water, putt-putt to the store across the bay and lap up whatever sun there may be.


Making a Difference; Trimming the Sails At Public TV's Flagship
William F. Baker is president of New York's Thirteen/ WNET, the largest public television station in America.
He is also a fellow of the Explorer's Club and has been to both the North Pole and the South Pole.
So the current chill at the station has not fazed him unduly.
"I think we can even be better for having to go through this," he said last week.


Group Appeals to Delay Council Elections
The Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund has asked Justice Thurgood Marshall of the United States Supreme Court to delay the New York City Council elections while the Justice Department reviews the new Council districts.
Earlier this week, a three-judge Federal panel denied the group's request for an injunction to stop Council candidates from gathering ballot petitions until the districting plan was cleared by the Justice Department.
Lawyers from the defense fund had argued that the petitioning carried out a districting plan that must be approved by the Justice Department under the Voting Rights Act.
The United States Supreme Court was the next level of appeal.


Alison Curtiss Is Married
Alison Angela Curtiss and Scott Thomas Seger, advertising account executives in Manhattan at DDB Needham Worldwide and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, respectively, were married yesterday by the Rev.
David Good in the Congregational Church in Old Lyme, Conn.
Mrs.
Seger, 28 years old, graduated from Haverford College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan C. Curtiss of Old Lyme.
Mr.
Seger, also 28, graduated from Allegheny College.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas C. Seger of Pittsburgh.


Cabbies and Police Join to Stop Suspect
Two livery-cab drivers helped the police stop a suspect in a hit-and-run fatality in the Bronx early yesterday morning, the police said.
The suspect, William Price, 52 years old, of White Plains, was charged with driving while intoxicated, vehicular manslaughter and leaving the scene of an accident in the death of an unidentified woman in her 30's, the police said.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
UNCOMMON LECTURES
Sidney Altman, 1989 Nobel Prize winner and Sterling professor of biology at Yale, will give a talk on Thursday at 8 P.M. as part of a summer series on the New Haven campus.
His subject is "Understanding Life in the Laboratory," and the non-technical presentation is meant for a general audience.


The Return of Jazz's Greatest Eccentric
Ornette Coleman, the alto saxophonist and composer, is explaining to his guitarist how he wants a musical phrase to be shaped, and as usual he's in an avuncular mode.
In a shabby rehearsal space high above Harlem, surrounded by the musicians that make up his group Prime Time, he digresses.
He turns to his favorite subject, harmolodics -- his own theory of music, which stresses collective over solo improvisation.
Mr.
Coleman loves to jump from subject to subject, and he's soon talking about unisons, harmonies, clefs and transposing -- not using these terms in their traditional sense, but as metaphors for larger philosophical arguments.


CONSEQUENCES
Like Pogrebin, I became pregnant "out of wedlock" in the days before abortion was legal.
Marriage wasn't an option for me, either.
The sense of shame was intense, the fear of exposure paralyzing.
I, too, wanted an abortion.
However, my father was a laborer, not a lawyer with the kinds of connections to find me "a real doctor who did abortions on the side." So I did what was intolerable to Pogrebin.
I entered a home for unwed mothers.
I have never regretted it.
The home, run by nuns, was a safe, nurturing place.
My daughter, whom I last saw in the delivery room, will be 26 years old today.
I didn't mean to transmit a "legacy of rejection at birth," though maybe I did.
I hoped to be a mother someday, but I didn't want to be a mother then.
Now I'm in menopause.
As it turned out, I never married, and I've never had any other children.
So I'm glad I had the experience of maternity.
I like to think that my daughter had a loving home and that she made a childless couple very happy.
MARION S. LANE
Jackson Heights, Queens


Travel Advisory; Orient-Express To Bangkok
Orient-Express Hotels, operator of the Venice Simplon-Orient-Express, plans to introduce a luxury train service in Southeast Asia late next year.
The Eastern &amp; Oriental Express will make one round trip a week between Singapore, Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) and Bangkok (Thailand).
The 1,200-mile one-way journey will take 41 hours, including two nights and one full day on board.
The route is through mountains and tropical rain forests and along coastlines.
The train will also stop at Butterworth, Malaysia, for an excursion to Penang.
Departure days and times have not been announced.
Additional day trips are planned from Singapore to Malacca, Malaysia, and from Bangkok to the old Thai capital of Sukhothai.
Passengers will be able to join or leave the train at any of the main stops.
All the cars will be air-conditioned and the sleeping cars will all have private washing and toilet facilities and showers.
Fares, which will vary according to type of cabin, will start at $860 a person for a one-way journey between Bangkok and Singapore, including meals.
Reservations will be accepted early next year.
More information: (800) 524-2420.


Too Much Of a Good Thing?
To the Editor:
Michael Kimmelman notes without comment Walter Annenberg's belief in "strength going to strength" as the reason for the gift of the French Impressionist and Post-Impressionist collection to the Metropolitan  [ "From Strength to Strength: A Collector's Gift to the Met," June 2 ] .
But "strength going to strength" is only a refined way of saying "the rich get richer," a sentiment with certain unpolitic corollaries.


Lisa Michelle Adams Weds Warren Meeker
Lisa Michelle Adams, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry G. Adams of Houston, and Warren Jeffrey Meeker, a son of Patricia A. Meeker and Warren C. Meeker of New York, were married yesterday at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Frederick Hoesli performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Meeker, 22 years old, graduated from the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University.
She is an alternate Rockette.
Her father is the manager of customer and consumer affairs at Shell Oil in Houston.


Editors' Notes
An article on page 22 of The Times Magazine today about the difficulty of determining the truth in nonfiction writing discusses the libel suit by Jeffrey M. Masson, a psychoanalyst, against the writer Janet Malcolm.
The article says the United States Supreme Court agreed to rule on whether the suit should go before a jury.
On Thursday, after the magazine had gone to press, the court ruled that the case could go to trial, overturning a lower court ruling that dismissed the suit.


Best Schools Have White Affirmative Action; Color Line at Annapolis
To the Editor:
I was pleased that "Blacks in a Long Gray Line" (news article, June 2) mentions that blacks have been members of the United States Military Academy at West Point since the 1870's.
Blacks were also attending the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis in the 1870's.


Coming of Age


Christine Finch Wed to David Bullock
Christine Dana Finch, an advertising sales manager, and David Duncan Ridgely Bullock, a Bankers Trust associate, both in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Catherine's Church in Riverside, Conn.
Msgr.
William A. Genuario performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Bullock, 28 years old, graduated from the Connelly School of the Holy Child and attended Marymount University in Arlington, Va.
She works for the Tapis Publishing Company, which publishes trade magazines for the wallpaper industry.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George S. Finch of Old Greenwich, Conn.
Her father is a marketing executive for I.B.M. in Sumner, N.Y.
Her mother, Judith P. Finch, owns the Diet Center of Rye, N.Y.


Review/Theater; 'El Esplendor': Reality and Illusion in 2 Languages
"What words have I to give you?" a retired vaudeville actress in "El Esplendor" asks a young woman who has been writing about her and searching for her since she was a little girl.
"It is my life. But it is your story."
The ancient theatrical puzzle of finding what is reality and what is illusion is given some new twists in this work performed in English and Spanish at the Pregones Theater in the Bronx by members of Grupo Zero, a Mexican company dedicated to traditional Mexican carpas, or vaudeville, and El Taller, an experimental Chicano-Latino theater laboratory in San Francisco.
The production is part of the New York International Festival of the Arts.


Rangers Pick a Soviet Dynamo
Two years ago, when the Detroit Red Wings took Sergei Fedorov of the Soviet Union on the fourth round of the National Hockey League draft, few North American fans had heard of him.
Last summer, when Fedorov left the Soviet national team at the Goodwill Games and signed with Detroit, he was still not widely known.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Sunday Outing article last week, about Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, omitted the name of an antiques store that specializes in 19th-century American pieces, and omitted the identities of its owners.
The store is the Upholstered Room; the owners are brothers, David and Larry Marshall.


Tyson Referee
MILLS LANE will be the referee for the rematch between MIKE TYSON and DONOVAN (RAZOR) RUDDOCK on Friday, Nevada State Athletic Commission executive director CHUCK MINKER said yesterday.
RICHARD STEELE worked the first meeting between Tyson and Ruddock on March 18, a bout that ended in controversy when Steele stopped the fight with Ruddock still on his feet and gave the victory to Tyson.


First-Time Home Buyers Now Leading The Market
AT the end of 1988, when Robert and Christine Scuderi decided to marry, they talked, as newly engaged couples often do, about buying a home some day.
Back then, the prospects for homeownership for the 21-year-olds seemed like a distant dream.
But the right combination of timing and hard work -- they both took on second jobs, he cutting grass and trimming hedges, she waiting tables -- put the Scuderis in a two-bedroom condominium in Carmel, N.Y., in February.


Bach Festival Pays a Visit
Efficiency and passion are not always companions in the performing arts, so it was nice to experience the Bach Aria Festival and Institute as it passed through Manhattan on Wednesday night at the 92d Street Y.
There are fellows and artists engaged in master classes and lecture demonstrations at the State University campus at Stony Brook, but at concert time they play as equals -- and very well indeed.
Works appear and reappear on the 10 programs; accumulated experience with them helps account for the mutuality of Wednesday's performances.


Shiite Cleric Says Hostages Won't Be Freed Over Holiday
Lebanon's highest-ranking Shiite Muslim cleric today dicouraged hopes for release of Western hostages in the next few days but said their captivity was nearing an end.
"The conditions for the hostage issue are much better now than any time in the past," Sheik Mohammed Mehdi Shamseddine, leader of the Higher Islamic Shiite Council, said in an interview on the Voice of Lebanon, a Christian radio station.
"We can say the problem of the hostages has neared its end, but their release is not imminent."


An Unsettling Look Inherent In Recovery
People love to talk about the Dow as if they were talking about a person.
"The market is feeling nervous," they say.
"The market wants to go higher." These days the market is acting more like a lottery winner worried that the telegram is a practical joke.
Nobody can be absolutely sure that the recovery that seems to be underway is the real thing.
"There's a possibility of a false start in the economy," said Laszlo Birinyi, a financial consultant.
Indeed, the gross national product has popped up in the middle of half of all postwar recessions, only to slump anew.


Yankees Come Up Short, 4-3
The ovation Wade Taylor received in the eighth inning last night must have warmed the Yankee rookie.
But the loss surely turned him cold.
Taylor pitched brilliantly for seven and one-third innings at the Stadium, but the Yankees, despite scoring two runs in the ninth inning, fell to the Minnesota Twins, 4-3.
The Twins have won 19 of their last 20 games and all four against the Yanks.


Sarah Wendell Casey Weds
Sarah Wendell Casey, a daughter of Mrs.
Craig W. Casey of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Rev.
Casey, was married yesterday to Charles Lockwood Forbes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles S. Forbes of Boston.
The Rev.
V.
Alastair Votaw officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, assisted by the Rev.
Diana W. Phillips, a Congregational minister.
The couple graduated from Connecticut College.
He is a property manager for the Whittier Partners, a real-estate company in Boston.


Miss Burian Wed To Michael Rowe
Jennifer Ann Burian, a sales executive at Talbots in New York, and Michael Ehlen Rowe, a banker, were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
T.
Carlton Lee officiated.
Mrs.
Rowe, 25 years old, graduated from Denison University and is an associate at Talbots, the women's retail clothing chain.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
John Hanson of Lloyd Neck, L.I., and A. Ward Burian of Lyme, Conn., a partner in Dunham Ltd.
Realtors in Old Lyme.


Evening Primrose Requires a Firm Hand
THE evening primroses are in bloom.
These sunny yellow flowers with their up-facing petals (four of them) provide bright spots throughout the summer.
Their golden yellow color is a delightful asset.
Some gardeners also call this plant sundrop, which is a little closer to reality.
But this plant is an aggressive grower.
It needs discipline.
Where once there were just a few of these delightful flowers, there often are many.
In a few years, gardeners often wish they had never planted it.
The plant spreads and grows and in no time appears to be all over the place.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a screened-in patio that we recently enclosed with sliding panels of clear vinyl.
The screens are on the outside.
No matter what we try, we cannot seem to get the vinyl panels clean.
They always end up streaked and spotted.
Perhaps the screens have stained the vinyl.
Any suggestions?
A.
You have discovered the big drawback to vinyl.
It is hard to keep clean.
If the screens are aluminum, this could be part of the problem, but if they are plastic or fiberglass, they probably are not the problem.
To clean the vinyl properly, you will have to either take down the screens so you can work on them, or you will have to remove them to get at the outside of each panel.
Then clean with a soft cloth and sponge dipped in mild detergent.
If this is not enough, buy one of the plastic cleaners that are sold for this purpose in marine-supply and auto-accessory stores.
Use according to directions, and then apply a protective coating made for vinyl, which these stores also sell.


Streetscapes: St. Ann's Church; An 1869 Work With a Shaky Future
NEXT Sunday is the cutoff date for the New York City Council to establish new procedures for nonprofit owners of landmark buildings to appeal for relief because of financial hardship.
Preservationists are nervously considering which buildings might be the first to bring a request for demolition under liberalized rules.
One that always gets a second look is the 1869 St.
Ann's Church, owned by Packer Collegiate Institute in Brooklyn Heights.
This elaborate Victorian gothic sanctuary has been vacant since 1967 and requires at least $6 million in repairs.
Dr.
Frank Bookhout, the school's business manager, calls it a "bomb that's ticking away."


Jennifer Polshek, a Librarian, Marries
Jennifer Hyde Polshek, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Stewart Polshek of New York, was married in Stone Ridge, N.Y., yesterday to Peter Randall Thompson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Thompson Jr. of Shallotte, N.C.
Pamela Neimeth, Town Justice of Milan, N.Y., officiated at the country home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Polshek, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a children's librarian at the Newton (Mass.) Free Library.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in children's literature from Simmons College.
Her father is a principal in the New York architectural firm bearing his name.
Her mother, Ellyn Polshek, is an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.


School Board President Resigned on May 1
To the Editor:
Your June 12 report on my resignation as president of the New York City Board of Education presents some inaccurate information.
You state that the action of Mayor David N. Dinkins, in appointing H. Carl McCall to the board, "came after some of Dr. Baker's fellow board members made clear that they intended to seek her ouster."


Fewer Investors Find Haven in Gold
Some of the world's most influential money managers have been recasting their views about gold's ancient role as a haven for wealth in times of uncertainty or crisis.
In commodities markets, coin shops, Swiss investment houses and in the minds of many disappointed investors, gold is no longer the hedge investment of choice, or lately even a very profitable one.


Why We Should Aid Peaceful Soviet Change; Baltic Independence
To the Editor:
"Break the Baltics' Vicious Cycle" (editorial, May 29) does not suggest a meaningful way for the Baltic republics to exit unimpeded by the Kremlin.
You seem to imply that throwing Western aid at the Kremlin will insure reform.
You seem encouraged by reports from Soviet authorities that Mikhail S. Gorbachev has renounced the use of force and is prepared to negotiate.
Yet black beret troops of the Soviet Interior Ministry have recently attacked Lithuanian border posts.
Since the January crackdown in Vilnius, these troops have been intensifying their activities.
After Lithuania did not sign the new union accord, the attacks became more frequent and brazen.


New Jersey at Work; Chief Aide's Task: Dulling Florio's Hatchet
In his struggle to revive the political fortunes of Gov.
Jim Florio, the Governor's chief of staff, Joseph C. Salema, finds himself stuck between a rock and several hard places.
From his desk a few feet from the Governor's door, Mr.
Salema has to plan thousands of layoffs by month's end.
At the same time, he is trying to appease angry union leaders and avoid having Mr.
Florio's policies undermined by competing aides or by the Governor's own blunt confrontational style.


Due Up for License Renewal: The Future of Nuclear Power
Before the end of the month, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission may issue a rule defining the future of the nation's nuclear power plants by setting the safety standards they must meet to extend their lives.
Over the next 25 years, more than half the nuclear plants in the United States will turn 40, and their operating licenses will expire as they do.
With no reactors on order and only two under construction, the nuclear industry's hope for survival probably rests on continued operation of existing plants.


Several Issues in This Week's U.S. Sales
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this week will consist of sales of $12.5 billion of two-year notes tomorrow and $9.25 billion of five-year notes on Wednesday, as well as the regular weekly auction of new three-month and six-month bills today that will total $20.4 billion.
The Treasury also expects to offer $12.5 billion in one-year bills on Thursday.
By late Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.58 percent and the six-month bill was bid at 5.75 percent.


Bodies of 2 BBC Newsmen in Iraq Identified
Two bodies found in a remote area of northern Iraq last month have been identified as those of BBC journalists who disappeared along the Turkish-Iraqi border in March.
A third member of the BBC team is still missing, and the British authorities say they have no definitive leads in the case.
The three were covering the Kurdish refugee crisis when they disappeared.
They were last seen March 23.


NCR Offers Pen-Based Computer
The NCR Corporation today plans to introduce the first pen-based computer designed to take advantage of the Intel Corporation's powerful 386 microprocessor.
The NCR computer is but one of hundreds of products that will be shown this week as companies gather at the annual PC Expo trade show at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan.


Review/City Ballet; New Work Heralds Optimism And Youth
The music keeps announcing itself through constant little fanfares and the choreography insists on proclaiming its own predictability.
"Ash," Peter Martins's newest work for the New York City Ballet, travels no artistic distance: it ends virtually the way it begins.
And yet it all adds up to a satisfying whole.
The explanation is not hard to find.
"Ash," which was performed on Friday night at the New York State Theater, is the fourth ballet Mr.
Martins has choreographed to a score by the 30-year-old Michael Torke, the company's de facto house composer.
And while the lack of linear development in this ballet grows out of the blocklike structures dictated by Mr.
Torke's music, "Ash" shares the energetic vigor of other Martins-Torke plotless ballets.


Jazz and Blues Improvisation at the Ritz
The Jazz and Blues Jam on Saturday night at the Ritz crawled along, the result of bad programming.
Though the idea of the show was sound -- to bring together jazz improvisers and blues stars -- the execution was mostly miserable.
The show, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, for example opened with Elvin Bishop, a guitarist and singer who plays decent enough bar band rock-and-roll using blues forms but devoid of blues feeling.
The invited guest was the saxophonist Arthur Blythe, one of jazz's most distinct soloists but somebody who plays best in a well-ordered environment; jam sessions aren't his strength.
The result was restrained, with Mr.
Blythe fighting the rigidity of the 12-bar form, his sound never quite emerging from under the electronic ringing of the band.
Bar band blues are obvious and loud and their main power comes from excitement; Mr.
Blythe was lost from the first note.


Bednarik-Gifford: The Rematch
Over the years, FRANK GIFFORD has not been amused when reminded of the hit that knocked him out of pro football for a year: CHUCK BEDNARIK' missile-strike of a tackle late in the 1960 season, Eagles against the Giants.
The head injury laid Gifford low for all of the next season.
But in a good cause, Gifford will allow himself to be roasted -- with the famous hit sure to be mentioned by the man who did it -- Thursday night at a sports dinner to benefit the Valerie Fund.
The charity operates five children's cancer-care centers at New Jersey hospitals.
The dinner is at the Aspen-Manor Hotel in Parsippany, N.J.


Cambodia Factions Call Truce on Eve of New Talks
The Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government and the three major guerrilla forces opposing it agreed today to an indefinite cease-fire that is similar to a truce established earlier this year and then largely ignored.
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's exiled leader and the head of one of the guerrilla groups, announced the cease-fire after meetings this weekend in Thailand with the Cambodian Prime Minister, Hun Sen, and commanders of the two other guerrilla factions, the rightist Khmer People's National Liberation Front and the Khmer Rouge, whose brutal reorganization of society in the 1970's killed more than one million people.


Question Box
DiMaggio and Yankees
Q.
In what place in the American League standing were the New York Yankees when Joe DiMaggio started his 56-game hitting streak in 1941 and where were they when the streak ended?


Mara Saperstein Weds Richard A. Weissmann
Mara Sue Saperstein, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Saperstein of Danbury, Conn., was married last night in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Richard Andrew Weissmann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Weissmann of New York.
Rabbi Jerome R. Malino performed the ceremony at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill.
The bride, 30 years old, is an associate in the law firm of White &amp; Case in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Muhlenberg College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is a kidney specialist with Associated Internists of Danbury and an assistant clinical professor at Yale University.


Life on the Bottom Line: How Dinkins's Budget Affects Social Services
Sheena Craig, a 32-year-old home-care attendant with no health insurance, walked out of an outpatient pharmacy at Kings County Hospital Center in Brooklyn last Wednesday clutching two plastic bottles of pills -- one for treating a fallopian-tube infection, the other to kill the pain.
Alexis Suter, 28, an unemployed singer who is eight months pregnant, came in for vitamins, and Valerie Dawson, 67, a housecleaner, picked up the $320 worth of prescriptions she needs every month to control high blood pressure and diabetes.


Small House to Buy Atlantic Monthly Press
The Atlantic Monthly Press, a respected but struggling small publisher, is to be sold to another independent company in a deal suggesting that some houses can still resist the advance of media conglomerates.
In a deal to be announced today, the Charles E. Tuttle Company, a Boston-based publisher that specializes in Asian and particularly Japanese books, has signed a letter of intent to acquire the Atlantic Monthly Press.
Terms are not being disclosed.


Quotation of the Day
"When I think about what we used to do -- taking trips every summer, going skiing every March, camp for the children, private schools, a lake house -- we must have been insane, in a dream world. We are no longer in the dream world." -- Molly Peterson, of Atlanta whose family is staying home this summer.  [ A1:4. ]


C. T. Basson Wed To Laurie Kopp
Laurie Kopp, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mel Kopp of West Orange, N.J., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Craig Todd Basson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin E. Basson of Upper Brookville, L.I.
Rabbi Stanley Asekoff performed the ceremony at the Jewish Center.
The bride, 27 years old, is a summa cum laude graduate of the University of Pennsylvania and a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
She is studying for an M.B.A. degree at Harvard University.
Her father is the senior vice president and controller of the Block Drug Company in Jersey City.


Life Insurer Failures Point Up Flaws in Safety Nets of States
The recent collapses of two huge Los Angeles-based life insurers present a sobering reality to regulators and consumers: the safety programs set up by 48 states to protect policyholders when their insurance companies fail may be woefully unprepared for a crisis of this magnitude.
The two insurers, the Executive Life Insurance Company and the First Capital Life Insurance Company, together have roughly a million policyholders whose insurance policies and savings and retirement annuities are worth billions of dollars.
If those companies were permanently closed, industry experts say, many of the state safety nets, called insurance guarantee funds, could not meet the big financial demands suddenly made on them.
Weaknesses Are Cited
In addition to arguing that the programs lack resources, critics point out that the programs are not run or guaranteed by state governments, that they are not true "funds" because they do not keep money in reserve, and that they are limited in how much they can ask each year from surviving insurers.


SoHo Journal; Walks as Sheer as Cliffs Jut Above the Ordinary
This is not a story about a great social wrong, or even a great esthetic one.
It is about something so subtle that it's hard, at first, to see what the fuss is about.
But look carefully, and it is clear that a magnificent piece of New York, albeit a tiny one, is being lost.
Michael Lichtman, who has lived in SoHo for 14 years, has always appreciated the sidewalks on his block of Greene Street, between Prince and Houston.
They aren't the usual concrete sidewalks that every pedestrian knows, the kind that are the veins of the city, the pathways for excursions both vital and mundane.
They are huge slabs of granite that jut out from the old industrial cast-iron buildings and stop short at the street, without any curb to block their thrust.


The Sounds and Sights of Spain Grace 42d Street


TRANSACTIONS
SATURDAY BASEBALL American League CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Eduardo Perez, first baseman, and assigned him to Boise of the Northwest League.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Acquired Jim Blueberg, pitcher, from the Seattle Mariners as the player to be named later in the deal involving Mike Blowers and assigned him to Albany of the Eastern League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Activated Erik Hanson, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Pat Rice, pitcher, to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
National League NEW YORK METS -- Sent Mark Dewey, pitcher, outright to Tidewater of the International League.
FOOTBALL National Football League DALLAS COWBOYS -- Signed Ken Willis, placekicker, to a two-year contract.
HOCKEY National Hockey League LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Traded Todd Elik, center, to the Minnesota North Stars for Charlie Huddy, defenseman; Randy Gilhen, center; Jim Thomson, right wing, and a fourth-round pick in the entry draft.
MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Traded Dave Babych, defenseman, to the Vancouver Canucks as part of a three-way deal that also involved the New York Islanders.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Traded Craig Ludwig, defenseman, to the Minnesota North Stars as part of a three-way deal that also involved the Vancouver Canucks.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Traded Tom Kurvers, defenseman, to the New York Islanders as part of a three-way deal that also involved the Minnesota North Stars.


Sharon I. Block, A Lawyer, Is Wed
Sharon Ina Block, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Block of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Kevin Arnold Hovland, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis Hovland of Des Moines, Wash.
Judge Alan Nevas of Federal District Court in Hartford performed the ceremony.
The bride, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Columbia University and received a law degree magna cum laude from Georgetown University in May.
She is to join the Washington law firm of Steptoe &amp; Johnson in September.
Her father is the president of Block &amp; Nardizzi, a marketing communications firm in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother, Lois Block, is a pension-fund consultant at Evaluation Associates Inc. in Norwalk, Conn.


Ira Silverman, 46, Advocate for Rights Of Jews in U.S., Dies
Ira Silverman, a influential leader of major Jewish groups who was the executive vice president of the American Jewish Committee from 1988 until last July when illness forced him to resign, died yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 46 years old and lived in Princeton, N.J.
He died of internal bleeding caused by ulcers and a parasite that invaded his digestive system while he was visiting China in 1989, a family spokesman said.


A '93 Deadline To Get Lindros
Although the Quebec Nordiques made Eric Lindros the first pick in the National Hockey League draft Saturday, they could lose his rights in two years and get nothing for them.
According to Brian O'Neill, the N.H.L.'s executive vice president, Lindros would return to the draft in 1993 if the Nordiques don't sign him by then.
Lindros, who is 18 years old, could continue to play for his Oshawa, Ontario, junior team and also for the Canadian Olympic team in the Winter Games of 1992 and/or 1994.


In a Huge Deal, Schwarzkopf Sells Memoirs to Bantam
After a hotly contested auction, Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf has sold the world rights of his planned book to Bantam Books for a sum estimated at over $5 million.
In a statement yesterday, Bantam said the four-star general, who commanded the allied forces in the Persian Gulf war, would begin work on his autobiography immediately after his retirement from the Army on Aug. 31.
The writer who will work with him on the book, which has no title yet, has not been chosen.


Origin: Belfast. Next Stop: The Rangers
In the early 1970's, Barry Young's parents and Owen Nolan's parents lived in Belfast, Northern Ireland.
Although their homes weren't far apart, the families didn't know each other.
The Youngs are Protestant and the Nolans are Catholic.
When both boys were babies, the religious strife in the province led their families to emigrate, at about the same time, to a safer, quieter life in Canada.


Review/Television; On the Baltics and the Persian Gulf
In "A Baltic Requiem," the Latvian movie maker Juris Podnieks gets at the heart of the resurgent nationalism of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
The 90-minute work, at 9 tonight on Channel 13, sets last summer's folk festivals, in which the Balts celebrated their national identities, against the power that has dominated them since before World War II.
The patriotic songs, banned for half a century, the flowers, crosses, candles, costumes and high emotions of the festivals are contrasted with the grayness imposed by the guns and tanks of the Soviet Union.
Few of the singers are old enough to remember their nations' brief spell of independence between the two world wars or to have had any experience of democracy, yet they seem imbued with a culture that has managed to survive centuries of repression.
The memories of elderly people of the arrests and deportations during the Nazi occupation in World War II and the Soviet takeover after the war are followed by pictures from last year's votes for independence in the Latvian and Lithuanian parliaments.
Among the powerful images are those of a hill of crosses in Lithuania, thousands upon thousands of them, planted and replanted by the faithful after being bulldozed by the Russians, and hard-to-take scenes of Soviet soldiers chasing and clubbing civilians last winter in Vilnius.


Views Differ on Increase in Rates
As the second quarter nears its close, credit market analysts and participants are full of doubts about prospects for the economy and the inflation rate.
But one tenet is still widely held: to insure a recovery, the Federal Reserve will refrain from pushing up short-term interest rates for some time, possibly for the balance of the year.
The Fed's past performance, however, strongly suggests that it will dash those expectations and move much faster.


Metro Matters; Picking Issues: Dinkins's Crime, Koch's Housing
Whoever said talk is cheap never met the Mayor of New York.
A prisoner of his own oratory, Mayor David N. Dinkins sought last fall to end his sentence in political purgatory with a proposition: a four-year $1.8 billion "assault on all fronts" to redeem his campaign pledge to be the city's "toughest mayor on crime" and to compensate for what seemed to be his indifference to a surge in homicides over the summer, which prompted demands that he hire 5,000 more police officers.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Hulbert Wins in Playoff Mike Hulbert parred the first playoff hole last night to defeat Kenny Knox for the Anheuser-Busch Classic title in Williamsburg, Va.
The playoff became necessary when both bogeyed the 72d hole as darkness approached on Kingsmill Golf Club.
The round was held up by a 2-hour-20-minute rain delay, and Knox, playing in the final group, did not finish the 18th hole until 8 P.M.
Both closed with three-under-par 68's and finished four trips over the 6,776-yard layout at 18-under 266, tying the tournament record set last year by Lanny Wadkins. (AP)


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday None Tuesday Durable Goods...May 10-Day Auto Sales...Mid-June Consumer Confidence...June Wednesday Corporate Profits...1st qtr.
Real Economic Growth...1st qtr.
Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims Personal Income...May Friday Leading Indicators...May Farm Prices...June


Dividend Meetings


Weeklong Fiat Closings
The Italian auto maker Fiat S.p.A. says it plans to idle most of its manufacturing plants in the final weeks of July and September to reduce excess inventory.
The move will temporarily lay off 50,000 workers, or nearly half of Fiat's 115,000 work force, a spokesman said on Friday.
The two weeks of layoffs will reduce production by 80,000 cars.
Fiat has closed plants for one week every month since February in response to sluggish demand in the European car market and the decline of its share of the Italian market.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 24


OFFICIAL'S REPORT BLAMES 7 GUARDS IN PRISON UPRISING
The State Correction Commissioner today put the blame for last month's uprising at the supermaximum-security Southport Correctional Facility on seven guards who, he said, left inmates unsupervised in a recreation area while taking a lunch break.
The Commissioner, Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, released a report on the incident that served as a forceful punch in what has become a bruising political fight between Mr.
Coughlin and the union that represents the state's prison guards.


Dance in Review
'Flamenco'  Winter Garden World Financial Center
One of the more curious events of the dance season occurred on Wednesday night when the World Financial Center and the New York International Festival of the Arts presented "Flamenco." The program of fusion flamenco music and dance had been planned for an outdoor performance, but the threat of rain prevented that.
Instead, the program took place in the huge and echoing Winter Garden, and was further dwarfed by the presence of the towering, charmless wedding dress and veil -- "The Honeymoon Project" -- designed by the Spanish artist Miralda for a symbolic wedding of the Statue of Liberty and the Christopher Columbus monument in Barcelona's harbor.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7
The Soviets should be offered a role, though limited, in the International Monetary Fund, the seven leading democracies agreed.
It would be a milestone in Moscow's march to join the world financial system.
Page A1


G. W. Hobbs 3d, 85; Ran Group on Aging
G.
Warfield Hobbs 3d, a former chairman of the National Committee on the Aging, died on Saturday in Longwood, Fla.
He was 85 years old and moved there last year after living in both Stonington, Conn., and Englewood, Fla., for two decades.
He died of cancer of the liver, his wife, Helen, said.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the examination of the remains of President Zachary Taylor for evidence of poisoning gave an incomplete history of Presidential exhumation.
Taylor was apparently the first President to be exhumed for a pathological examination, but other Presidents were exhumed for different purposes.
The coffin of Abraham Lincoln was opened four times -- most recently on Sept. 26, 1901, to confirm that it contained his remains.
The remains of several other Presidents were moved from temporary burial sites to permanent tombs.
Ulysses S. Grant's remains, for example, were moved from a small temporary tomb to Grant's Tomb in New York City in April 1897, a dozen years after his death.


Barbara Weinberg Marries
Barbara Ruth Weinberg, an assistant general counsel for the Pennsylvania Energy Office in Harrisburg, and Thomas Coffin Willcox, a deputy attorney general of Pennsylvania, were married yesterday in Radnor, Pa.
Justice Stephen McEwen of Pennsylvania Superior Court officiated at Taquet, a restaurant.
The bride is the daughter of Carol Goldstein and Martin Weinberg, both of Philadelphia.
The bridegroom is a son of Maryl Willcox of Marblehead, Mass., and the late Harold M. Willcox.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from Vassar College and received a law degree from Widener University.
The bridegroom, also 29, graduated from Columbia University and has a law degree from the University of Michigan.


Hungarians Are Thriving, Gloomily
Back in the days of "goulash Communism," Hungary used to be called the happiest barracks in the Communist camp.
Today, as the former Soviet bloc makes the break for capitalism, Hungarians again have reason to be cheerier than their neighbors, but few are prepared to admit it.
One year after its first post-Communist Government took office, Hungary is arguably the closest thing Eastern Europe has to a success story.
Unemployment and inflation are up, but not as high as some had feared.


A Grand Experiment For Mets in the Outfield
Bud Harrelson, the manager of the Mets, is contemplating a plan that would move left fielder Kevin McReynolds to right and Hubie Brooks from right to left.
Today, with the experiment still in its earliest stages, Harrelson started McReynolds in right and rested Brooks.
"It's an opportunity just to look," Harrelson said of today's relocation of McReynolds.
"I'm not rushing to do it, and I won't if I find that it's too disruptive."


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Brokers said news that the president of Nomura Securities would resign sent Japanese investors to the sidelines today.
About a half hour before the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 432.59 points, or 1.78 percent, to 23,842.49.


Berlin, Named Seat of Power, Now Wonders if It Has Room
The German Government will begin moving to Berlin soon, and people here are beginning to ask where the 100,000 legislators, diplomats and bureaucrats will live and work once they get here.
The vote to move the Government from Bonn back to its traditional seat in Berlin was taken late Thursday night.
By Friday morning, real estate agents estimated, prices for homes and apartments had risen about 5 percent.
An expert predicted that the price of a one-family home would rise at least 20 percent in the next year.


Books of The Times; Nazis' Children Contend With Their Legacy
Hitler's Children Sons and Daughters of Leaders of the Third Reich Talk About Their Fathers and Themselves By Gerald L. Posner Illustrated. 239 pages.
Random House. $21.
The sins of the fathers are visited upon the children, as the Old Testament, Euripides, Horace and Shakespeare have each affirmed.
And so they continue to be, to judge from "Hitler's Children," a survey by Gerald L. Posner, a former Wall Street lawyer, of the attitudes and feelings of various sons and daughters of men who played prominent roles in the Third Reich.
The question remains, "Do we really need a book to tell us as much?"


This What's For You?
Those crazy golfers: Not far from the Artic Circle, where you can play a round after supper thanks to the midnight sun, the northernmost course in the world is nearing completion in two countries.
The first nine holes are played in Finland, the back nine in Sweden, where it's an hour earlier.
At the 19th hole, the Finns are more likely to finish the day off with vodka; the Swedes prefer aquavit.


Gunman Kills Woman At Bronx Street Corner
A gunman in the Bronx fired 14 bullets yesterday morning, killing a 19-year-old woman who was sitting in a car at a street corner and wounding her 31-year-old companion who was standing outside at a pay telephone, the police said.
The police have not established a motive for the shooting, which occurred at 5:30 A.M. at East Gun Hill Road and White Plains Road in the Wakefield section, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Nicholas Vreeland.
The unidentified gunman fled.


Kurd Reports Agreement on Autonomy
The Kurdish guerrilla leader Massoud Barzani said today that the Government of President Saddam Hussein had approved a draft agreement providing for free elections for an autonomous provincial legislature within three months in the Kurdish lands in the north of Iraq.
Eventually, he said, the agreement will give the Kurds autonomy in all matters except national security and the police.
He also said the agreement called for democratic elections throughout Iraq within six months.


B.B. King, Miles Davis And Risks
Friday night's double bill at Avery Fisher Hall, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, showed that the act of improvising doesn't respect genres.
B.
B.
King, playing in a jump-blues style he helped originate in the late 1940's and early 1950's and using minimal harmonic help, turned in an exciting set laden with fertile and risky improvisations that shimmered with inspiration.
Miles Davis, working within an instrumental pop context that dates to the 1970's, turned in a set totally devoid of any risk taking at all, a set that questioned his ability to produce sustained, coherent improvisations.
The difference between them didn't have anything to do with the material either, because Mr.
King was working with ancient tunes, using the same jokes he uses in every show and basically sticking within the blues form.
Backed by his regular touring band, which included a small horn section, Mr.
King created long set pieces that centered around infidelity and lack of love and that bristled with his guitar improvisations, solos that wandered to the edge of instability then pulled away just in time.
During one piece he and his drummer engaged in a duet that had Mr.
King unfurling long and nasty lines and phrases tense with pushy rhythms; the duet was as unpremeditated as improvisation can get.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Southwest Airlines Co.'s $200 million shelf offering, filed last Thursday, has been assigned a preliminary A- rating by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
The lead manager, Merrill Lynch, said $100 million of 9.4 percent senior unsecured notes, due in July 2001, were priced at 99.55 to yield 9.471 percent. *
Oryx Energy Co. sold $100 million in eight-year noncallable notes at par through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The notes, which bear a 10 percent coupon, was the third sale of a shelf registration that totaled $600 million.


Dinkins Plans To Limit Cuts In Services
As talks on New York City's budget dragged toward next Monday's deadline, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that there was a limit to how much he would let the City Council cut services to avoid the property-tax increases he has urged.
But the Mayor said negotiations with the City Council were "progressing," and he sounded a new conciliatory note after a weekend of leaks and name-calling between Council leaders and mayoral aides.


This Week's Equity Issues
The following equity offerings are expected this week: Advanced Telecommunications, 4.5 million common-share global offering.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Advanta Corp., 1.75 million common shares.
Prudential Securities Inc.


Why We Should Aid Peaceful Soviet Change; Signing the Treaty
To the Editor:
Your May 26 news article on changes coming in the Soviet Union's structure states that the prospect that 9 of the 15 Soviet republics will sign a new union treaty raises the question of what will happen to those separatist-minded republics that refuse to sign the treaty.


Immigration Service to Issue Fines for Phony Work Papers
The Immigration and Naturalization Service plans to begin issuing civil fines of up to $5,000 against anyone caught trafficking in phony documents.
Such documents are now widely available to illegal aliens seeking work.


At Home Abroad; Margaret Thatcher's Britain
In the last week Margaret Thatcher has been feted in the United States.
She spoke to weighty audiences in New York and Chicago, and she met President Bush.
Americans, it seems, still regard her with a respect bordering on awe.
How different it is in her own country -- and her own Conservative Party.
There is still a small group of loyal Thatcherites.
But apart from them, the general opinion is that Mrs.
Thatcher is an arrogant pest, a political has-been who ought to stop making life difficult for her successor, John Major.


Ghana Falters After Years of Growth
After Flight Lieut.
Jerry Rawlings seized power here in a 1979 coup, Ghana's economy went from near-collapse to a position of such relative robustness that the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund praised it recently as a showcase for free-market reform.
Mr.
Rawlings pursued an austere economic restructuring program unparalleled in scope and duration elsewhere in Africa.
To encourage private investors, the currency was devalued, the bureaucracy trimmed, the budget balanced, public works improved and the prices paid for cocoa, the nation's biggest export crop, were raised.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet New York State Theater
There were surprises and disappointments when the New York City Ballet performed on Saturday night.


Psychiatric Institute Is Put in Limbo by Albany Budget
As worshippers of logic, the scientists at the Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research have had difficulty understanding this year's state budget process, particularly as it affects the institute's future.
The 240 staff members at the Rockland County laboratory were stunned when Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed closing the nationally renowned center as part of the budget he released in late January.


Dance in Review
Ilkhom Triplex Theater
One virtue of the New York International Festival of the Arts this year was its organizers' willingness to cut across conventional boundaries.
If the definition of dance was stretched to include wordless drama or a mixture of folk genres, a festival program like "Ragtime for Clowns" by Ilkhom, an experimental theater company from the Soviet Union, also defied stereotyped labels.


1964 Chain-Gang Escape Follows Man North to L.I.
James Harris was 17 years old and a high school truant when he ran into trouble with the law in Alabama in 1962.
Beaten, he says, into confessing to a burglary, he was sentenced to 21 years in prison and sent to a chain gang to dig ditches and lay asphalt on Alabama's muddy back roads.
In 1964, with $20 and a pair of shoes from his fellow prisoners, Mr.
Harris escaped to Long Island and began to make a life for himself.
It has hardly been free of trouble -- there was a robbery in 1974 and a $25 drug bust a year ago -- but along the way, he married twice, had three children, and worked as a welder in his uncle's company.


RICH NATIONS BACK JUNIOR SOVIET ROLE IN MONETARY FUND
The seven leading industrial democracies agreed in principle here today that the Soviet Union should be offered a limited role in the International Monetary Fund, the American Treasury Secretary, Nicholas F. Brady, said.
He said the offer would probably be made when President Mikhail S. Gorbachev meets with leaders of the seven nations here next month.


Dr. Joseph Jaksy, 91; Saved Jews From Nazis
Dr.
Joseph J. Jaksy, a urologist who saved Jews in his native Czechoslovakia during World War II, died on Tuesday at his home on the Upper West Side.
He was 91 years old.
Dr. Jaksy died of cardiac arrest, his wife, Elizabeth, said.


CHRONICLE
The young life of PATRICIA KAAS resembles a 1950's Hollywood movie.
The daughter of a coal miner, she began singing onstage at age 8, was discovered by GERARD DEPARDIEUat 18 and is now France's leading female singer, about to make her American debut.
Ms.
Kaas's star was born in 1985, when Mr.
Depardieu heard her sing and offered to produce her first single, "Jalouse," written by his wife, ELISABETH.
Ms.
Kaas's next single, also produced by Mr.
Depardieu, reached France's top 50.
Her first album sold more than one million copies in 1990.
Her second, "Scene de Vie," released this year, has sold 1.8 million.


Why We Should Aid Peaceful Soviet Change
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal is outraged at the prospect of Western economic aid to the Soviet Union ("The Soviet Solution," June 4).
He seems not to understand why, after the West cheered at the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe, it is poised to provide assistance to Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the Kremlin leadership.
There are, however, significant differences between the former Soviet satellite states and the Soviet Union.


What's Ailing Steffi Graf?
With her loss in the semifinals of the French Open earlier this month, STEFFI GRAF had been beaten in five Grand Slam tournaments in a row.
Her confidence was shot, she admitted.
What's wrong? Can she get back on track for Wimbledon, which starts today?


Ex-Miami Aide Admits to Faked Forms, Cites Kickbacks
A dismissed University of Miami official has said he faked hundreds of financial-aid forms to help needy students for more than a decade, but only began charging kickbacks in the last two years, to be able to pay for his cocaine habit.
Tony Russell, a former associate academic coordinator, said Saturday he charged $85 to Miami students, mostly football players, to falsify financial aid applications so he could support his addiction.
The 43-year-old Russell, who is under investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, made the admissions in a lengthy interview at his home with a selected group of reporters.


One Art Dealer Who's Still a High Roller
The art dealer Larry Gagosian likes to make offers that clients can't refuse.
He once called Robert Half, a prominent collector in Beverly Hills, Calif., to ask if he would sell "Herald," a 1954 painting by Franz Kline that Mr.
Half had cherished for 20 years.
Mr.
Half said no through three or four phone calls.
Finally he asked what price was being offered by the buyer, identified as a mysterious Mr.
Goldman.


Tokyo Journal; Best College Money Can Buy (Can It Be Bought?)
To a generation of Japanese who created the world's most disciplined work force from the chaotic ruins of World War II, Tsuyoshi Mitsuzawa was the hero of an era, an ace amateur pitcher who parlayed an accurate arm into a career as a university coach, television commentator and successful businessman.
But to members of a very different generation that often find themselves trapped in the system their parents built, Mr.
Mitsuzawa was apparently a hero of a different kind: a man who knew his way around the notoriously rigid university entrance-exam system.


CHRONICLE
EDWARD HEATH, who turns 75 on July 9, is making waves.
He successfully interceded to obtain last Monday's release of DOUGLAS BRAND, the British engineer who had spent more than nine months in an Iraqi prison on spying charges.
The next day, Mr.
Heath, who was Britain's Prime Minister from 1970 to 1974, attacked MARGARET THATCHER, to whom he lost leadership of the Conservative Party in 1975 and with whom he has openly conducted a feud ever since.
In television interviews, he excoriated her speeches in the United States against further European unity, calling her "ignorant."


Kurd Reports Iraqi Offer
A Kurdish guerrilla leader said the Iraqi Government had agreed to free elections for an autonomous legislature in Iraqi Kurdistan.
Page A6.


Gwen M. Vallely Wed to John Greene
Gwen Meltzer Vallely and John David Greene were married yesterday at their home in Pine Plains, N.Y., by Rabbi Charles Feinberg.
The bride is the daughter of Fay G. Ricklin of New Rochelle, N.Y., and the late Morris Meltzer.
The bridegroom is the son of Sylvia Greene of New York and the late Leonard C. Greene.
Mrs.
Greene, 47 years old, is an associate director of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the New York investment firm.
She graduated from the University of Rochester.


High Hotel Tax Hurts New York City Tourism
To the Editor:
I was surprised that your June 5 article on the drop in United States visitors to New York City did not mention one of the most compelling reasons: the imposition by the state last year of a 5 percent supplementary tax on hotel rooms costing more than $100.
At close to 21 percent, this makes the total New York hotel tax bill the highest in the country, second highest in the world (after Bangkok).


Reporter's Notebook; Parental Emotions Are Also on Trial In Lurid St. John's Sex Abuse Case
They sit and listen, their faces expressionless masks, until the agony can no longer be contained.
They are the parents of three young men and a young woman embroiled in a lurid tale unfolding in a Queens courtroom -- one in which the men are accused of sexually degrading and tormenting the woman last year at a house near St.
John's University, where the four were students.
To determine whether the tale is true or, as the defense suggests, an elaborate concoction by a woman who consented to the sexual activity, a jury has been hearing testimony for nearly a month.
The steadily growing audience in State Supreme Court in Long Island City has heard the 22-year-old woman and other prosecution witnesses give sordid descriptions of sexual abuse.
Included have been details of the oral sodomy that the woman says the men made her perform on them.
They used force at times, she says, and at other times took advantage of her helplessness from liquor that one assailant pressured her to drink.


The Garden's New Leading Man Is the Strong and Silent Type
Two years ago this month, when Rick Pitino was deciding whether to remain as coach of the Knicks or leave for the University of Kentucky, his next-door neighbor in the sprawling Westchester suburb of Bedford, N.Y., offered him free advice.
"Don't go," the neighbor said. "You'll own this town."


Lisa Gross Wed To David Chinitz
Lisa Gail Gross and David Evan Chinitz, doctoral candidates in English literature at Columbia University, were married yesterday at Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y., by Rabbi Avi Magid.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marc Gross of Ardsley, N.Y.
Her husband is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Wallace Chinitz of Melville, L.I.
The bride, 30 years old, graduated from Swarthmore College.
Her father is a partner in the New York office of the Bryan Cave McPheeters &amp; McRoberts law firm in St.
Louis.
Her mother teaches English as a second language.


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
The Soviet Union should be offered a limited role in the International Monetary Fund, the seven leading industrial democracies agreed.
By acquiring such a role, the Soviet Union would gain technical assistance toward economic changes but no immediate I.M.F. bailout to revive its moribund economy.  [ Page A1. ]
The president of Nomura Securities resigned in the wake of reports that his firm had helped a former underworld boss and compensated big investors for their investment losses.  [ D1. ]
Ghana's economy has reversed gears again, after the country won praise as a showcase for free-market reform.  [ D2. ] THE ECONOMY
The recent collapses of two huge life insurers present a sobering reality: safety programs set up by 48 states to protect policyholders when insurance companies fail may be woefully unprepared for a crisis of this magnitude.  [ A1. ]
Orders for American-made machine tools fell in May for a third straight month, the industry's trade group said.  [ D1. ]
The N.R.C. is expected to issue a new rule soon that may define the future of the nation's nuclear power industry.  [ A1. ]  About 200 lawyers, engineers and chemists have been wrestling with writing the details of the Clean Air Act.  [ D1. ]
People in the travel industry say the summer season is unlikely to be anything to write home about, despite some of the most favorable airline and hotel discounts in years.  [ A1. ]
A generation of young people has been pushed into the harshest economic climate any high school class has faced in 25 years.  [ A8. ] THE MEDIA BUSINESS
The Atlantic Monthly Press is to be sold to another independent company, Charles E. Tuttle, in a deal that suggests that some houses can still resist the advance of media conglomerates.  [ D1. ]
Winning the Subaru account will give Wieden &amp; Kennedy a chance to prove it can repeat the success it had with Nike's advertising.  [ D6. ]  Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver lost Subaru, but that was not the agency's first brush with adversity.  [ D6. ]
Handicapping of the fall TV season, through ad agency projections, is completed.
The early line: no breakout hits, but a couple of candidates for rookie of the year.
Bill Carter: Television.  [ D6. ]
An advance look at magazine ad pages for September shows some signs the recession may be at or near an end.
But most publishing executives say they think happy days may not return until the first or second quarter of 1992.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D7. ] COMPANIES
The Gap Inc. is exceeding its 80's successes in the 90's, by separating the sexes and widening its appeal.  [ D1. ]  The chain's innovative approach is reflected in a different sort of ad campaign.  [ D3. ]
NCR plans to introduce the first pen-based computer designed to take advantage of Intel's 386 microprocessor.
Hundreds of other new products will be shown at the PC Expo trade show.  [ D2. ] MARKETS
Some of the world's most influential money managers have been recasting their views about gold's ancient role as a haven for wealth in times of uncertainty or crisis.  [ D1. ] TODAY'S COLUMNS
American Biogenetic Sciences owes its existence to a strain of mice.
Raised in germ-free conditions on special diets and injected with human proteins, the mice may give the company a leg up in developing antibodies for medical applications.
Market Place.  [ D4. ]
Most credit market analysts and participants think the Fed will refrain from pushing up short-term interest rates for some time.
But the Fed's past performance strongly suggests it will dash those expectations.
Kenneth N. Gilpin: Credit Markets.  [ D5. ]


Going for Home, Going for Glasses
You're standing on the corner of 59th Street and Fifth Avenue and train a pair of powerful binoculars on two people walking toward you at 79th Street.
It is impossible to tell who's in front.
That task will be facing TOM DURKIN next Sunday, in a different locale.
Durkin, track announcer for the New York Racing Association, will be in Ireland, trying to tell ESPN viewers which horse is leading a one-mile straightaway charge.


E. Reeseman Fryer, 90, Indian Affairs Official
E.
Reeseman Fryer, an assistant commissioner in the Federal Bureau of Indian Affairs from 1961 to 1968, died on Wednesday in a hospital in Brunswick, Ga.
He was 90 years old and lived on Jekyll Island, Ga.
Mr. Fryer died of complications from a stroke, said his daughter Sue Fryer Ward.


Sununu's Power Wanes in Furor Over His Travel
Even if John H. Sununu keeps his job as White House chief of staff, leading Republicans said today, his power and his relationship with President Bush have been seriously weakened by his controversial travels and the resulting revolt against him by some of the most powerful Cabinet members and aides to the President.
Several influential party members said they thought Mr.
Sununu's use of a corporate jet to fly to Chicago earlier this month and an incomplete account of it by his office, had "put the whole thing on a new level," as one said, and left him with little better than an even chance to keep his position.  [ A detailed look at Mr.
Sununu's travels, page A12. ] Criticism From Cabinet
One Cabinet member said Mr.
Sununu's chances of survival have been hurt by the fact that influential Cabinet figures feel that he is contemptuous of them and that his widely criticized travel arrangements are opening their own trips to criticism.
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady, Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher, Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner and others are said to be telling Mr.
Bush that Mr.
Sununu is a liability.


Life on the Bottom Line: How Dinkins's Budget Affects Social Services; Pharmacies: The High Cost Of Getting Sick
If the outpatient pharmacy service at Kings County Hospital Center shuts down, Sheena Craig and Valerie Dawson say that not getting their medicines free will mean not getting them at all.
"I don't know what I'll do," said Ms.
Dawson, who has Medicare.
She said she earns about $300 a month cleaning houses.
"I'm really scared. It's my life."


Escobar's Gilded Cage
The so-called surrender of Pablo Escobar Gaviria in Colombia on Wednesday is not only the surrender of the world's biggest drug dealer but also the surrender of justice by the U.S. and Colombia.
Mr.
Escobar was the head of the Medellin cartel, the world's biggest cocaine ring, and the chief of a deadly terrorist organization.
But when the Colombian Government, under the leadership of President Cesar Gaviria Trujillo, enacted a law last week banning the extradition of criminals, Mr.
Escobar turned himself in, free from prosecution in the U.S.


Life on the Bottom Line: How Dinkins's Budget Affects Social Services; Health Screening: The Front Lines In the AIDS Fight
The public never sees the Health Department's Bureau of Laboratories at work, but the proposed 46 percent cut in its budget would affect patients in public and private medical offices alike, and have serious implications for preventing and treating disease.
The most immediate and critical concern is the fate of tests for HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.


Louis E. Yavner, 80, Ex-New York Regent
Louis E. Yavner, a former member of the New York State Board of Regents and City Commissioner of Investigation in the LaGuardia administration, died on Saturday at Peekskill Community Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died as a result of a heart aneurysm, his wife, the former Viola Levenson, said.


Using the Courts To Renew a Life
Almost every place but on the tennis court, where she has studiously rediscovered how to lose herself in her sport, she is bothered by indecision and a loneliness brought on by a midlife crisis very much of her own making.
Breaking up, as the crooners warn, is hard to do.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the election of Representative William H. Gray 3d as president of the United Negro College Fund misidentified the church at which he is a pastor.
It is the Bright Hope Baptist Church in Philadelphia.


With Its TV Commercials, The Gap Breaks Some Rules
The innovative approach to retailing that the Gap Inc. has used to prosper is reflected in the chain's new television advertising campaign, which is now being broadcast nationally.
The company's first television commercials in years have several odd approaches rarely used in apparel advertising.
The first two commercials in the series, for instance, show no close-ups of clothing.
Such shots are a staple for brands like the Dockers line from Levi Strauss &amp; Company.


Officials Choose a Drug Mecca to Announce New Push in War on Drugs


Dance in Review
Dance Theater of Harlem Davis Hall City College
The Dance Theater of Harlem closed its annual Harlem homecoming season with a program of historic and relatively recent ballets of impressive variety, performed with the company's customary spirit and commitment.


Young Musicians Find A Future in the Past
The trumpeter Wynton Marsalis, who is 29 years old, was the seasoned elder at Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday's double bill of Mr.
Marsalis's septet and Jazz Futures, an alliance of musicians in their 20's.
In the 1980's, Mr.
Marsalis became an exemplar of and spokesman for what he saw as the pinnacle of the jazz tradition: the rigorous small-group jazz of the late 1950's and early 60's, performed in jacket and tie.
Since his uncompromising jazz proved commercially viable, other young jazz musicians have garnered national exposure.
Yet Mr.
Marsalis is a step ahead of his contemporaries.
As his improvisations have grown from studied to songful, he has become one of the most inventive composers and meticulous band leaders in jazz.


Electronic Fraud Victims Seek Congress's Aid
t is a paradox of the electronic age that the technology that has saved lives, work and time for millions has also provided the unscrupulous with new techniques for bilking the unwary.
Victims of those techniques are now turning to the Government for help.
Facing this explosion in electronic fraud, totaling billions of dollars in losses each year, Congressional subcommittees began a series of joint hearings last week focusing on the methods, victims and solutions for fraudulent solicitation.


Sharon D. Shorofsky Weds Alexander Mack
Sharon Dee Shorofsky, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Morris A. Shorofsky of New York, was married in New York yesterday to Alexander Herbert Mack, a son of David Mack and Phyllis Mack, both of New York.
Rabbi Arthur Schneier and Cantor Moshe Geffen officiated at the Westbury.
The bride, 23 years old, graduated from Barnard College, where she is an admissions counselor.
Her father is an internist in New York.
Her mother, Roanna Shorofsky, is the director of the Abraham Joshua Heschel School in New York.


No Rest For Weary, No Victory For Mets
The questions, one asked within minutes of the other, had their origins in desperation.
Wally Whitehurst, with seven scorching and laborious innings behind him and a slim 3-2 lead over the Braves shimmering on the scoreboard in the distance, was asked if he had anything left.


Older Worker's Guide to Success in a New Job
To the Editor:
As a retired professional, with heavy experience in management and career counseling, and in writing about both, I was pleased at the findings of the Commonwealth Fund you discuss in "Old Dogs Are Better Dogs" (editorial, June 12).
Nothing favorable about older workers will be poorly received by me.


Ann M. Churchill Marries a Forester
Ann Moorehead Churchill, a daughter of Ellen S. McDaniel of Belleaire, Fla., and Asaph B. Churchill of Ellicott City, Md., was married yesterday in Holderness, N.H., yesterday to Mark Richard Dillenbeck, the son of Suzanne V. Dillenbeck of Locust Valley, L.I., and Richard R. Dillenbeck of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles P. Price, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Chicorua Island Chapel.
The bride, 27 years old, is a behavior specialist at the St.
John's Child Development Center in Washington.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in theology from the Virginia Theological Seminary.
Her father, who is retired, was the manager of the Frederick, Md., branch of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Her mother is the director of the De Paul School for Dyslexia in Dunedin, Fla.


World Economies


Mel Torme Focuses on Ellington
During the 15 years that Mel Torme has been a contributor to what is now called the JVC Jazz Festival, his programs have served as celebrations of the American popular song, often guided by Alec Wilder's book "American Popular Song." For his 15th annual appearance at the festival on Friday at Carnegie Hall, Mr.
Torme shared a program with the Tommy Flanagan Trio and the Clark Terry Big Band that focused on a single songwriter, Duke Ellington.
Faced with Ellington's prolific output and his many lastingly familiar songs, Mr.
Torme chose a mixture that was a fair representation of Ellington's range as a songwriter, including several that were refreshingly unfamiliar.
There were, inevitably, a couple of his big hits -- "Sophisticated Lady" and "Don't Get Around Much Anymore." And there were also relative trivia -- songs Ellington called "my little pop things" -- like "Otto, Make That Riff Staccato" and the compulsively swinging "Tulip or Turnip."


Nomura's President Resigns
Yoshihisa Tabuchi, president and chief executive of the Nomura Securities Company and perhaps the most powerful individual in Japan's financial markets, stunned this city today by announcing that he was resigning because of a major scandal at his firm.
Mr.
Tabuchi first revealed his intention to resign at a 9 A.M. board meeting.
Then, fighting back tears, he made the announcement at a crowded press conference at the company's headquarters at 10 A.M.
He said that he would become vice chairman but would not have any executive responsibilities.


Seles Could Be Facing Stiff Fine at Wimbledon
The Monica Seles melodrama has simmered down here on the eve of the premier grass-court tennis tournament.
But if Seles, the former top-seeded woman, fails to produce a clearer excuse for her late withdrawal Friday, she could be fined up to $:3,800, or about $6,200, tournament officials said.


INSIDE
Tokyo Financial Shake Up The president of Nomura Securities, perhaps the most powerful person in Japan's markets, resigned in a big financial scandal.
Page D1.


Beth Apter Is Married
Beth Ilene Apter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Apter of Manchester, Conn., was married last evening in Longmeadow, Mass., to James Jaffe Gold, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan J. Gold of Dallas.
Rabbis David Packman and Leon Wind officiated at Temple Beth El.
The bride, 27 years old, was until recently a buyer for Henri Bendel in New York.
She is a graduate of Tufts University.
The bridegroom, 27, graduated cum laude from Tulane University and received an M.B.A. degree this month from Harvard University.
He is to join a buyers training program at Neiman Marcus in Dallas in August.


Account
*The United States Air Force has retained Bozell Advertising, New York, as its advertising agency for another five years.
Bozell said billings for the recruitment advertising and other promotional work totaled $25 million.
The incumbent agency was chosen in a review over two other agencies: Richards Group, Dallas, and Hammeroff, Milenthal, Spence Inc., Columbus, Ohio.


Pomp, Circumstance and Pessimism: Awaiting Hard Knocks After School
Confetti and cheers showered the 335 seniors when they graduated today from Abraham Lincoln High School here.
But beneath the euphoria lay haunting worries among the graduates about the future.
Evangelia Notidis, 17 years old and the school's top student, fretted that the economy might undermine her efforts to pay for a medical career.


Israel in Uproar Over TV Report Confirming Existence of Secret Army Unit
The film was grainy, the images distant, but the picture was searing nonetheless.
Two Arabs, a man and a wman, sauntered up a busy alleyway somewhere in the West Bank.
Casually, they wandered toward two Palestinian men who were lounging beside an automobile.
Suddenly the "woman" leaped on one of the Palestinians and dragged him to the ground while a partner pulled out a gun, whipped off an Arab headdress and started shouting at their captive in Hebrew.
Then they dragged him away.


Sports of The Times; America's Oldest Olympian
ABEL KIVIAT, born on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, was one of "a trio of great milers" from America competing in the final of the 1,500-meter run in the 1912 Olympic Games in Stockholm.
Norman Taber and John Paul Jones were the other two outstanding American runners referred to by Dick Schaap in his book, "An Illustrated History of the Olympics" (Alfred A. Knopf Inc.).
The three, wrote Schaap, "waged a furious struggle as they stormed down the stretch, but in the final 30 meters, Arnold Jackson of Oxford and Britian uncorked a tremendous kick and, with his last ounce of energy, overtook the three Americans. He collapsed at the tape.
"The British star won by the narrow margin of one-tenth of a second over both Kiviat and Taber, with Jones only three-tenths of a second farther back. The first five finishers all broke the Olympic record by more than five seconds. . . ."


Jill Lauren Morrow Wed To Robert Bruce Spiegel
Jill Lauren Morrow, a daughter of Gayle Morrow of Lawrence, L.I., and Robert E. Morrow of New York, was married last evening in New York to Robert Bruce Spiegel, a son of Mr. and Mr.
Richard Spiegel of Atlantic Beach, L.I.
Rabbi Gilbert Rosenthal officiated at the Rainbow Room.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Wisconsin.
She is a saleswoman for Kenilworth Equities Ltd., a real-estate development company in New York.
Her father is the president of Kenilworth.


How to Pick A Hit Show: Just Guess
THE fall television season starts in three months, but the handicapping, in the form of ratings projections by advertising agencies, has already been completed.
The early line: no new breakout hits in sight, but a couple of strong candidates for rookie of the year.


Roberto Kelly Finds Touch in 5-Hit Spree
"I'm not a .240 hitter," Roberto Kelly said once more, with feeling.
Through much of his most frustrating Yankee season, Kelly has been working, often unsuccessfully, to prove his point and raise his average.
His first five-hit game in the major leagues, plus three runs batted in, allowed Kelly's mantra to sound a little more resolute yesterday.
"You just have to say to yourself, sooner or later you're out of it," he said of a seasonlong slump.
"Maybe I'm out of it, maybe I'm not."
Kelly, who had four singles and his eighth home run of the season in the 11-2 victory over Minnesota yesterday, became the first Yankee with five hits in a game since Steve Sax on June 27, 1989.
His previous 5 hits had been spread over 44 times at bat in the previous 11 games.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: For 2 Ad Agencies, the Tides of Fortune Shift With Subaru's Account; Wieden's Hope: Victory Will Build Its Creative Name
After Wieden &amp; Kennedy won the Subaru of America account, one of the agency's clients voiced an opinion widely shared among advertising, marketing and media executives: "This will give them an opportunity," said Joseph W. Cece, president and publisher of TV Guide, "to show that they can 'just do it' for somebody else as well."
Mr.
Cece's choice of words was, of course, no accident.
In echoing the slogan the agency created for its largest and best-known client, Nike Inc., he brought out the two conflicting implications of Wieden's long-shot victory last week in the fierce competition with Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver and four other agencies for Subaru's account.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: For 2 Ad Agencies, the Tides of Fortune Shift With Subaru's Account; Levine's Hope: Another Rebound After a Big Loss
Madison Avenue is lined with the bones of advertising agencies that withered away after losing big clients.
For Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, whose loss of the $70 million Subaru of America account last week followed the departures of its chief executive and creative director earlier this year, the graveyard would seem to be beckoning.
But Levine, an honored agency that has delighted television viewers with its sly and frequently sexy commercials for clients like Maidenform, has an unusual advantage as it begins to rebuild from its losses: It has fought this battle before, and triumphed.
Nine years ago, a senior Levine partner quit the New York agency, taking one of its largest accounts with him.
Levine has also weathered constant turnover in its creative department.
The turmoil did not prevent Levine, since 1985 a subsidiary of Grey Advertising, from growing to $270 million from $70 million in billings during the last six years. 'A Lot of Adversity'
"Levine has had a lot of adversity through the years," said Lee Garfinkel, a former creative director at the agency.
"Every time people say the agency is on the way out or on a downward trend, in my experience they always came back in some form, and in many ways better than before."
To be sure, 1991 has proved especially traumatic.
In January, Levine's longtime chief executive, Robert H. Schmidt, left to become head of marketing for the Dreyfus Corporation, a Levine client.
The same day, the creative director, Tony DeGregorio, departed for an executive vice presidency at the Lintas agency.
Four months after Mr.
Schmidt's exit, Frito-Lay Inc. moved $40 million worth of snack-food advertising to BBDO and Tracy-Locke in Dallas.
And on Tuesday, Subaru moved its account to Wieden &amp; Kennedy.
During the mid-1980's, Levine, the car company's agency for 17 years, shared the credit for Subaru's rising sales.
But sales have fallen sharply in recent years and, inevitably, Levine received some of the blame.
With the loss of Frito-Lay and Subaru, Levine's billings will fall to less than $100 million.
Whether the agency can show a profit this year is questionable.
Levine's losses this year are in dizzying contrast to the agency's steady rise over two decades into the upper echelons of advertising creativity.
The agency's ascension began in late 1971, when Harold Levine persuaded Chet Huntley, the newscaster, to join him and Mr.
Schmidt in acquiring a small agency.
Mr.
Huntley's presence brought small but prestigious companies to the door, where they were seduced by sometimes bold, often whimsical ads molded by the two creative directors, Larry Plapler and Allen Beaver.
In 1980, four years after Mr.
Huntley's death, Levine got its biggest break, when People Express airlines gave the agency its $2 million account.
Two years later, with the account having ballooned to $10 million in billings, Mr.
Plapler left to form his own agency.
The account followed. 'We Will Survive'
"Everybody said we couldn't survive," recalled Mr.
Levine, 69 years old, the agency's chairman.
"We survived Chet dying, we survived People Express and Larry disappearing, we will survive Bob and Tony leaving."
In a recession-ridden industry, survival now is more arduous than it was during the 1980's.
Layoffs are likely to follow the Subaru loss, although Edward H. Vick, the agency's chief executive, said he was unsure how many people would be dismissed.
Mr.
Vick, 47, who was hired by Grey in February, has moved aggressively to make Levine more attractive to clients who believe that in tough times, creativity alone is not enough.
He has changed the top management of the agency, while leaving its backbone, the creative department, intact.
Mr.
Vick looked within for a new creative director, appointing Rochelle Klein, 39, a writer who was instrumental in winning the Ethan Allen furniture store account.
Mr.
DeGregorio, who worked with Ms.
Klein at Levine, said her greatest strength was her ability to help clients understand the strategic rationale behind creative advertising.
While Mr.
Vick says he intends to maintain Levine's "creative culture," he is also adamant about moving the agency into other areas of marketing and using the resources of Grey, a $3.2 billion marketing company, to do it.
He hired James T. Bell, 42, an entertainment marketing specialist with Grey, to become media director.
And in its proposals to Subaru, Levine worked with Grey's direct-marketing unit to fashion a plan for drawing customers into dealerships by offering them gifts.
Reaction From Clients
One might expect clients who came to Levine for creative advertising would worry about the changes.
But they appear to be applauding them.
Marilyn Bane, the vice president of advertising for Maidenform, credited Levine's "extraordinary creative work" -- including lingerie ads featuring male sex symbols like Omar Sharif -- with increasing the company's visibility and customer loyalty.
She acknowledged that she was worried when Mr.
Schmidt left the agency.
But Mr.
Vick's "marketing savvy and involvement in our company" have more than mollified her.
"We think the world of Levine, Huntley," Ms.
Bane said, "and we're thrilled with Ed Vick."


Bridge
The world record for the largest number of master points won in a career has fallen.
When Barry Crane died six years ago, his total of 35,137.6 put him more than 11,000 points ahead of his nearest rivals.
Since then, however, Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash., a former world champion and one of the most active professionals on the tournament circuit, has been averaging almost 2,000 points each year.
On Thursday, playing in the Regional Stratified Teams in Cherry Hill, N.J., he won 24 points and passed Crane's mark.


The Guns of Cypress Hills
Did the National Rifle Association hear the shooting the other day at the Cypress Hills housing project in Brooklyn?
It blasted forth just as Mayor David Dinkins was announcing a new crackdown on guns.
Fearing flying bullets, many in his audience ducked for cover; the Mayor courageously stood his ground and urged calm.
Those bullets also flew just as Congress prepared for debate this week on its 1991 crime bill.
It would, among other things, impose a waiting period between purchase and delivery of a handgun.
That could inhibit the black market now feeding illegal guns into city housing projects.


Life on the Bottom Line: How Dinkins's Budget Affects Social Services; The Homeless: Crowded Shelters 'Like a Nightmare'
In his proposed budget, the Mayor has eviscerated his own plan for building a more humane system to shelter homeless men and women.
The proposal would cut $15.8 million from spending on the homeless.
The administration has proposed closing 9 of the 12 women's shelters, and moving the 800 displaced women into one giant shelter that will offer fewer social services and less security.
To date, no shelter for women has housed more than 250.


Essay; To Protect the Kurds
In diplomatic secrecy, the Bush Administration is negotiating a deal with its coalition allies to pull the last protective troops out of Iraqi Kurdistan.
Our policy is driven by the politics of extrication: how to get out of Iraq quietly, replacing a force of coalition troops with more than a company of U.N. eunuchs.
The plan is to prevent Iraq's underdefeated dictator from merely waiting a decent interval before he breaks his promises of peaceful autonomy and resumes his genocide against the Kurdish people.


Health Chief Warns A.M.A. on Cost of Medicine
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, Louis W. Sullivan, appealed to the nation's largest organization of doctors today to curb soaring medical costs and improve availability of care or risk a virtual popular revolt.
"Unless we act now to meet these goals, we could find ourselves with a critical mass of our citizens demanding a total government takeover of health care," Dr.
Sullivan told hundreds of doctors at the opening of the American Medical Association's annual meeting.


Why We Should Aid Peaceful Soviet Change; Armenia and the Kurds
To the Editor:
Catherine Cosman of Helsinki Watch is quite correct (letter, June 2) that most Kurds in the Soviet Union have been subjected to cultural suppression and forced assimilation.
It is important to note though, that there is one place in the Soviet Union, Armenia, where Kurdish identity and rights have been respected and even encouraged for decades.


Magazines Seeing Signs Of Recovery
AN advance look at magazine advertising pages for September, an indicator of the economic health of the marketing and media industries, shows some signs the recession may be at or near an end.
But there are few Pollyannas among the publishing executives, and most said they thought that happy days might not really return until the first or second quarter of next year.


Supply-Siders Persist in Their Errors
To the Editor:
"We're All Better Off for Reagan's Tax Reforms" by Jude Wanniski (letter, June 6) is another attempt by a supply-sider to perpetuate the myth that the Reagan tax reductions worked miracles for the American economy and that a cut in the capital gains tax would add to the benefits.


Well, There He Goes Again: Jays' Carter Hits 17th Homer
Joe Carter hit his major league-leading 17th home run and tied two team records today, leading the Toronto Blue Jays over the Cleveland Indians, 3-1, for their fourth straight victory.
Carter connected for a bases-empty homer in the first inning.
It was his 11th home run in June and fifth in four games, both of which tied team records held by George Bell.


The Bottom-Line Bombers
Financial World magazine has looked at the sports business and discovered it can be confusing.
The July 9 issue bravely assesses the value of every franchise in big-league sports.
The colossus?
The Yankees, at $225 million.
The lowliest?
Hockey's Winnipeg Jets and Minnesota North Stars, at $30 million apiece.


Graduation: Surviving Despite Odds
Two of New York City's very best basketball players, Jerry McCullough from Manhattan and Orlando Antigua of the Bronx, graduated from high school this month and are headed to the University of Pittsburgh.
Both have suffered gunshot wounds.


Gap Finds Middle Road to Success
The Gap Inc., which became a successful chain in the early 80's with casual clothing like unisex jeans, T-shirts and denim jackets, is doing even better in the 90's by separating the sexes and widening its appeal.
The Gap still sells jeans but has added a broader assortment and greater range of colors in clothing like blouses and dresses.
In doing so, the company took a risk that it could keep its regular customers and add new ones.


Margaret Lescher Weds J. A. Samuels
Margaret Cantwell Lescher, a daughter of Mary Cantwell and Robert Lescher, both of New York, was married yesterday at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden to Dr.
Jonathan Alan Samuels, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Samuels of Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
Surrogate Renee R. Roth of Manhattan officiated.
Ms.
Lescher, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a psychiatric social worker at the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
She graduated from Amherst College and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father founded Lescher &amp; Lescher, a New York literary agency.
Her mother is a member of the editorial board of The New York Times.


Yanks' Glide Stops Slide
There is nothing a team likes more than scoring a slew of runs before some fans even find their seats.
No matter how tense it gets for the pitcher, or how many runners reach base, there is a fat and friendly digit staring down from the scoreboard.
The Yankees put up six runs in the second inning against Minnesota yesterday and Scott Kamieniecki did the rest by throttling the hottest team in the major leagues.
The rookie pitched superbly into the eighth inning and New York eased to an 11-2 victory over the Minnesota Twins at Yankee Stadium.


James L. Kunen; Foundation President, 76
James L. Kunen, a former president of the Eugene and Agnes E. Meyer Foundation in Washington, died Saturday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 76 years old.
Mr. Kunen died of heart failure, a spokesman at the hospital said.
Mr.
Kunen joined the Meyer Foundation in the mid-1950's and retired in 1983 as president of the organization, which supports educational and civic programs in the Washington area.
Survivors include his wife, Elizabeth B. Kunen of Washington; five children, Andrea Barr of West Virginia, Seth Kunen of New Orleans, Jessica Kunen of Lawrence, Kan., and Lisa and Jonathan Kunen of Washington; two stepchildren, David Frazier of Bethesda and Christopher Frazier of Rockville, Md., and five grandchildren.


Where Dinkins's Budget Cuts Would Fall


Adam T. Rochlin Weds Amy Ferro
Amy Harford Ferro, a daughter of Mr. and Mr.
Michael J. Ferro Jr. of Harrington Park, N.J., was married yesterday to Adam Todd Rochlin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Rochlin of Fort Lee, N.J.
Msgr.
Edward M. Kavin and Rabbi Ari Fridkis performed the ceremony at the Hilton at Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Rochlin, 24 years old, is an assistant treasurer at Bankers Trust in Jersey City.
She is a Georgetown University graduate.
Her father is the senior partner in the law firm of Ferro Lippman Labella &amp; Logerfo in Hackensack, N.J.


Review/Pop; A Softer Image for Elvis Costello
Near the end of his concert on Saturday evening at Madison Square Garden, Elvis Costello did something that would have seemed unthinkable a decade ago: He blew kisses at the audience.
While the gesture did not mean that the English singer and songwriter had turned cuddly-warm, it was one of many indications that Mr.
Costello, who began his career 14 years ago as the thinking person's punk-rocker, has mellowed into a more approachable performer than the sneering misanthrope of the late 1970's.
Bearded and looking almost portly, with shoulder-length hair and sunglasses, Mr.
Costello, with his four-man band, made music that, in sharp contrast with the stringy, nervous post-punk sound of earlier Costello concerts, sounded richly fleshed out and at moments almost operatic.
The band, which consisted of Marc Ribot on guitar, Larry Knechtel on keyboards, Jerry Scheff on bass and Pete Thomas on drums, dressed Mr.
Costello's songs in big, chunky arrangements in which the squalid personal dramas of his lyrics were underlined by emphatically flowery pianistic flourishes.
At the same time, Mr.
Ribot brought a countryish twang to the songs.
From a rigid post-punk march, the show's closing number, "Oliver's Army," was turned into a high-voltage folk-rocker somewhat in the manner of Bob Dylan's "Subterranean Homesick Blues."


Tyson and Ruddock Take Aim
You remember the first time Mike Tyson and Donovan (Razor) Ruddock went at it here.
The bout was March 18 and it ended in controversy when Referee Richard Steele stopped it in the seventh round with what seemed undue haste and proclaimed Tyson the winner.
Steele's action precipitated a post-fight ruckus in the ring between both fighters' camps and brought a howl of protest from a crowd that only a round earlier had seen Ruddock connect with punches apparently potent enough to register on the Richter scale.


Machine Tools Orders Fell 19.6% in May
Orders for American-made machine tools fell in May for a third straight month, dropping 19.6 percent from the April level, an industry trade group said in a monthly report being released today.
The drop comes in spite of predictions by makers of machine tools and the industry trade group, the Association for Manufacturing Technology, that industry orders would generally improve as American businesses began spending to upgrade their manufacturing plants.


Child World Posts Loss
Child World Inc., the troubled toy retailer, says it lost $23 million in its first quarter ended May 4, partly because of charges from store closings and inventory markdowns.
For the similar period last year, Child World lost $7.4 million.
Last year's loss reflected a $7.1 million tax benefit, the company said on Friday.
Sales fell nearly 27 percent, to $95.6 million, from $130 million in the 1990 period.
Child World, with 182 stores nationwide, lost $192.3 million in the year ended Feb. 2.
In December, the company suspended payment on $212 million in merchandise because of a cash shortage.
Child World recently said it had reached a debt-restructuring pact with its creditors.


Dishonorariums in the Senate
A longstanding pay scandal gnaws at the Senate's credibility.
Annual reports recently made public show that 64 senators accepted $2 million last year in speaking fees from tobacco, banking and insurance interests, military contractors and others with a stake in legislation.
Influential legislators like the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, and the minority leader, Robert Dole, pocket thousands of dollars each year from favor-seekers eager to offer $2,000 for speeches or sometimes just for having lunch.
That demeans and distracts the Senate, and insults the taxpayers.


Life on the Bottom Line: How Dinkins's Budget Affects Social Services; The Elderly: Old and in Need Of a Place to Go
Henry Winter finished his lunch, then managed a grim joke about how the city budget cuts could change his 85-year-old life.
"If I can't come down here," he said, sitting with a group at the Prospect Hill Senior Services Center in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn, "I'd go back to the pool rooms."


Foley Is Pressed for Inquiry on Hostages
The increasing interest in whether the Reagan Presidential campaign struck a deal with Iran in 1980 to delay the release of Americans hostages until after the election is putting pressure on the Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley, to convene a full Congressional investigation.
But the Speaker and his party face a quandary.
If the persistent but unproven allegations of a deal to withhold release in exchange for arms after Mr.
Reagan took office could be proved or demonstrated to the public beyond much doubt, Democrats could reap enormous political benefits.
But if an investigation led nowhere, the perils for the party might be at least as large.


Life on the Bottom Line: How Dinkins's Budget Affects Social Services; Drug Treatment: When Mothers Are Addicted
When Brenda Santos learned that the city was planning to kill the "Children and Families Together" drug-treatment program in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx, she found a black ribbon and tied it around one arm as a symbol of mourning.
Because of her addiction to cocaine, a judge had threatened to take away her infant daughter.
But in January she was taken into the program, one of the few in the city that accepts women and their children, and was soon free of drugs.
"I've been too busy here to think of cocaine," she said.


Teamsters to Select Candidates
As part of a transition intended to bring the union democratic leadership, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters on Monday will begin selecting candidates for an open election to its top office.
About 2,000 delegates attending a weeklong national convention are to nominate presidential contenders for secret balloting by members in December.
It will be the first time the union's 1.6 million members have had a direct vote over who assumes the office.
Past presidents, including James R. Hoffa and Dave Beck, were chosen by unelected delegates.


Look for Unknowns in Draft
For MARTY (HAVE I GOT A KID FOR YOU) BLAKE , this is prime time.
The National Basketball Association draft will be held Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden, and said Blake, shucking aside modesty, "I've got one of my great discoveries."
Blake is the chief scout for the league, and his job to find players.
And sometimes the ones he finds aren't from tony Division I colleges.
MYRON BROWN , for instance, played for Slippery Rock, in Division II.


R. T. Blauvelt Jr., 85, Moving Concern Chief
Reginald T. Blauvelt Jr., longtime chief executive officer of the Lincoln Mayflower Moving and Storage Company of Orange and Madison, N.J., died on Saturday at the Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 85 years old and lived in Hightstown, N.J., and Lake Wales, Fla.
He died of advanced cancer, a family member said.


Vacations, Yes, but Closer to Home This Summer
The third week in June brings not only the summer solstice but also the start of the year's heaviest vacation season.
In 10 hectic weeks through Labor Day, millions of Americans spend billions of dollars on air fares, gasoline, hotels and restaurants.
But this year, despite some of the most favorable airline and hotel discounts in years, people in the travel industry say the summer season is not likely to be anything to write home about.
Even at this late date, some analysts say they still do not know whether the peak travel season will be disastrous or just disappointing.


Life on the Bottom Line: How Dinkins's Budget Affects Social Services; Children's Health: A Need for Care At an Early Age
Mary Downes, a pediatric nurse practitioner for the city's Health Department, had just given three injections to a 4-year-old Sikh boy the other day when he caught her by surprise.
"He said he wanted to give me a blessing, and he knelt down and touched my feet in prayer," she said.
Many people are grateful for the efforts of Mrs.
Downes and her six colleagues in the new-admissions clinic of the Jamaica District Health Center, at 90-37 Parsons Boulevard in Queens.
But City Hall budget makers have allocated no funds in the coming fiscal year for the Bureau of School Children and Adolescent Health, which runs the clinic.


Market Place; A Vision of Profits In a Better Mouse
WITH so many young biotechnology ventures and so few successful products, most companies in the sector are still evaluated as much on their visions as on their track records.
One company benefiting from that attitude is tiny American Biogenetic Sciences Inc., which owes its existence to a strain of mice raised at Notre Dame University.
The company, based in Copiague, L.I., says its mice give it a leg up in the worldwide race to develop new antibodies for a variety of medical applications, including tests for potential heart attacks, strokes and blood clots.


Disease Stalks Iraq as Trade Ban Saps Its Strength
The 11-month-old international embargo on trade with Iraq is threatening the country with severe malnutrition and a rise in disease among the poor, American and other Western doctors inspecting hospitals this month say.
Some senior officials of relief agencies here have begun to criticize the prolonged trade sanctions because of their devastating effect on the general population and the burden they place on humanitarian organizations.


Letter: On Health Care Reform; Abortion Ruling's Dangerous Precedent
To the Editor:
Before we leap to enact some form of universal health insurance as the cure for our nation's "sick" medical care system (column by Anthony Lewis, June 3), we would all do well to ponder the point made in John P. MacKenzie's Editorial Notebook in the same issue.
The Supreme Court has ruled that when Federal funds are used to provide health care services, the Government may determine not just what the physician does, but what the physician says.


China Arrests Catholic Bishop
The Communist authorities in China have arrested the acting Roman Catholic Bishop of Shanghai, a Catholic news agency reported today.
The arrest of Bishop Giuseppe Fan Zhong Liang occurred on June 11, after Pope John Paul II's announcement that another Chinese prelate, Bishop Ignatius Gong Pinmei, had been named a Cardinal, the Asia News agency reported.
The Milan-based agency said the arrest of Bishop Fan appeared to be a "comment" by the Communist authorities on the Pope's announcement.
It had no further details on the detention.


On Ogling Women
Four years ago, in an interview she doesn't remember giving, the woman who is now Prime Minister of France cast a rueful eye across the English Channel.
"Anglo-Saxon men are not interested in women," Edith Cresson sighed.
"And this is a problem that needs analysis. I don't know whether it is cultural or biological but there is something there that isn't working -- that's obvious. Moreover, I remember from strolling about in London that men in the streets don't look at you. When you do this in Paris . . . a workman, or indeed any man looks at passing women . . . For a woman arriving in an Anglo-Saxon country, it is astonishing. She says to herself, 'What is the matter?' "


BBDO Names President Of North American Unit
BBDO Worldwide has announced an appointment that could point to a possible successor for the top executive overseeing its North American operations.
The agency is promoting Peter Mills to the newly created job of president and chief operating officer of BBDO North America.
Mr.
Mills, 52 years old, will continue as president and chief executive of BBDO's Canadian unit, Comcore/BBDO, Toronto, until a successor is named.


Bird Not Sure About Future
It was Larry's Game, but Larry Bird stayed on the bench.
And the Boston Celtic star said he didn't know if he would ever get into another game again.
Bird, who underwent back surgery on June 7, was one of the coaches tonight in his annual scholarship benefit game featuring National Basketball Association players.


Hungry Python Foiled
A 12-foot pet python wrapped itself around a 9-year-old boy and was trying to swallow his foot when help arrived, a Fire Department spokesman said today.
The boy, Alex Henry, was home alone on Saturday when the snake began to coil itself around him, the spokesman, Bob Caldon, said.
The boy screamed to neighbors for help and was rescued, suffering only minor puncture wounds on his foot.


Environmental Negotiators Flesh Out Bare-Bones Law
About 200 lawyers, engineers and chemists have been meeting intermittently in the ballrooms of unfashionable hotels around Washington for several months, wrestling with the landmark Clean Air Act.
Although Congress finished work on the law last year, these representatives of oil companies, auto makers, Federal agencies, state governments, environmental groups, and everyone from the National Corn Growers Association to the National Association of Convenience Stores have been engaged in writing the details.


Outdoor Dancing Returns
Lincoln Center's annual Midsummer Night Swing opens Wednesday at 6:30 P.M. with a free one-hour mambo lesson conducted by Eddie Torres, followed by dancing to the music of Tito Puente's band.
Twenty bands will participate in the five-week series of dance parties on Wednesday through Saturday nights through July 27, from 8:15 to 11 P.M., on Lincoln Center's Fountain Plaza.
Lessons in swing dancing, tango and ballroom dancing will be offered on consecutive Wednesdays from 6:30 to 7:30 P.M.
Admission to each party is $6, or $5 for those presenting a Citibank automatic teller card or an empty wrapper from a 10-pack of subway and bus tokens.
Information: (212) 875-5440.


Miss Congdon, Painter, Is Wed
Elizabeth Caffey Congdon, a painter, and James Lawrence Montgomery, a blues musician, were married yesterday at St.
Ignatius of Antioch Episcopal Church in New York by the Rev.
Howard T. W. Stowe.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. Congdon Jr. of New York.
The bridegroom is a son of John O. Montgomery of Grosse Pointe, Mich., and the late Joy Dunlop Montgomery.
The bride, 28 years old, is a landscape painter who exhibits at the Main Street Gallery in Nantucket, Mass.
She graduated from the University of California at Santa Cruz and studied painting in Florence and at the Parsons School of Design.
Her father, who was the publisher at Congdon &amp; Weed in New York, is the author of nonfiction books.


Dissidents Win 6 Seats at Bank
A group of Baltimore Bancorp shareholders seeking to replace the company's managers said Friday that a Federal judge in Baltimore had confirmed the election of six directors opposed by management.
The dissident shareholders, led by Edwin F. Hale, said Federal District Judge J. Frederick Motz also ruled that they could increase the size of the company's board by a majority vote, but he ordered that a new election be held to do so.
The shareholders said they would appeal that part of the decision.


Virginia Morris Weds Robert G. Plumb
Virginia Schuyler Morris, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John McLean Morris of New Haven, was married in Branford, Conn., yesterday to Robert Gowing Plumb, a son of Patricia Gowing Plumb of New York and the late Robert K. Plumb.
The Rev.
Campbell Lovett performed the Congregational ceremony at the Pine Orchard Union Chapel.
Ms.
Morris, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a cum laude graduate of Princeton University and is a medical writer.
Her father is the John Slade Ely Professor Emeritus of Gynecology at Yale University.
Her mother, Marjorie Austin Morris, is a saleswoman for the H. Pearce Real Estate company in New Haven.


Young &amp; Rubicam Adds To Its Media Operations
Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising Inc., New York, is beefing up its media operations.
The agency has promoted Gary Pranzo, 58, to the new post of deputy worldwide media director.
Succeeding him as media director for Young &amp; Rubicam New York is Steven J. Farella, 35, who had been the executive vice president and director of corporate media services at Wells Rich Greene BDDP Inc.
Both men will report to Chris Dickens, 46, the agency's worldwide media director.


Identifying Callers: Push for Phone System
New York Telephone is proposing to introduce a service that enables people to see the telephone number of a caller when a call comes in.
As part of the service, it wants the right to offer at no extra charge a plan that would allow a caller to use a three-digit code that conceals the caller's number.
By offering this service, the company is trying to defuse a debate over whether the service is an invasion of privacy, particularly for those with unlisted numbers.
The cost would be $6.50 a month for residential customers.


Ralph Sutton And Stride
Stride piano overflows with optimism, and Ralph Sutton's performance at Weill Recital Hall on Friday afternoon, as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, took the audience back to a pre-World War II war era free of the 20th century's worst disasters -- an era of possibility.
Mr.
Sutton, one of jazz's finest stride pianists, was working with intensely American themes.
In his pieces, motion and movement signaled a type of freedom, and the spiky, abrupt right-hand interjections, working as melodies, exemplified the new musical vocabulary that developed in the early decades of this century.


Chief of Staff's Air Travel Practices And Questions About Their Propriety
Each year the summer fund raiser of the Missouri Republican Party showcases a speech by a top Administration official, and the state Republicans have always ferried the officials to St.
Louis and back in a first-class commercial airline seat.
Until this year, when the speaker was John H. Sununu.
President Bush's chief of staff made the round trip from Washington to St.
Louis on May 20 aboard a Missouri executive's eight-seat Lockheed JetStar.
The journey is among five recent political trips that Mr.
Sununu has taken on corporate jets.


Industry Coalition Opposes Ad Tax Plan
A group of advertising and media trade associations has announced its opposition to a proposal to assess a quarter of 1 percent Federal tax on ad revenues.
The group, the Advertising Tax Coalition, sent a letter Friday to members of Congress, arguing that the tax "could seriously disrupt the economy" and would be a serious blow to newspapers, magazines and broadcasters already suffering in the recession.


From His Pulpit, Gray Tells of 'Higher Calling'
Calling his decision to resign his Congressional seat an answer to a "higher calling," Representative William H. Gray 3d presided as usual today over the pulpit of the Bright Hope Baptist Church, where he has served as pastor since 1972.
Here, the third-ranking Democrat in the House of Representatives is simply the Rev.
Bill Gray.


Work Teams: Not All Teamwork
The Monsanto Corporation's huge chemical and nylon complex in the piney flatlands east of this quiet Gulf Coast port has joined the growing ranks of businesses challenging the traditional belief that a worker's main job is to follow orders.
At plants like this one, teams of workers make decisions -- on hiring, purchasing, job assignments and production -- once reserved for foremen and managers.
The result at this plant, Monsanto's largest, has been a rapid turnaround from losses six years ago to its best levels of safety and productivity ever.
Based on the experience here and at several other plants, executives at the company's St.
Louis headquarters say the team approach could work throughout Monsanto's multinational empire.


Soviet Union Protests Boycott of Film Festival
The Soviet Union has protested a decision by the United States to boycott a Moscow film festival in July, the foreign ministry said on Monday.


Let's Skate to the Videotape
The National Hockey League's Board of Governors today approved the use of video replays in which a video goal judge will help the referee determine goal calls.
The rule may prove more difficult to implement than the National Football League's replay review since not every N.H.L. game is televised.
But league officials said that every N.H.L. team tapes all of its games for training purposes and that video would be available to the video goal judge.


6 Greek Police Officers Hurt As Bomb Explodes in Athens
Six Greek police officers were wounded when a time bomb exploded here at dawn today.
The officers were on patrol, and a Government spokesman said it was not clear if they were the intended targets of the bomb, which went off near the Athens headquarters of the Greek Communist Party.
The police speculated that the explosion might have been aimed at the party, which is facing a major internal dispute.


INSIDE
More Bank Weakness Seen
Many weak banks, including some of the nation's largest, have overstated their ability to absorb loan losses, economists say.
Page D1.
Northrop Settles Lawsuit


Parcells Getting Around
Six days after BILL PARCELLS became a studio analyst for NBC's pre-game show, "The N.F.L. Live," the former Giants head coach yesterday added another job, as co-host of an N.F.L. preview show on the Madison Square Garden Network.


CHINA SAID TO CURB FOREIGN RESEARCH
China appears to be moving to cut off access by foreign scholars to social survey data, according to Chinese academics and a secret document distributed recently.
The State Education Commission has already circulated a document that prohibits universities and other institutes from turning over to foreign scholars the results of social surveys, even if they were conducted as a joint effort.
Now, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, one of China's most prominent academic institutions, is planning to draft similar guidelines.


Work Force In Bridgeport Is Squeezed By 2 Laws
Bridgeport has cut its work force so deeply that it is caught in a bind between the state's labor laws and welfare laws that threatens to leave the city both dirtier and poorer.
As the city lays off custodians, parks workers and street cleaners, it has little choice but to take away the jobs of the welfare recipients who assist them as part of the state's workfare program.
Connecticut, like most states, bars people in workfare programs from taking the place of municipal employees.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 25


TOBACCO COMPANY MUST STAND TRIAL
Louisiana's highest court has ruled that the American Tobacco Company must stand trial on the question of whether it is liable for a smoker's cancer.
The State Supreme Court ruled on Friday that a lower court had erred when it dismissed a lawsuit filed by a smoker who has lung and brain cancer.
The court, in applying a state law that measures the benefits of products against their risks, said that "since normal use of cigarettes causes lung cancer, the risk from smoking cigarettes is enormous, while its utility is virtually nil."


Time Warner In Sales Shift
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that it was revamping the sales staffs of its magazines by creating four regional managers who will be responsible for all Time Warner magazines in their respective markets.
Sales executives at Time Warner's individual magazines will now report to one of these four corporate regional sales managers: in the past, they had reported to the heads of individual magazines.


Corrections
A music review yesterday about a rock concert by Elvis Costello at Madison Square Garden on Saturday evening misidentified the show's closing number.
It was "Pump It Up," not "Oliver's Army."


My Husband Died of Blood-Transfused AIDS; Test for Virus Also
To the Editor:
Recently, three patients died of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and three others were infected with the human immunodeficiency virus after getting organs from a donor infected with the virus.
These HIV infections are transmitted only because routine testing techniques for blood and other donor tissues test only for the HIV antibody, which may not appear for weeks to months after HIV exposure.


Washington Journal; Picking Ethiopian Food: It's a Political Decision
The Asmara Restaurant in the Adams-Morgan neighborhood a few miles north of the White House was once billed as an Ethiopian-Eritrean restaurant.
Now it is strictly Eritrean.
The political and ethnic allegiances among the disparate ethnic groups in the thriving 50,000-member Ethiopian community here are being stretched to the limits these days in the wake of last month's ouster of the Marxist Government of Mengistu Haile Mariam.
Nowhere is that more apparent than in the community's dozen or so restaurants, concentrated on 18th Street and Columbia Road in Northwest Washington.


Yugoslav Premier in Plea to Republics
In a gloomy 11th-hour speech before the Croatian Parliament, Yugoslavia's Prime Minister appealed today for Slovenia and Croatia, this country's two most prosperous republics, to halt plans to declare themselves independent on Wednesday.
The Prime Minister, Ante Markovic, who has broad support abroad but only scant popularity throughout this country, warned that further decay of the moribund, six-republic Yugoslav federation and moves by Slovenia and Croatia to break it up could lead to an economic and social catastrophe.


Evidence of More Gas In Milky Way Galaxy
SCIENTISTS from Germany and the United States have found strong new evidence that hot gas between the stars in the Milky Way, Earth's galaxy, is more widespread than was once believed.
More than 20 years ago scientists first detected a background of short wavelength X-ray radiation, called soft X-rays, spread fairly evenly throughout space.
Scientists were unsure of the source of these X-rays but believed a significant component came from superheated gas within the galaxy.
Many scientists believed that the hot gas surrounded the Sun like a bubble out to 300 light-years.
A light-year is the distance light travels in one year, or 5.8 trillion miles.


China Warns On Luxuries
China's ruling State Council warned today that spending on luxury goods by the leaders of debt-ridden state companies and other operations threatened to undermine the country's official austerity program and increase inflation.
"The desire for high consumption is once more on the rise," the council said through the state news media.
It added that too many organizations were "lusting after the new and seeking out the foreign."


Protesters Arrested During AIDS Debate


Bondholders Hire Firms to Fight Orion
Bondholders of the Orion Pictures Corporation have hired the investment banking firms of Rothschild Inc. and Gerard, Klauer &amp; Mattison and a California law firm, Stutman, Treister &amp; Glatt, to represent them in negotiations with the company.
In late May, financially troubled Orion Pictures asked its bondholders to accept an arrangement that would include swapping $285 million in interest-paying bonds for zero-coupon notes and equity.


GERMANY TO HELP SOVIETS OBTAIN AID
Chancellor Helmut Kohl will meet with Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union in advance of the meeting of the seven leading industrial democracies in July to persuade the Soviet leader to accept free-market reforms bold enough to generate a major infusion of Western aid.
A Bonn spokesman said today that the two leaders would meet in Kiev on July 5, 10 days before the seven-nation meeting in London.


In Unforgiving Haste, A Shift Atop Bantam
In a move that underlines how unforgiving the publishing business has become, Bertelsmann A.G., the German media giant, yesterday named Jack Hoeft, a former Pepsico marketing executive, as the second new chief of Bantam Doubleday Dell in just nine months.
He replaced Paul D. Neuthaler, who was named vice chairman of the publishing house, a new position.


Bowhead Whale on the Rebound
THE bowhead whale, hunted to near-extinction in the last century, is rebounding in Alaskan waters, scientists say.
An estimated 7,800 bowheads live in the Arctic waters near Alaska, give or take 20 percent, said Dr.
Judith Zeh, a statistician at the University of Washington, and their numbers are increasing by an average of 3 percent a year.
Scientists estimate that only 1,000 bowheads remained in Alaskan waters, where most live, as recently as the 1970's.


Dollar Down Amid Concern About Rates and Policies
The dollar fell yesterday as concerns about interest rates and reactions to the weekend meeting of Group of Seven monetary officials eroded the gains the dollar chalked up last week.
Investors had bought the dollar on the expectation that the officials would not take a firm stand on limiting its advance.
The dollar has risen 20 percent recently as the United States economy has shown signs of reviving.


Jazz Festival; Several Permutations Of Today's Saxophone
For five hours on Sunday afternoon, the modern saxophone held sway.
The JVC Jazz Festival's nod to free jazz and its aftermath was a free concert featuring dissonant, knotty compositions and harmony-defying improvisations.
But a standing ovation for the concert's wildest solos, from the David Murray quartet, showed that the audience that filled Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center didn't mind cacophony if the music also had vitality and swing.
Mr.
Murray, a tenor saxophonist, played as if torrential passions were barely held back by melodies.
In a blues, a ballad and a modal piece, after a few choruses of suave melodic paraphrase, his solos would zoom for the ozone with streaking, hyperfast runs and flutters and squawks, offering not just pyrotechnics but a clear sense of development.
The final piece took off at a perpetual-motion sprint; for its coda, Mr.
Murray played bass clarinet, bouncing low slap-tongued notes against high flurries.
Rod Williams on piano, Fred Hopkins on bass and Andrew Cyrille on drums all knew how to balance tonality and texture.


Dow Drops By 52.55, To 2,913.01
Stock prices plunged yesterday, as the market was buffeted by an unusual combination of a Japanese brokerage scandal and signs of a worsening domestic economy underscored by declining corporate earnings.
A reduction in the earnings estimates of analysts for several technology companies also weighed on the market, as did a weaker dollar in the face of a stronger German mark and British pound.


Bush the Choreographer


Stockbroker Earnings Up
Stockbrokers' earnings inched up less than 1 percent on average in 1990, to $79,169, according to a survey released on Sunday by the Securities Industry Association.
The gain in earnings of retail brokers, who serve individual investors, was the second in a row, but earnings remained well below the record high of $97,100 reached in 1986.


More Insiders Must Now Report Trades to S.E.C.
High-level managers who never before had to report their trading in their company's stock are now doing so under recent changes in securities laws.
The reports can give investors a perspective on how people other than the top executives of a company think it is performing.
While chairmen, presidents and chief executives have always had to file under these rules, amendments approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission earlier this year and taking effect last month require executives to look at their functions within the company, rather than their titles, to decide whether they affect company policy and must file.


Computer Group
The Advanced Computing Environment, a consortium of computer makers and software publishers created in April to develop a new industry computing standard, said 40 more companies have joined the initiative and specified their first hardware designs.
Some of the initial 21 sponsors of the group were Compaq Computer, Digital Equipment, Microsoft and Mips Computer Systems.
New members include Adaptec, Daewoo Telecom, Epson America, Goldstar and Parallan Computer.


A Step Toward Halting Abuses
The Southern Association of Colleges and Schools has taken the first formal step in approving new rules that would require colleges and universities to assume responsibility for the integrity of their sports programs to stay in good academic standing.
If adopted later this year, as is expected, the rules would represent the first serious attempt to use academic accreditation as a weapon to halt abuses in collegiate sports.
An institution that loses its accreditation faces severe repercussions, including a cutoff of Federal financial aid to its students.


Sigiriya Journal; A Veritable Versailles, 600 Feet Up on a Rock
In the shadow of a 600-foot-high boulder crowned with the ruins of a magnificent palace, Sri Lankan archeologists are slowly unlocking the secrets of a 1,500-year-old Buddhist kingdom singular among world civilizations.
The builders of the Sigiriya rock fortress and palace excelled in engineering, the arts and landscaping.
The earliest known formal gardens to have survived in Asia are here, and they reflect Sri Lanka's geographical position on ancient maritime trade routes.


Music in Review
Music for a While  Phyllis Kind Gallery
It is good to renew contact periodically with an older generation of early-music performers fondly remembered for their work in Noah Greenberg's pioneering New York Pro Musica.
Music for a While consists of three such musicians, Sheila Schonbrun, a soprano and organettist; Judith Davidoff, a viol specialist, and LaNoue Davenport, a wind player.


Winfield Hits for the Cycle
Dave Winfield hit for the cycle for the first time in his career, and went 5-for-5 over all, as the Angels trounced the Royals, 9-4, tonight.
Winfield singled in the first and sixth innings, doubled in the third and hit his 14th homer of the season, a two-run shot, in the fifth.
He completed the cycle with a triple in the eighth off infielder Bill Pecota, who was making his first big-league appearance as a pitcher.


Walesa vs. Parliament: Voting System Is at Issue
The major conflict to arise between President Lech Walesa and Parliament continued to simmer today as each side clung to its own version of what procedures Poles are to follow when they cast their votes in national parliamentary elections in October.
Though seemingly technical in nature, the issue, which reached a crisis last Friday when the legislature rejected presidential amendments to a draft voting bill, is profound and raises fundamental and unresolved questions about whether the President or Parliament is preeminent.


Bank Reports On Assets Are Doubted
A growing number of economists and analysts are saying that many weak banks, including some of the nation's largest, have overstated the amount of capital they have on hand to absorb loan losses, and that a taxpayer bailout may be a stronger possibility than has been acknowledged by the banks and the Bush Administration.
Because the banking industry's capital is measured by historical prices, which reflect values when the loans were made, not reflected is the fact that many bank assets have deteriorated because of real estate and third world loans and other investments made amid the speculative excesses of the last decade.


Johnny Carson's Son Killed in Auto Crash
The son of Johnny Carson, host of "Tonight," was killed last Friday after his car went off a rural road and fell 100 feet down an embankment, the authorities said today.
Richard Wolcott Carson, 39 years old, was thrown from his four-wheel-drive vehicle, which then landed on its top in a culvert, said Russ Johnson of the California Highway Patrol.
Mr.
Johnson said Mr.
Carson was killed instantly.
Private funeral services were held Sunday in Los Angeles.
The authorities said Mr.
Carson was driving on a narrow service road adjacent to Highway 1 about 180 miles northwest of Los Angeles when he apparently became distracted.
Richard Carson was one of three sons from his father's first marriage, to Joan Buckley.
The others are Christopher, 40, and Cory, 38.


Corrections
An article on May 31 about United States policy in Ethiopia incorrectly summarized a speech by a former Ethiopian Foreign Minister that was broadcast three days earlier on the Voice of America.
The former official, Goshu Wolde, criticized the guerrilla forces that had toppled the Government in Addis Ababa and warned that "an end to the fighting that will bring a lasting peace will not take place" unless a broad transitional government is established.
He did not urge residents of the capital to take up arms against the guerrillas.


New York's Film Office May Suffer Sharp Cuts
A proposal by the New York City Council to make severe cuts in the Mayor's Office for Film, Theater and Broadcast has provoked a chorus of criticism from those in the city's film industry, and in the mayoral and police bureaucracy as well.
On Friday, as part of efforts to close the city's $3.5 billion budget gap, the Council proposed that the $450,000 operating budget of the film office be cut to $250,000; that 5 of the office's 10 staff members be laid off, and that the issuance of film permits be transferred to the New York Police Department.


CHRONICLE
Among the literati glitterati, KURT VONNEGUT JR. and JILL KREMENTZ were one high-shine couple.
He -- tall, courtly and novelistically complicated.
She -- pretty, driven and Peter Pan-like.
He writes serious books.
She abandoned a career as a photographer of famous authors and took to writing children's books.
She still does the odd high-priced celebrity photo session for people like GAYFRYD STEINBERG.


New Software Standards Plan
A new group of corporate personal computer users and computer vendors plans to announce an industry standards group today that would set standards for multi-vendor office computing systems.
The group, to be named Open/User Recommended/ Systems, includes representatives from 10 companies, including the Chase Manhattan Bank, Lockheed, Rockwell International and Shell International Petroleum.


Videotaped Bush Speech Is Booed At Opening of Teamsters Meeting
At the opening session of their annual convention, delegates of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters here booed a videotaped speech by President Bush and remarks by their outgoing president today.
Many delegates have expressed anger over the union's settlement of a Justice Department lawsuit that alleged widespread corruption in the union.
Many of them blame Mr.
Bush and the outgoing union president, William McCarthy. for the pact.


New Campaigns
*
Chemical Bank and its advertising agency, Della Femina McNamee Inc., introduce today a revamped television image-advertising campaign stressing heritage and stability.
One commercial focuses on New York City neighborhoods, then and now, while a second shows a family, and the bakery it owns, over the years.
The spots include a theme Chemical has used since 1989: "The human touch. The financial edge."


Oil-Rig Count Drops
The number of working oil and gas rigs in the country dropped by five in the most recent week, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
The Houston-based maker of oilfield tools said 866 rigs were operating, down from 871 the previous week and 1,021 a year ago.
Of those working, 340 were handling gas, 485 oil and 41 others were listed as miscellaneous.
The count represents the number of rigs actively exploring for petroleum and natural gas, not those producing oil and gas.
At the height of the oil boom in December 1981, the count reached a peak of 4,500.
But the number plunged to a low of 663 after oil prices collapsed in 1986.


Unocal Sees Falloff In Quarterly Net
The Unocal Corporation said its second-quarter profits would be substantially lower than last year because of lower West Coast refining and marketing margins, depressed domestic natural gas prices and soft prices for crude oil in California and Alaska.
The Los Angeles-based company had a net income of $33 million in the second quarter of last year before a one-time gain of $132 million from the sale of a Norwegian oil and gas subsidiary.


At 2 Urban High Schools, Sports Is a Path to College


Perry Ellis Americana
Marc Jacobs checked out bandanna patterns as a theme before starting his Portfolio collection for Perry Ellis.
The bandanna, of course, is an authentic piece of Americana, ranking alongside cowboy boots and blue jeans.
He worked out a design in red, black and white combining the main colors of the resort collection.
It is brash and bold in cotton shirts, shirt jackets and sweaters that can be worn with plain white or red pants, shorts or short slim skirts or with stretch tights that pick up a detail of the print.


Sumner Locke Elliott, 73, Novelist And Playwright Born in Australia
Sumner Locke Elliott, a novelist and playwright whose fiction drew upon his formative years in his native Australia, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old.
He died of colon cancer, a friend and fellow writer, Whitfield Cook, said.


Exporters Fight Costs and Rules of Brazil's Ports
The number of containers handled here, at Latin America's largest port, tripled in the 1980's as the volume of loose cargo declined.
But the port's operations still seem like a parody of modernization.
Union work rules and Government regulations require each stevedore gang moving a steel container to include someone schooled in the ancient art of sewing torn coffee sacks.
A forest of archaic regulations, labor cartels and state control has grown so thick around Brazilian ports that the nation's manufacturers think the growth in the 1990's of Latin America's largest economy depends on a more efficient port.


Aid to Salvador Can Wait
In a wise move last year, Congress cut in half the $85 million in military aid that the Bush Administration sought for El Salvador.
The aim was to provide incentives for both the Salvadoran Government and its adversaries to end a decade-long civil war.
If the rebels failed to negotiate in good faith, the full amount could be restored.
The final decision was left to President Bush.
Peace is not yet at hand.
But the 50 percent approach has produced positive results.
Pressures to restore the cuts now should be resisted.


Market Place; Rosy Accounting At Japan's Banks
A FUNNY thing happened to Japan's big banks on the way to reporting their annual profits.
For months newspapers have been filled with stories of the huge financial problems at the banks' real estate affiliates and the high level of corporate bankruptcies here.


Scipio, to Hannibal
Before long I'll probably manage to say something outrageous about "multicultural education," but the best I can produce right now is a small laugh.
Here's why:
Just a few minutes ago a dear relative, the product of a pretty good -- should we call it "monocultural" or "unicultural"? -- education, consulted me about the crossword puzzle.
Who was Scipio and what was his relationship to Hannibal, and what people were "Khartoum residents"?  she needed to know, poor dear.
Did I ever tell her!


Our Towns
Here's a story about the other Persian Gulf war, the one up front that had pieces of hot metal inbound.
There wasn't a whole lot of color news film of this one.
So it has remained unfamiliar to most Americans enthusiastically celebrating the resounding victory and safe returns.
But this other war had its dramatic tales, quiet heroes, haunting happenstances and silent victims.
And its aftermath, now unfolding across the country in scores of peaceful communities like this, has nothing to do with even 87 ounces of confetti.


Scientists Study Ancient DNA for Glimpses of Past Worlds
WILL it one day become possible to breed a living dinosaur from genes preserved in fossils?
Although most scientists regard such an idea as unrealistic, a few have begun to conclude that it can no longer be dismissed out of hand.
With luck and ingenuity, they say, geneticists might one day recover enough dinosaur DNA to create a beast that is reasonably close to the original.


Business and Health; Computer Says Take 2 Aspirin
THE Harvard Community Health Plan, a large New England health maintenance organization, is testing a computerized service that answers health-care questions and advises people in their homes.
The sponsors say the service pleases consumers and may eventually save money by reducing calls and visits to health plans.
The system is being developed by Interpractice Systems, a joint venture of the Harvard Community Plan and Electronic Data Systems, the big Dallas-based unit of General Motors that provides data processing services to health insurers.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.65
5.75
8.32
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.58
7.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.75
7.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.18
8.16
8.60
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.50
8.50
8.56
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.55
9.55
9.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.24
7.24
7.55
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Q&amp;A
Changeable Roses
Q. Can roses change color from year to year?


Dr. Jekyll or Mr. Tyson, A Mixture of Extremes
Mike Tyson has always intrigued the public with the extremes of his possibilities -- the little-boy shyness in contrast to the sometimes unfiltered surliness, the articulate riffs on boxing posed against the hammer-blunt antisocial interludes.
And every time a fight grows closer, Tyson bashing becomes chic.


Wheat Still at 4-Month Lows As Corn and Soybeans Gain
Wheat futures continued to languish around four-month price lows yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as corn and soybean futures gained on possible weather damage to the crops.
In other markets, meat and livestock futures were mixed and precious metals were lower.


Bush Says He's Puzzled by Vaccine Article
President Bush said today that he was puzzled by a report that the White House had deferred action on an emergency plan to buy vaccines and distribute them to cities and states for children.
"I don't know what that story was about," Mr.
Bush said, referring to an article in The New York Times on Sunday.
"If it's done, it has not been called to my attention."


Corrections
An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day on Saturday misidentified the business that the Eaton Corporation bought from Cooper Industries.
It was Arrow- Hart's specialty switch business.


Dow-Marion Insider Case
A woman was charged today with providing inside information to two men who are accused of making $415,000 in illegal profits on the merger of a Dow Chemical Company affiliate and Marion Laboratories.
Barbara Aldrige was charged by the Securities and Exchange Commission with illegally passing confidential corporate information, while the men were charged with making illegal trading profits.
The charges were listed in a civil complaint filed by the commission in Federal District Court in Kansas City, Mo.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Wachovia will buy South Carolina National in a stock swap valued at $835 million.
The acquisition will increase Wachovia's assets to $32.7 billion, placing it among the 20 biggest banking companies in the country.  [ Page D1. ]


BRIEFS
*
American Telephone and Telegraph Co. said it would call for restoration of direct telecommunications service with Vietnam at a House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee hearing today. *
Bank of North America said that the Resolution Trust Corp. had accepted its bid for three Broward County, Fla., offices of Ambassador Federal Savings &amp; Loan Association.
Terms were not disclosed.


Helping Us Keep Cool


Aftermath of L-Tryptophan
More than a year after 1,500 people were made ill by the health-food supplement L-tryptophan, most still suffer and many report new problems with anxiety and concentration, health officials say.
The conclusions come from a follow-up study of patients in New York State.
Sixty-four percent still suffer "moderately or extremely severe" symptoms of a blood disorder, the Centers for Disease Control reported last week.


Abortion Foes Say Poll Backs Curb on Advice
Congressmen and organizations opposed to abortion said today that new polling data show that the American public supports a recent Supreme Court decision allowing a ban on abortion counseling in federally financed family-planning clinics.
Results from the questions they paid the Wirthlin Group to ask contradicted findings released June 11 from a poll conducted by Louis Harris and Associates and paid for by Planned Parenthood.


Pushing Today's Burden Into Tomorrow
The proposal to postpone hundreds of millions of dollars in payments to the city's pension systems over the next year -- a move now being studied by the Dinkins admininistration -- would help avoid some layoffs or service cuts.
But just like a homeowner who refinances a mortgage, extending its terms, the city would be shifting the burden into the future, shifting costs from current taxpayers to those paying taxes in the next century.


Eljer Industries
Eljer Industries said its board voted to accept an invitation from Hanson P.L.C.'s Jacuzzi Inc. unit to discuss Jacuzzi's offer of $20 a share, or $145 million, for Eljer.
Eljer also said it would appeal a recent Federal court ruling against the company in a liability suit involving problems with a plastic plumbing system manufactured by Eljer's United States Brass Corporation unit.
Dozens of such suits have been filed, and Eljer said it had set aside $12.2 million for claims.


To Our Readers
Beginning today, the chart on top of the Business Digest omits the gold price and lists oil instead.
The oil price will be the previous day's closing quotation for the nearest month's crude oil futures contract on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
The change reflects oil's greater importance to the economy.


Anonymity: a Tool Used, and Abused
Promises of confidentiality to news sources are the grease that helps make the wheels of journalism turn, especially in investigative reporting.
From leaked documents to tips, from "off the record" interviews to "background" briefings, the offer of anonymity in exchange for useful information is a fundamental element of the craft of journalism as it is practiced today.


Crime-Bill Conferees Agree on Death Penalty
Democratic and Republican leaders working on the anti-crime bill that is moving toward a vote on the Senate floor agreed today to expand the number of Federal crimes punishable by death.
The agreement leaves two important areas of difference to be resolved: proposals that would ban some semiautomatic weapons and establish a waiting period on handgun purchases, and a proposal to limit state prison inmates' rights to Federal review of their convictions.


Reynolds Effort to Improve Winston Image
Seeking to reverse years of sliding sales and market share of its flagship Winston line, the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company yesterday disclosed plans to use a significant change in product packaging, designed to keep cigarettes fresher, as a marketing tool to help the brand's image.
Outlined in a video-conference call from Reynolds's Winston-Salem, N.C., headquarters, the plans center on introducing what the company is calling the most innovative change in cigarette packaging since it brought out the cellophane wrapper 60 years ago.
The shiny new packaging, called Flavor Seal, will appear in mid-August on 9 of the 11 styles of regular, light and ultra-light Winstons.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the continuation of an article on Saturday about promotional campaigns for summer movies was omitted from some copies.
Readers who want copies of the continuation of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Bridge
Although bridge activity in universities has certainly declined in the past half century, there are several encouraging signs of revival.
One of these is at New York University, where the players call themselves, with tongue in cheek, the Imprecision Club, and have been effective in finding recruits for the group.
Three of the Imprecision players, Ernie Campbell, Michael Hind and Laureen Treacy, won the Flight B Regional Swiss Teams in Manhattan a month ago, together with Carl Michelet.
Campbell, with different teammates, went on to win the Flight B Reisinger Knockout Teams a week later.
He is active as a bridge teacher and game director, as is Hind.
Treacy sat South on the diagramed deal from their Swiss victory.


Sabena in Talks
Sabena, the Belgian state airline, and British Airways are likely to agree on a partnership by the end of next month, a Sabena spokesman said.
British Airways could take a direct stake in Sabena by purchasing $324 million in new shares, the spokesman said, but talks are continuing and nothing has been settled yet.
Sabena said in February that the ailing state carrier would be restructured to cut costs, find new investors and attract a partner to help make Brussels the center of a European regional air network.


Ruling on Lawsuits by News Sources
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 5-to-4 decision yesterday in Cohen v.
Cowles Media Co., holding that the First Amendment does not protect the news media from lawsuits over broken promises of confidentiality of sources.
Justice Byron R. White's opinion was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices John Paul Stevens, Antonin Scalia and Anthony M. Kennedy.
The dissenters were Justices Harry A. Blackmun and David H. Souter, who each wrote dissenting opinions, as well as Justices Thurgood Marshall and Sandra Day O'Connor.
FROM THE OPINION
The question before us is whether the First Amendment prohibits a plaintiff from recovering damages, under state promissory estoppel law, for a newspaper's breach of a promise of confidentiality given to the plaintiff in exchange for information.
We hold that it does not.


Austine M. Hearst, 72, Newspaper Columnist
Austine McDonnell Hearst, a former reporter who was married to the editor in chief of the Hearst newspapers, died on Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of heart failure after suffering from lymphoma, a family spokesman said.


Doyle Joins U.S. Team
ALLEN DOYLE, who missed the 1989 Walker Cup because of a bad back, will get another chance to play for the United States against Britain.
Doyle, six-time Georgia state amateur champion, will join the 1990 United States Amateur champion, PHIL MICKELSON, and three other standout amateur golfers on the American team that will play in September near Dublin.
Others named are DAVID DUVAL, an all-American from the University of Georgia; two-time United States Amateur winner JAY SIGEL and DAVID EGER, a PGA Tour official.
Five others will be selected later. (AP)


Vietnam Party Vows to Maintain Absolute Power
Leaders of Vietnam's ruling Communist Party declared today that they had no intention of giving up their absolute hold on power even as the party continued to encourage a sweeping liberalization of the economy.
Their statement, delivered by Nguyen Van Linh, the party leader, was replete with the anti-imperialist language of an era gone by in most of the rest of the Communist world.
A transcript of his remarks, made at the opening session of the party's national congress in Hanoi, the capital, was made available here.


1-Year Pact for Walker
HERSCHEL WALKER agreed to a one-year contract with the Minnesota Vikings yesterday, ending months of sometimes acrimonious negotiations.
The situation appeared headed for arbitration because the Vikings and Walker disagreed about the running back's 1990 base salary, upon which qualifying offers had to be made.


Loss of Genetic Diversity Imperils Crop Advances
THE farmers of the world, harvesting the abundant crops of the Green Revolution, have so far defied Malthusian predictions that population growth would outrun agricultural production and consign much of humanity to chronic famine.
But scientists say the diverse varieties of traditional crops and wild plants they need to breed more productive new strains are in jeopardy.
In the field, farmers are abandoning them in favor of the new high-yield varieties.
Wild strains of agricultural plants are disappearing as development destroys their habitat.
And lack of funds, lack of care and political upheaval threaten the collections of seeds, in "banks" around the world, in which much of the remaining genetic diversity is stored.


Defensive Step By Northrop
The Northrop Corporation said today that its directors had adopted measures to protect its pension-fund surplus and to defend against hostile takeover attempts.
The military contractor said that the action was not in response to any acquisition attempt, and that it knew of no efforts to gain control of the company.


Congo Political Conference Gives Africa a Democratic Model
It seemed somehow appropriate that when a national conference on the political future of this Central African country ended recently, all 1,500 delegates solemnly took turns dipping their hands in the reflecting pool outside the Congolese national assembly hall.
The ceremony was meant to symbolize the washing away of the bile that often marred deliberations at the three-month conference.
It was also an act of reconciliation, and a way of affirming the momentous changes that had taken place in what political leaders are calling Congo's democratic coup.


Trial Opens for Physician in Steroid Case
A Federal prosecutor asserted today that a suburban Harrisburg doctor acted as a drug dealer, not a physician, by selling anabolic steroids and other controlled substances to professional wrestlers and weight lifters from throughout the country.
Assistant United States Attorney Theodore Smith 3d made the allegation as he outlined the Government's case against Dr.
George Zahorian 3d, a urologic surgeon.
The trial is a test case of a 1988 law passed by Congress that outlawed distributing steroids for non-medical reasons.


Ford Recalls 72,600 Trucks That Were Sold in California
The Ford Motor Company said today that it was voluntarily recalling about 72,600 trucks to insure acceptable emissions levels.
The trucks were built for sale in California.
Included in the recall are the 1986-87 F-Series and Bronco vehicles with 4.9-liter engines and the 1986-88 Ranger trucks with 2.3-liter engines.


Tandon's Modular Upgradeability
THE Tandon Corporation has become the newest and most enthusiastic proponent of a new trend in personal computers, broadly known as modular upgradeability.
That simply means one can take the microprocessor and related components out of an older computer and replace them with a faster or more powerful set of chips, in effect getting the latest technology for less money than it would cost to buy a complete new system of comparable power.


Graduation: A Star's Difficult Passage
Damon Santiago flew into New York City yesterday to rehearse for his graduation today from Stevenson High School.
The17-year-old basketball star did not know until late last week that his transcript seemed to be in order and that he had met all requirements.
"It feels great," Santiago said. "I get a new start."


Thomas Greelish, 51, Former U.S. Attorney
Thomas W. Greelish, a former United States Attorney for New Jersey, died on Sunday while attending a picnic here.
He was 51 years old and lived in Mendham, N.J.
He apparently suffered a heart attack, said W. Hunt Dumont, who preceded Mr.
Greelish as United States Attorney and who was with him on Sunday.


On My Mind; Praying in London
The parade of British troops who fought in the Persian Gulf was brief.
It took them about 45 minutes to march past the Queen.
Immediately afterward, London went about its business and the Queen went off to the races.


People
*
Ray Gaulke, 55 years old, has been named executive vice president and chief marketing officer at the Newspaper Advertising Bureau, New York.
He had previously been executive vice president and senior partner at Whittle Communications, Knoxville, Tenn. *
Jack Heistand, 38, has been promoted to publisher of magazine development at Hearst Magazines, New York, from vice president and marketing director.
Also at Hearst Magazines, P. Reed Foster, 36, has been promoted to associate publisher of Redbook, while continuing as advertising director.


Seles Fined $6,000 for Pulling Out Of Wimbledon
Nobody, including the formerly top-seeded Monica Seles, played tennis at rain-soaked Wimbledon today, but only Seles was fined for it.
Gerry Smith, chief executive officer of the Women's Tennis Association, confirmed this afternoon that Seles would be assessed a $6,000 penalty for her late and insufficiently documented withdrawal from the tournament on Friday afternoon.
Although players are permitted to use a medical excuse once per season, Seles already used hers in Sydney in January when shin splints and exhaustion threatened to interfere with her plans for the Australian Open.


Careers; Companies Add Managers for Education
A NEW job category has evolved at companies that provide assistance to education, according to a recent survey.
A study by the Conference Board, a private business research organization, found that these companies, concerned with the future availability of an educated work force, provide support mostly to local high schools, often in communities where the companies have plants or headquarters.


Fight Crime, Not Liberty; The Exclusionary Rule Needs Protection
Senators are competing with each other and with the Bush Administration to see who can pose as toughest on crime.
In coming days the Senate faces a series of separate votes on everything from the Federal death penalty to gun control.
Today's scheduled vote is on the so-called exclusionary rule, a bulwark for liberty that is under attack by those waving the tough-on-crime banner most fiercely.
The exclusionary rule was devised by the Supreme Court back in 1914 as the best way to enforce the Fourth Amendment's ban on unreasonable searches and seizures.
Crude but never improved upon, the rule requires the courts to throw out illegally seized evidence as a deterrent to misconduct by law officers enforcing the law.


President Quits At Circle K
The Circle K Corporation, a convenience-store chain that filed for bankruptcy protection in May 1990, said yesterday that its president and chief operating officer, Robert A. Dearth Jr., had resigned.
In a statement released by the Phoenix-based company, Mr.
Dearth cited personal and family circumstances.
He said that since Circle K was unable to file a proposed reorganization plan now, he would step aside so the company could find a successor who could remain throughout the reorganization.


Castro, on All the Touchy Subjects
ABC's Jim McKay has lately been in the habit of interviewing the likes of thoroughbred horse trainers Nick Zito and D. Wayne Lukas.
But there he was last Thursday night, in a conference room at the Palace of the Revolution in Havana, interviewing President Fidel Castro for four and a half hours.
But Castro was late.
The talk with the former pitcher, which will most likely be broadcast as part of ABC's coverage of the Pan American Games in August, was scheduled for 2:30 P.M., but the man who has run Cuba for only slightly longer than McKay has been with "Wide World of Sports" didn't stroll in until 10.


Columbia Gas Debt Default
Columbia Gas System Inc., the embattled utility that serves 15 mid-Atlantic states, said it missed a $10 million short-term debt payment today, its second default in less than a week.
The company said Wednesday that Columbia and its pipeline subsidiary might seek bankruptcy protection unless they could renegotiate bank credit lines and their natural-gas purchase contracts that are well above current market prices.


Players Graduate to Tougher Curves
The first baseman, Ralph Gonzalez, was the first to leave.
He packed a suitcase, shaved off his goatee -- his mother insisted -- and climbed into a friend's car for the drive to Dublin, Ohio.
He planned to spend a month with relatives there.
Three mornings later, a blue Cadillac Seville pulled up in front of a six-story tenement on West 168th Street, and the third baseman, Manny Ramirez, got in.
The Cadillac belonged to Joe Delucca, the local scouting supervisor for Manny's new employers -- the Cleveland Indians.
He drove Manny to La Guardia Airport for his flight to Ohio.


Music in Review
Vagram Saradjian  Cellist Merkin Concert Hall
It was a shame anyone had to settle for second billing at the New York debut recital of Vagram Saradjian, an Armenian cellist, on Sunday afternoon.
True, Mr.
Saradjian was being presented as the 1990 Aram Khachaturian Music Award winner by the Armenian General Benevolent Union, and he made a brief, invigorating solo flight in a work written for him by his former teacher, Levon Chaoushian, (Recitative and Scherzo, from 1974).
But the program consisted chiefly of the cello sonatas of Rachmaninoff (Op. 19) and Shostakovich (Op. 40), to whose success Nina Kogan, a Russian pianist, contributed mightily.


Twins Mar Yankee Pitcher's Hour Upon the Stage
Jeff Johnson had the luscious chance to realize an authentic pitcher's dream last night -- tossing a perfect game -- as he faced the Twins in only his fourth career start.
For five innings, it was more than just a rookie dream.
Johnson thought about a game like this on bus trips through countless minor league towns, but last night was different as the fantasy was becoming reality at Yankee Stadium.
He retired the first 15 Minnesota batters, and the fans dreamed with him by cheering every out as if it were the last.


Japan-China Business Rising
Japan's exports to China are booming and investment is rising again after a two-year drought, as economic and political relations normalize and the effect of the Tiananmen Square crackdown wears off, Japanese officials said today.
On Tuesday, the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, begins a four-day trip to Tokyo, during which a visit to Beijing in August by the Japanese Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, is expected to be announced.


Dexter M. Keezer Is Dead at 95; Economist Gauged U.S. Outlook
Dexter M. Keezer, an economist who developed techniques of projecting the nation's business climate, died yesterday in the Orleans Nursing and Convalescent Center in Orleans, Mass.
He was 95 years old and lived in Truro, Mass.
He died of congestive heart failure, a family spokesman said.


COURT AGAIN CURBS FEDERAL APPEALS BY STATE INMATES
The Supreme Court today issued the latest, and in some respects the most sweeping, of several decisions sharply constricting the ability of state prison inmates to pursue appeals in Federal courts.
The 6-to-3 opinion overturned a 1963 landmark ruling of the Warren Court era that had guaranteed the right of state prison inmates, under most circumstances, to challenge the constitutionality of a conviction or sentence in Federal court.
These challenges, petitions for writs of habeas corpus, are filed after state court appeals have been exhausted.
Emphasis on State Procedures
The 1963 decision, Fay v.
Noia, was written by Justice William J. Brennan Jr., who retired from the Court last July.
It held that Federal courts were bound to consider habeas corpus petitions even from inmates who had failed for some reason to appeal their case properly in the state courts, as long as the inmate had not "deliberately bypassed" the state's appeals process.


Miscellany
*
While advertising executives wonder about the future of the trouble-plagued Clio Awards, the trade publication Advertising Age has announced expansion plans for its annual advertising awards competition.
Among the plans are opening the awards to international entries for the first time, as well as considering shifting the awards ceremony to New York from Chicago.


Assembly Offers Budget Proposal For New Jersey
The Democratic leaders of the General Assembly proposed their own version of a state budget today, and said that it would avoid the layoffs of more than 4,000 state workers.
But the Assembly budget plan was immediately criticized by Gov.
Jim Florio, who has told the state's nine public employee unions that they must give up more than $280 million in wage increases and benefits by the end of this week or face thousands of additional layoffs.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-16
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany will meet Mikhail Gorbachev before the meeting of the leading industrial democracies, hoping to persuade the Soviet leader to make reforms that could bring Western aid.
Page A1
Hard-liners in the Soviet Parliament again attacked President Gorbachev's reach to the West, charging that Soviet moves were not being reciprocated from abroad.
A16


Train Hits a Truck in Japan; More Than 300 Are Injured
More than 300 commuters were injured today when a packed train smashed into a truck at a crossing in western Japan, the police said.
The train was carrying between 450 and 500 passengers, most of them students, when the collision occurred in Fukuchiyama, about 50 miles from Kyoto, Japan's ancient capital.


College for the Study of Masts and Mackerel
In search of bluefish, lobster and a college degree, an elite and unlikely band of students sets sail every school day from Kingsborough Community College at the tip of the Manhattan Beach section of Brooklyn.
Like characters dreamed up by a latter-day Melville or Twain, they spend much of the academic year cruising Jamaica Bay and the Atlantic, fishing and learning the ways of the sea.
Whether studying aboard this pedagogical armada of about a dozen fishing trawlers, an 1860's-vintage sailboat and a Florida speedboat seized for running drugs, or scaling and inspecting fish in onshore classrooms, these prospective fishermen, boat operators and seafood dealers have at least two things in common: a love of the sea and, after two years, a diploma in fisheries and marine technology.


Dominance Dwindles For Mets' Pitchers
Pitching.
Lots of pitching.
Lots of good young pitching.
For the Mets, it's long been their operating philosophy and strategic premise for success in the National League East.
Too much pitching.
Too deep to be hurt badly by injury.
Too talented to ever be counted out of the race.
For the rest of the division, that's been the conventional wisdom in sizing up the Mets.


Iraq Tells of Constant Electricity Crisis
The Iraqi Minister of Industry says the restoration of electrical power in Iraq after the allied bombing of power plants is in a state of constant crisis, with equipment failures and blackouts that are using up dwindling supplies of spare parts.
The comments by the official, Amer Asadi, amount to an unusual official acknowledgment that the return of basic services in postwar Iraq was a temporary and somewhat illusory achievement by the Government of President Saddam Hussein.


Books of The Times; The Legendary Goethe As a Developing Artist
Goethe The Poet and the Age.
Vol.
I.
The Poetry of Desire (1749-1790).
By Nicholas Boyle 807 pages.
Oxford University Press. $37.50.


Mortgage Rates Mixed
Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 9.65 percent last week, down from 9.66 percent in the previous week, according to a national survey by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
But on one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 7.24 percent, up from 7.22 percent in the previous week.
The rates do not include add-on fees known as points.


Music in Review
Grupo Circulo  Merkin Concert Hall
From a single evening of five composers one cannot deduce the musical mood of a country, but Spain's new music -- like so much else in that resurgent country -- is just now making itself known in other places, and listeners get their information where they can.


Erickson's 12th Night Is a Two-Hit Show
There is no time for Scott Erickson to consider how far he has come, and how fast.
Two years ago this month, he was a fourth-round draft choice out of the University of Arizona.
One year ago today, he was pitching in his first major league game.
Twelve months and 20 victories later, Erickson has a record of 12-2 this season built on a dozen consecutive victories, the latest of them being his 5-0, two-hit domination of the Yankees last night.


Reduce New York Taxes and Restructure the State Government
To the Editor:
I am responding to "New York's Ordeal: The Tax Exit" (editorial, June 13) on behalf of a 20,000-member public policy organization.


Kevin O'Connor, An Actor, Director And Teacher, 56
Kevin O'Connor, a theater actor, director and teacher, died on Saturday at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 56 years old and lived at the Chelsea Hotel in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, his brother, Patrick, said.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Acumos Inc., Foster City, Calif., a computer equipment company, named Douglas J. Bartek president and chief executive. *
Air Products &amp; Chemicals Inc., Allentown, Pa., named Harold A. Wagner president and chief operating officer.


Moses Rosenthal, 103, A Rabbi for 77 Years
Rabbi Moses Rosenthal, the spiritual leader of congregations on the East and West Coasts, died on June 17 in the Goldman Nursing Home in Niles, Ill.
He was 103 years old and had lived in Far Rockaway, Queens, before moving to the nursing home in 1988.
Rabbi Rosenthal was ordained in 1914 after earning a master's degree from the Jewish Theological Seminary of America.
He then served congregations in Manhattan, Los Angeles and on Long Island before being named rabbi of Temple Emanuel in Passaic, N.J.


A Sanitation Layoff, a Fight With Wife, a Suicide Leap
Ollie Hartley's co-workers in the New York City Sanitation Department's central repair shop, where he had kept track of plumbing equipment in a small, neat, windowless office for the last nine and a half years, remembered him yesterday as a quiet, polite man, a good worker, devoted to his family.
Neighbors at Dyckman Houses, a well-kept public housing project in the Inwood section of Manhattan, where he grew up and lived with his wife, Deborah, and two sons, Christopher, 8 years old, and Kevin, 1, said pretty much the same thing, describing a nice, solid man who doted on his older son.


No Global Threat Seen From Oil Fires
In findings that confirmed earlier estimates, a team of scientists said today that the smoke from burning oil wells in Kuwait would not rise high enough or stay in the atmosphere long enough to affect the global climate.
But the researchers said the fires were causing substantial regional changes.


Editorial Notebook; Germany's Once and Future Capital
In times past, Germans spoke of the "Berliner Luft," the clear and crackling air of their capital city.
The atmosphere was blackened by firebombs during World War II, then thickened by industrial pollution, but the old adage still has a core of truth: nowhere else in Europe are the depths and heights of history so keenly visible.
A united Germany was right to choose a united Berlin as its capital.
Understandably, Germans are nervous about moving from Bonn, the reassuring symbol of West Germany's rebirth as a respected democracy.
It took a 10-hour debate and a close 338-to-320 vote last week for the Bundestag to confirm the shift.
And not only Germans are anxious about the ghosts that pervade the seat and graveyard of Hitler's Thousand-Year Reich.


Military Exports to Iraq Come Under Scrutiny
The Commerce Department has started an internal investigation of charges that officials of the agency altered documents related to the export of militarily useful technology to Iraq so that the material would appear less incriminating when examined by a Congressional committee, Congressional aides say.
The investigation, which is being undertaken by the department's Inspector General, came to light as a Washington public policy group provided examples of discrepancies between the Commerce Department's internal export control documents and those it presented to Congress and the public.


At Bennington, Justice Had the Last Word
To the Editor:
Bennington College endorses an academic environment free of the kind of intimidation and narrow-mindedness so vividly etched by Edward Hoagland in "Fear and Learning in Vermont" (Op-Ed, June 15).
This is especially evident in the college's handling of Mr.
Hoagland's complaint that a charge of homophobia prevented him from being rehired.


Vietnam Party Vows to Maintain Absolute Power
Leaders of Vietnam's ruling Communist Party declared today that they had no intention of giving up their absolute hold on power even as the party continued to encourage a sweeping liberalization of the economy.
Their statement, delivered by Nguyen Van Linh, the party leader, was replete with the anti-imperialist language of an era gone by in most of the rest of the Communist world.
A transcript of his remarks, made at the opening session of the party's national congress in Hanoi, the capital, was made available here.


Forget No. 2. Look Who's the Nets' No. 1
Since selling his 40 percent interest in the Nets in 1985, Joe Taub had been a fan with a season ticket.
At most Byrne Meadowlands Arena games, he sat in Section 122, Row 5, and watched the franchise he once helped save from possible extinction deteriorate to the point where it had missed the playoffs the last five years.
But now he's going to do more than watch.
He's going to run the team.
At 2 P.M. today, Taub will meet with Willis Reed, the Nets' vice president of basketball operations, and Coach Bill Fitch to decide how the team will use the second pick in tomorrow night's National Basketball Association draft at Madison Square Garden.


Castro, on All the Touchy Subjects
ABC's Jim McKay has lately been in the habit of interviewing the likes of thoroughbred horse trainers Nick Zito and D. Wayne Lukas.
But there he was last Thursday night, in a conference room at the Palace of the Revolution in Havana, interviewing President Fidel Castro for four and a half hours.
But Castro was late.
The talk with the former pitcher, which will most likely be broadcast as part of ABC's coverage of the Pan American Games in August, was scheduled for 2:30 P.M., but the man who has run Cuba for only slightly longer than McKay has been with "Wide World of Sports" didn't stroll in until 10.


Iran Said to Want U.S. Deal
Iran wants to sell up to 400,000 barrels of oil a day to the United States, but obstacles like freedom for Western hostages in Lebanon must be cleared, the Middle East Economic Survey reported today.
The Iranian oil authorities have set no date for accomplishing their goal of 300,000 to 400,000 barrels a day in crude sales to the United States, the journal said.


Patterns
Laurenland
Ralph Lauren is getting to be the Walt Disney of fashion.
Like Disney, Mr.
Lauren creates worlds within which other frames of reference are obliterated.


Taking Refuge In Ogilvy Work
The Gordon Bowen story -- or, "McCann or Ogilvy? That is the Question" -- continues to be a prime topic of conversation among advertising and marketing executives.
"I don't know whether I'm in the middle of the tornado or outside of it," Mr.
Bowen, who is executive creative director of Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, said in a telephone interview yesterday.
One sign of the winds swirling about Mr.
Bowen: the interview was interrupted when he took a call from David Ogilvy, his agency's famous founder.


Short-Term Notes Down Slightly
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed in slow trading yesterday, as short-term notes and bills gave ground, while longer-term issues improved somewhat.
Traders said they were surprised by the decline in the price of some short-term maturities, given the big drop in American equity prices, the Japanese stock scandal and a fall in the Commodity Research Bureau's index of 21 leading spot commodity prices for the second straight session.


Gains Cited on AIDS, But Urgency Remains
More has been learned about the AIDS virus in the eight years since its discovery than about any other microbe, even those that have been known for a century, many proud scientists note.
But meetings like the International Conference on AIDS held here last week serve as useful reminders that much remains to be learned about AIDS and the human immunodeficiency virus that causes it.


Carlson Companies Names Key Officer
Charles W. Schmid yesterday was appointed executive vice president of Carlson Companies Inc., one of the nation's largest travel servce companies.
Mr.
Schmid was also named president and chief operating officer of two of its operating groups, Carlson Travel and Carlson Marketing, where he will be in charge of both domestic and international operations.
Mr.
Schmid, 48 years old, has been senior vice president of sales and marketing for the Miller Brewing Company since 1988, to which he was appointed after two years on special assignment to the corporate offices of the Philip Morris Companies, Miller's corporate parent.
At Miller, where annual revenues exceed $3.5 billion, Mr.
Schmid was in charge of all domestic and international sales, brand management and business development.


Castro, on All the Touchy Subjects
ABC's Jim McKay has lately been in the habit of interviewing the likes of thoroughbred horse trainers Nick Zito and D. Wayne Lukas.
But there he was last Thursday night, in a conference room at the Palace of the Revolution in Havana, interviewing President Fidel Castro for four and a half hours.
But Castro was late.
The talk with the former pitcher, which will most likely be broadcast as part of ABC's coverage of the Pan American Games in August, was scheduled for 2:30 P.M., but the man who has run Cuba for only slightly longer than McKay has been with "Wide World of Sports" didn't stroll in until 10.


By Design; The Long Summer
Donna Karan breezed into her showroom one day last week wearing all black -- a tank-top bodysuit and a long, full cotton skirt slit on one side and flying open.
The designer finds long skirts irresistible in hot weather.
"It's answering the question of how to handle your legs," she said.
"You don't want to wear stockings, and pants are too hot."


Northrop Settles Workers' Suit on False Missile Tests for $8 Million
The Northrop Corporation has agreed to pay $8 million to settle a lawsuit by two of its former employees who said the company falsified tests on parts for the Air Force's cruise missile.
The settlement, which has been agreed to by Northrop but is still awaiting the approval of the Justice Department, comes 16 months after Northrop pleaded guilty to Federal criminal charges.
It is one of the largest settlements to date in a flurry of lawsuits by employees who have reported wrongdoing by military contractors.


Raid Cuts Off Slugs for Subway Cheats
A raid on a New Jersey factory and the arrests of eight suspects have cut off the largest source of slugs used by fare cheats in New York City subways, District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan announced yesterday.
With hundreds of the shining brass slugs spread out on a table before him at a news conference in his office, Mr.
Morgenthau said the factory produced the bulk of about 10,000 slugs that were inserted in subway turnstiles every week.


Foul Weather Forces Wimbledon to Wait
Wimbledon, which has carried on the classic love-hate relationship with Britain's omnipresent cloud banks since the tournament began in 1877, was lashed by showers morning, noon and night today and forced to acknowledge a thorough opening-day washout, the first since 1987.
Oddly enough, this was just the 26th time in the Grand Slam tournament's luminous but chronically rain-soaked history that play had to be canceled outright.
The decision to abandon hope and send defending champion Stefan Edberg home to his London penthouse came at 6:45 P.M., just after tournament officials ordered the evacuation of the largely deserted premises because of a bomb scare.


Other Shreds of the Past
Even when DNA is absent, ancient remains may retain remnants of other tissue of value to science.
Dr.
W.
Dale Spall, an analytical chemist at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, has been extracting core samples from the huge vertebral bones of a 160-foot-long dinosaur called a seismosaur that lived 150 million years ago.
In these extracts he reports having detected tiny quantities of several unidentified proteins, possibly the oldest proteins ever to come to light.


Foundation Ordered To Pay News Groups
A University of South Carolina foundation was wrong to deliberately destroy public documents and must pay $227,000 in legal fees to two news organizations that had sought its records, a judge ruled today.
The judge, Carol Connor of Circuit Court, ordered the Carolina Research and Development Foundation to reimburse The Associated Press and The Greenville News, which sued in 1987 after the foundation refused to make the records public.


Life Bleak for Jordanians Who Fled Kuwait
For Abdul Majid Natsheh, life since Aug. 2 has been like a bad dream from which he and thousands of other Jordanians who fled Iraq's invasion of Kuwait would like to awake.
"I have a good car and I have good clothes," he said recently, turning inside out the empty pockets of his fine suit, a relic of 31 years as a legal researcher and businessman in Kuwait.


Review/Dance; In Washington, the Houston Ballet Performs a New Paul Taylor Piece
String ties and cowboy boots, sometimes worn with shorts, were in fashion this weekend in and around the Kennedy Center here.
Hometown support from the Lone Star state has not been lacking for the center's first Texas Festival.
But there was more than boosterism behind the thunderous applause on Saturday night after the Houston Ballet's performance of "Company B," the instant masterpiece that Paul Taylor has choreographed to recordings by the Andrews Sisters.
It is, quite simply, the best dance premiere of the season.


Murder Charges May Be Dropped Against Officers in Queens Death
The new Queens District Attorney is expected to announce today that he will seek the dismissal of the most serious charges against four of the five police officers indicted in the killing of a car-theft suspect in February, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, also said that District Attorney Richard A. Brown wanted the murder charge against the fifth officer reduced to manslaughter or assault.
Mr.
Brown has scheduled a news conference for this morning, but his spokesman said only that Mr.
Brown planned to use the occasion to talk about the hotly disputed case.


Environmental Toll Mounting in Kuwait As Oil Fires Burn On
About 30 miles southwest of the smoggy central city of Kuwait, in a remote oilfield where the firefighters have not even begun to work, a burning well has taken on the appearance of a small volcano.
The wellhead is buried inside a towering cone of coke that blazes with a furious roar, emitting charcoal-black smoke so dense that it feels like liquid soot in the eyes and on the tongue.
For acres around this mound of flame, a congealing puddle of spilled oil belches incandescent gas and flickers with a thousand lesser fires.


Carrefour of France To Buy Euromarche
The French retailer Carrefour said today that it would buy rival Euromarche for up to 5 billion francs, or $818 million, catapulting it into the top spot among France's retail groups.
Adding Euromarche's 55 restaurants and 77 hypermarkets would bring Carrefour's annual sales to more than 100 billion francs, or $16 billion.
That, analysts say, would probably place Carrefour ahead of France's current retail leader, the family-owned Leclerc group, and make Carrefour one of Europe's biggest retailers.


Jazz Festival; Geoff Keezer Improvises
When the young pianist Geoff Keezer plays solo piano, it's like a couch that's exploded from internal pressure, with springs and posts and stuffing bursting out of the couch's basic form.
Mr.
Keezer, who appeared Saturday afternoon at Weill Recital Hall as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, puts everything he knows into his pieces, and the result is a burst of ideas, with lines and double-handed chordal figures and classical crescendos and be-bop phrases all sprawling across the plain of his imagination.


BRIEFS
Debt *City of Chicago O'Hare International Airport Special Facility Revenue Bonds have been awarded to a group headed by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, covering $45 million in special facility revenue bonds for the Lufthansa airline's project, series 1990.
The coupon rate is 7.125 percent, to yield about 7.505 percent at a price of 95.625.


Sandinistas' Booty Sets Off A Bitter Battle in Nicaragua
A legislative move to recover Government property that was requisitioned by the Sandinistas last year as they left office has gained strong popular support but brought a violent response from Sandinistas who want to hold on to the property.
The initiative, sponsored by conservative members of the National Assembly, is aimed at revising special laws that the Sandinistas pushed through in their last days in power.
They awarded tens of millions of dollars of Government-owned land, housing, equipment and other property to Sandinista loyalists in the weeks between their defeat in the elections in February 1990 and when they left power that April.


Quotation of the Day
"In effect, Kuwait is being painted black." -- Dr.
Larry L. Radke, a member of a team of scientists who have been touring the burning oil wells.  [ C5:1. ]


Corrections
A chart on June 17 listing the United States team for the world track and field championships omitted the marathoners.
They are Maria Trujillo, Gordon Bloch, Joy Smith, Steve Spence, John Tuttle and Brad Hudson.


I.B.M. to License Borland Software
The International Business Machines Corporation and the software publisher Borland International Inc. will announce a relationship under which the computer maker will license a Borland program called Objectvision.
The program makes it easier for users to design programs for personal computers.
I.B.M. will use the Borland software with the computer maker's new OS/2 2.0 operating system.


Soviet Hard-Liners Keep Up the Attacks
Hard-line members of the Soviet Parliament pursued their attack on President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's overture to the West today, charging that Soviet moves were not being reciprocated from abroad.
The news conference by leaders of the hard-line Soyuz faction in Parliament indicated that despite Mr.
Gorbachev's success in blunting a challenge from his Prime Minister and security chiefs last week, he could expect continued resistance as he moves toward reforms.


A Tokyo College Dismisses 2 In a Scandal Over Cheating
Two employees at one of Japan's prestigious private universities were dismissed today over charges that they were involved in a growing scandal over cheating on entrance examinations.
Meiji University said the two workers had helped stand-ins pass examinations for more than 10 applicants.
The employees -- Kentaro Takizawa, 48 years old, and Takashi Shimohara, 56 -- were arrested and indicted last week on charges of forging school documents.


Lotus and I.B.M. In Marketing Pact
Moving again to forge links with other computer companies, the International Business Machines Corporation said it would market software under license from the Lotus Development Corporation.
To bolster its business, I.B.M., the world's largest computer maker, has in recent weeks been seeking alliances with its rivals.
Last week, I.B.M. agreed to invest up to $100 million in Wang Laboratories Inc., which will resell some I.B.M. products under the Wang name.


With 7 Days Left, New York City Grapples With Budget Conflicts
Seven days before the start of its new fiscal year, New York City's political leaders yesterday groped through a maze of conflicting proposals to keep the city budget balanced, including a move to save money by stretching out payments to municipal pension funds.
Struggling with the city's worst fiscal problems since the crisis of the mid-1970's, negotiators for Mayor David N. Dinkins and municipal unions hope the changes in the pension payments could save hundreds of millions of dollars in the coming year, people close to the talks said.


Finally, Some Good News For Ayer and 'Fresh' Backer
AS large national advertisers made decisions yesterday on nearly $100 million in advertising accounts up for review, there was good news for two agencies -- Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. and Ayer Inc. -- that had been more used to bad news lately.
Backer Spielvogel Bates, New York, ended a string of account losses, including the $110 million Miller Lite beer account, by retaining the Avis Inc. account, with billings of as much as $35 million.


Taiwan's Financial Plan
Taiwan will use its power as a leading trading economy and its foreign exchange reserves to become an international financial center, its Prime Minister, Hao Po-ts'un, said today.
Taiwan's foreign exchange reserves, at about $74 billion, are among the world's largest.
"We are determined to gain a foothold in this world of competing financial systems," he told more than 200 bankers, officials and academics meeting in Taipei.
The group drafted proposals to allow gold exports, permit foreign exchange trading and make other reforms.
"We are late in starting to compete with other financial centers such as Hong Kong, but we will catch up fast," the Finance Minister, Wang Chien-shien, said.


Europeans Reach Accord On Sales Tax
Members of the European Community tentatively agreed today on a minimum national sales tax, temporarily ending differences that threatened to delay the creation of a single market at the end of 1992.
Britain had opposed any legally binding agreement to set the minimum standard for the value-added tax at 15 percent, effective on Jan. 1, 1993.


Sununu Is Given Another Vote of Confidence by Bush


Dravecky Is Discharged
DAVE DRAVECKY was discharged from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan yesterday, six days after the former Giant pitcher's left arm and shoulder were amputated.
Dr.
MURRAY BRENNAN, chairman of the hospital's Department of Surgery, who performed the operation, described Dravecky's recovery as "superb, both physically and psychologically." The surgeon said that Dravecky's long-term prognosis continues to be excellent. (AP)


Warned Not to Testify, Theft Victim Is Shot
A Brooklyn robbery victim who identified his attackers to the police and later was threatened by the suspects was shot in the head late Sunday on his doorstep, the police said.
The victim, John Singletary, a 31-year-old barber, was in critical but stable condition yesterday at Kings County Hospital, the police said.


Lest We Forget the Deeds of Oliver North
To the Editor:
In a speech to a convention of Southern Baptists, Oliver L. North elicited much sympathy recounting the terrorist threats he says have been directed against him and his family (news item, June 4).
Mr.
North's self-promotion as an implacable foe, and sometime target, of terrorism must be seen in light of the death and real suffering his collusion with terrorists has caused innocent thousands.
Some examples:


Chase Unit Offers $311 Million Issue
Chase Lincoln First Bank N.A., a subsidiary of the Chase Manhattan Corporation, offered $311 million of pass-through securities backed by payments on automobile and light-truck loans through an underwriting group led by Chase Securities Inc.
The securities were priced to yield 7.80 percent, 85 basis points over the prevailing yield on the Treasury's 6 3/4 percent two-year notes at the time of pricing.
The issue has an average life of one and a half years.


Ho-Hum No More, Concrete Goes High-Tech
QUIET advances in materials science, coupled with raw inventiveness, are turning the drab, ho-hum stuff known as concrete into a high-technology marvel that has far greater strength and durability than ever before and some surprising new properties, like flexibility.
Such materials are desirable for creating structures that bend rather than break in earthquakes.
And with concretes up to 10 times stronger than ordinary, builders are making plans for needle-thin skyscrapers that would rise more than a third of a mile into the sky, towering over today's tallest buildings.


Parolee Is Charged in Killing
A 21-year-old man on parole for robbery and assault was arrested yesterday and charged in the beating death of a flower vendor in Washington Heights.
The police said the vendor was killed because he would not give away flowers on Father's Day.
The suspect, David Brandon, of 465 West 157th Street, was arrested yesterday afternoon when he arrived at a meeting with his parole officer, a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, said.
He was later charged with murder and robbery.


Muckler Ponders Move To Sabres' Front Office
JOHN MUCKLER reportedly will leave his job as coach of the Edmonton Oilers to take a front-office position with the Buffalo Sabres.
Muckler will be working under the Sabres' general manager, GERRY MEEHAN, after apparently turning down an offer to be general manager of the expansion Ottawa Senators, The Buffalo News reported yesterday.
The Senators begin play in 1992-1993.


CHRONICLE
NEIL SIMON waived his royalty for a benefit performance of "The Odd Couple" Sunday night, starring TONY RANDALL and JACK KLUGMAN.
The sold-out evening, with dinner afterward at the Pierre, raised nearly $1.2 million for Mr.
Randall's National Actors Theater.
In thanks, Mr.
Randall gave the first annual Odd Couple award to Mr.
Simon, which was accepted by Mr.
Klugman.
The other recipient was AUGUST BUSCH 3d, chairman of Anheuser-Busch, who handed Mr.
Randall the final $100,000 of a $300,000 company gift.


U.S.-North Korea Pact Reported On Return of American Remains
A United States Senator announced here today that Washington had reached an agreement in principle with North Korea on the return of the remains of American servicemen listed as missing in action in the Korean War.
The announcement, by Senator Robert C. Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, came after North Korea handed over 11 sets of remains thought to be those of American servicemen.


2 Youths Die in Queens Fire; Man Is Charged With Arson
Two brothers, 17 and 10 years old, were killed in a fire early yesterday in Bayside, Queens, and a 35-year-old man was arrested and charged with setting the fire, the police said.
The suspect, Carter Ward, of 209-47 45th Drive, in Bayside, used gasoline to start the blaze that raced through the wood frame house at 211-11 45th Road, said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman.


Home Shopping Settlement
A class-action lawsuit against Home Shopping Network Inc. by holders of the company's convertible subordinated debentures has been settled, with the company agreeing to comply with the debentures' original conversion provisions and to pay $15 million to the plaintiffs.
The suit was brought by bondholders who contended that the television retailer, based in St.
Petersburg, Fla., failed to comply with a reset of the conversion price of the bonds.


Thomas Has Lead in Ike
With two metropolitan area titles already to his credit this season, Jeff Thomas of Plainfield West in Edison, N.J., today took a step toward also gaining the Ike championship.
The 32-year-old Thomas raised eyebrows this afternoon when he shot three-under-par 68 at the Old Westbury Golf and Country Club in the opening round of the Ike, which determines the amateur stroke-play champion of the Metropolitan Golf Association.


Allied Flotilla Quickly Clears Mines Off Kuwait
An international flotilla of minesweepers has cleared most of an estimated 1,200 mines off Kuwait's coast months earlier than expected, reopening those waters to commercial shipping, the senior United States Navy officer in the Persian Gulf says.
Two dozen vessels from nine nations, including Germany and Japan, have overcome political hurdles, disparate technical abilities and communication glitches to sift mines from coastal waters that Iraq laid to thwart an allied amphibious landing that never came.


TV Film About Gay Black Men Is Under Attack
An award-winning film documentary on gay black men, to be televised on the public television documentary series "P.O.V." next month, has come under attack for its graphic material and because its producer received a $5,000 grant from the National Endowment for the Arts.
The hourlong film, "Tongues Untied," is on the PBS schedule for July 16 at 10 P.M.
Public stations are not required to broadcast the programs provided by PBS, and they can change the scheduling of programs to best serve their own communities.


Symbols Are Louder Than Action
The sudden resignations on Monday of the presidents of two of Japan's most powerful securities houses, Nomura Securities and Nikko Securities, were clear attempts to use the traditional Japanese technique of self- sacrifice to halt the share-dealing scandal that has engulfed Kabutocho, Tokyo's counterpart to Wall Street.
But it is unlikely that the dramatic developments will put to rest two troubling questions highlighted by the scandal, the biggest to hit the financial industry here in more than two decades: How fair is this huge financial market to those outside its power structure, including foreign investors?
Whose interests are the market's policemen protecting?


The BBC Explores Hollywood's Heart And Finds It Ugly
Movie makers have long been accustomed to turning their eyes on other institutions and simply shrugging their shoulders if there are complaints about the portrayal.
But the BBC recently took a long look at the movie business, and now Hollywood is squirming.
For weeks, bootlegged videotape copies of a six-part series, "Naked Hollywood," have been circulating in the offices of studios, talent agencies and production companies.
At dinner parties, the documentary has also become a popular topic of conversation, provoking winces from those featured in it and guffaws from their friends.


Shell Oil to Sell California Refinery
The Shell Oil Company has put its 68-year-old refinery near Los Angeles up for sale to try to rebuild the company's refining and marketing operations.
The refinery, in Carson, Calif., could bring an estimated $500 million, and analysts said the most probable buyer was the British Petroleum Company.
Shell said it would close the plant if no qualified buyer was found.


Investment in Australia
Australia was the third-largest recipient of Japanese investment, after the United States and Britain, in the last year, with Australia's auto industry attracting most of the cash, according to figures released last week.
The Australia-Japan Economic Institute said Japanese investors put $3.67 billion into Australia, a 14 percent drop from $4.26 billion in the previous year, when investment was unusually high because of a boom in real estate and financial services.


Review/Fashion; Cruise Wear From Europe
The cruise showings by European designers speeded up in New York last week.
Ever since they began selling ready-to-wear in this country on a large scale a decade or so ago, French and Italian designers have homed in on an essentially American creation, the fashion season known as cruise and resort.
Initially, these clothes were meant for northern women who spent a considerable amount of time in warm-weather spots like Palm Beach, Fla., during the winter.
Way back when, some even went on cruises.


Lawyer Suggests Sex Suspect Was Not Named Immediately
A lawyer defending one of the St.
John's University students accused of sexually assaulting another student suggested yesterday that his client was not named by the woman as one of her attackers for at least a month after the episode.
The lawyer, Larry Silverman, who represents 21-year-old Andrew Draghi, is arguing at the trial in Queens that the woman's later identification of Mr.
Draghi as one of the men who she said criminally sodomized and sexually degraded her cannot be trusted.


Hewlett-Packard Offers New Line
The Hewlett-Packard Company has introduced a new line of powerful but modestly priced commercial computers.
Willem P. Roelandts, vice president of the company's Networked Systems Group, said Hewlett-Packard was introducing 16 business systems that he said were six times more powerful, yet generally cheaper, than comparable offerings from I.B.M. and the Digital Equipment Corporation.


Japan's Loans to Mexico
The Export-Import Bank of Japan has signed contracts to make two loans worth a total of 63.6 billion yen, or about $457 million, to two financial institutions in Mexico, the bank said today.
Loans worth 53.6 billion yen, or about $385 million, would be provided to Nacional Financiera S.N.C.
The other, worth 10 billion yen, or about $72 million, is for Nacional Financiera and Banco Nacional de Comercio Exterior.
The first loan would go to the Mexican national oil company, Petroleos Mexicanos, toward producing unleaded gasoline to reduce air pollution by cars.
The second would be used for importing capital goods and other products and services from Japan.
Interest rates for the loans would be based on the prime rate in Japan, the Export-Import bank said.


Oil-Eating Bacteria
French scientists say they have found a bacterium that breaks up steranes, a component of crude oil, more effectively than any other.
Scientists use steranes to help determine the geological history of a sample of crude oil.
From knowing the oil's history, they can also get a better sense of how much of the oil in a particular resevoir might be recoverable.
But because steranes are commonly degraded by bacteria, they are of limited use.


Justices Rule Press Can Be Sued For Divulging a Source's Identity
The Supreme Court ruled today that the First Amendment did not protect a news organization from a lawsuit if it promised to keep the name of a source secret but later disclosed it.
The 5-to-4 decision revived a highly publicized nine-year-old lawsuit by a former political consultant against Minnesota's two biggest newspapers, The Star Tribune in Minneapolis and The St.
Paul Pioneer Press Dispatch.
Lawyers for news organizations said today that the ruling was likely to encourage other such lawsuits.


Cambodian Factions Agree to Halt Arms Imports
Cambodia's warring factions signed an agreement today to stop receiving foreign arms, the latest step toward ending the 12-year-old civil war in the country.
The agreement also formalized the truce declared on Sunday between the Vietnamese-installed Government and the three guerrilla groups that have been fighting to overthrow it.
But the quest for peace still faces major obstacles.


Lore of Shaman Goes Well Beyond Plants
To the Editor:
Whatever knowledge shamans possess about the healing properties of plants ("Shamans and Their Lore May Vanish With Forests," Science Times, June 11), their value to human societies extends beyond their ethnobotanical lore.
Shamans -- found in diverse cultures from the beginning of recorded history -- have served an important community function as links between the natural and supernatural, intercessors with the gods, communicators with spirits, diviners of the future, healers of the present and seekers of divine knowledge.


Vietnam Party Vows to Maintain Absolute Power
Leaders of Vietnam's ruling Communist Party declared today that they had no intention of giving up their absolute hold on power even as the party continued to encourage a sweeping liberalization of the economy.
Their statement, delivered by Nguyen Van Linh, the party leader, was replete with the anti-imperialist language of an era gone by in most of the rest of the Communist world.
A transcript of his remarks, made at the opening session of the party's national congress in Hanoi, the capital, was made available here.


Rufino Tamayo, a Leader in Mexican Art, Dies at 91
Rufino Tamayo, a force in Mexican art for more than 60 years and one of the leaders of the Mexican Renaissance, died yesterday at the National Institute of Nutrition in Mexico City.
He was 91 years old.


Fight Crime, Not Liberty; Senator D'Amato Waffles on Weapons
Senator Alfonse D'Amato says he's tough on crime.
He also wants to do what's best for New York.
Thus he ought to be an enthusiastic supporter of the Brady gun control bill.
Instead he hesitates.
The Brady bill would impose a seven-day waiting period between purchase and delivery of a handgun.
A version before the Senate would also provide money for states to develop better criminal history data bases and would require that by 1993 police conduct background searches of gun buyers.


Tandy Sees Profits Halved; Radio Shack to Add Brands
The Tandy Corporation said today that weakened sales of personal computers in both the United States and Europe would slice its earnings from operations by more than 50 percent in the current quarter, well below Wall Street's expectations.
The company also said it would begin selling popular brand-name products from other manufacturers in its Radio Shack electronics stores.
Such sales will initially be tested in a limited number of stores.
Analysts said the decision marked an overdue break with tradition at Tandy, the nation's largest retailer of consumer electronic products.


Lubrizol Expects Lower Net Income
The Lubrizol Corporation said it expected its net income for the second quarter of the year, which ends June 30, to fall below last year's second-quarter earnings of 92 cents a share, based on preliminary results.
The report caused Lubrizol's shares to tumble $5.875, to $44, on the New York Stock Exchange today, on a volume of 7.4 million shares.
The 11.7 percent drop was the Big Board's third largest in percentage terms.


Doubts Grow Over Time Warner Offering
The stock of Time Warner Inc. fell yesterday to its lowest level since June 5, when the company announced a rights offering to raise capital.
Shares in the media conglomerate lost $2.50 each on the New York Stock Exchange, and closed at $89.25.


Jazz Festival; Solo Piano By Brackeen
The jazz line was what the pianist Joanne Brackeen was after, the sweeping landscape that can be conveyed in a series of single notes.
Ms.
Brackeen, who performed at Weill Recital Hall on Sunday afternoon as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, played a series of standards and originals that at their best contrasted the spareness of one note following the other with clusters of chords, the single notes floating in front of the backdrop created by the harmony.


Laurel and Hardy Facts
To the Editor:
William Safire, in "Carry Me Out of Old Virginny" (column, June 13), a discussion of the actions of Gov.
Douglas Wilder and Senator Charles Robb, refers to "that silent movie classic in which Laurel and Hardy destroyed their neighbor's car while he grimly took apart their house." He has it backward.


Sports of The Times; Supporter Worrying About Seles
WHEREVER Monica Seles is, and whatever she is doing, she picked a wonderful year to miss Wimbledon.
Any tournament that has had one more bomb scare than points played is already in full gloom.
Not only that, but the good folks who run the tournament sent everybody out into the dank evening without refund or rain ticket or even a clipped "sorry." The tournament will eventually begin, but we will not see Seles either in mist or in sunlight.
The 17-year-old, who was supposed to be top-seeded in this tournament, is somewhere in the States, nursing an injury.


Large Gas Find in China
A large natural gas deposit found in northern China will be developed quickly in hopes it will be an economic boon for the area, The China Daily newspaper said today.
The area includes parts of Shaanxi and Gansu provinces and the Ningxia and Inner Mongolia regions, the official newspaper said.
It is one of the poorest areas of China.
Preliminary estimates set an annual output of three billion cubic meters of natural gas for the field.


Intertrack 'Craze' Lands in Florida
The biggest race in horse racing these days is the race for business.
And since the business of racing is primarily the business of betting, the race is on to find new ways to reach you and your betting money before you spend it someplace else, most likely on a lottery or in some casino in Atlantic City or Las Vegas, Nev.


CHRONICLE
VERNON A. WALTERS announced yesterday that he had resigned as United States Ambassador to Germany.
Mr.
Walters, 74 years old, gave no reason for his decision, but said he had told President Bush about it two months ago.
He will stay on until the arrival of his replacement, not yet chosen.
Mr.
Walters, who assumed the post two years ago, oversaw relations with Germany during its tumultuous, complicated reunification, still in progress.


Gore Seeks Formal Inquiry in Hostage Case
Senator Al Gore called today for a formal investigation of persistent allegations that the 1980 Reagan Presidential campaign struck a deal with Iran to delay release of American hostages until after the election.
"Some deals should never be made, whether arms for hostages or hostages for elections," said Mr.
Gore, a Tennessee Democrat who ran unsuccesfully for the 1988 Democratic Presidential nomination and is considered a possible candidate in 1992.


Suffolk Bond Issue On Credit Watch
A $271 million general obligation bond issue from Suffolk County, L.I., received a setback yesterday when the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation reduced its rating on the bonds to BB, from BBB+, and placed the securities on credit watch.
It also reduced the rating on $51 million in 1990 tax anticipation notes to SP-3 from SP-2.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
M.L.B. PROPERTIES -- Named Timothy J. Brosnan vice president for business affairs.


Guards Lax Before Riot, Jail Chief Says
New York State's top prison official said today that many guards at the state's new highest-security prison had become lax before last month's inmate uprising because the officers wanted the prison's experimental program to fail.
The official, Correction Commissioner Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, said that guards at Southport Prison had routinely violated a critical security procedure by leaving inmates unobserved while the officers took unauthorized lunch breaks.
At a hearing on the causes and implications of the riot, Mr.
Coughlin said that many of the 234 Southport officers believed that the jobs of 46 officers who had been laid off would be restored if Southport were turned back into a normal maximum-security prison.


Mt. Pinatubo: Fertilizer for Future Farmers?
The eruption of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines will have a serious and perhaps catastrophic short-term effect on the region, geologists say, but in the long run it may be beneficial.
Volcanic deposits can increase agricultural production, particularly in tropical areas where they replace beneficial elements leached from the soil by heavy rainfall.
Potential agricultural benefits would vary by local circumstance but might show up within 25 years.


White House Stresses Loyalty to Sununu
The White House sought anew today to dampen speculation that John H. Sununu, the chief of staff there, was in danger of losing his job because of embarrassing disclosures about his travels on unofficial business.
But despite another vote of confidence from President Bush, Mr.
Sununu said for the first time that he planned to leave his job sometime after the beginning of Mr.
Bush's second term in January 1993, presuming that the President is re-elected next year.
Mr.
Sununu had said earlier this month that he hoped to remain in the White House for eight years.


Chess
A barrier fell in the 1991 World Microcomputer Championship in Vancouver, British Columbia.
After a chess machine called Chess Machine won with a score of 6-1 in the seven-round Swiss-system tournament, the manufacturer, TASC BV, of Rotterdam, the Netherlands, has put it on sale for $750.
The previous champion, Mephisto, is in the $10,000 price range.
But who needs such a device?
Surely not the 95 percent of the world's players who lose to far lesser microcomputers.
No, Chess Machine, which runs on a card that plugs into a standard slot in an I.B.M.-compatible personal computer, is for those who are curious to cross swords with the best, or for top tournament players who need a tiger of a practice partner that can also be used for research.


Highland Superstores To Cut Management
In its latest effort to cut expenses, Highland Superstores, the financially pressured chain of electronics and appliance stores, said yesterday that it was eliminating five vice presidential positions and that Yale Levin, its chief operating officer, was resigning.
The company, based in Plymouth, Mich., said the management reduction reflected a recent curtailing of its operations and an overall expense-cutting program.
Early this month, the company, one of the country's largest electronic chains, said that it had ceased paying creditors and was closing 32 stores in Texas, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Rhode Island to avoid a bankruptcy court filing.


Review/Television; Of Poets, Politicians and ... Pairs
This week's documentaries on Channel 13, though not up to "A Baltic Requiem," shown last night, do offer variety.
Tonight at 10 P.M., "P.O.V.," the showcase for independent productions, presents three half-hour pieces, beginning with "Twinsburg, Ohio: Some Kind of Weird Twin Thing." It's a visit to the Midwestern town's celebration of Twins Days, which attracts 2,500 sets of look-alikes each year.
The pictures of the congregated pairs of all ages, many dressed identically, are fun. ("I'm Alma. She's Wilma," announces a helpful T-shirt, the twin of which confirms that, yes, "I'm Wilma. She's Alma.")


Music in Review
Orchestra of St. Luke's  Caramoor Festival
Nature and music engaged in one of their periodic wrestling matches here tonight.
Caramoor decided to open its summer season of music.
Nature decided to rain.
Forty-five years in the outdoor festival business, however, have introduced a new cleverness into Caramoor's occasional battles with the elements.
In the last few seasons the temporary canopies at the sides of the Venetian Theater -- where listeners in the center could retreat from the weather -- have been replaced by one all-covering tent.
Wooden floors protect listeners from muddy feet.


Cards Extend 2 Pacts
The St.
Louis Cardinals yesterday gave one-year contract extensions to Manager JOE TORRE and General Manager DAL MAXVILL, running their pacts through 1993.
Torre was hired as manager last August while Maxvill has held his post since 1985. (AP)


Chief of Employment Commission Criticizes G.O.P. Bill on Job Bias
The chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission today urged the White House to reject compromise civil rights bills fashioned by moderate Republicans.
In a letter to John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, Evan J. Kemp, head of the commission, said the compromise would make it "extremely difficult for employers to use educational credentials and objective measures of academic achievement" like tests to determine who to hire or promote.


My Husband Died of Blood-Transfused AIDS
To the Editor:
My husband died a little over a year ago, and he died from acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
He wasn't a drug addict, bisexual, homosexual or a hemophiliac, and he wasn't famous.
Actually, in my eyes, he died from having been hit by a drunk driver.
We were in a terrible car accident a few years ago, and the medical team in the process of saving our lives, gave my husband bad blood.
A time bomb, except neither of us knew about it, until it exploded.


Elaborate Diagnosis For Your System
LIKE a doctor with a patient, QAPlus examines a computer system, measuring its pulse rate and blood pressure and checking for viruses.
Testing for computer viruses is one of the new features added to version 4.52.
And it is easy to use, with its large suite of tests selected from menus, with or without a mouse.
Of course, the more you know about computers the more you will get out of the program.


Higher Rents Approved For New York Tenants
Rent increases affecting at least two million New York City residents were approved last night by the Rent Guidelines Board at a raucous meeting.
The board, by a vote of 5 to 4, approved increases of 4 percent for one-year leases and 6.5 percent for two-year leases for 900,000 rent-stabilized apartments.


Castro, on All the Touchy Subjects
ABC's Jim McKay has lately been in the habit of interviewing the likes of thoroughbred horse trainers Nick Zito and D. Wayne Lukas.
But there he was last Thursday night, in a conference room at the Palace of the Revolution in Havana, interviewing President Fidel Castro for four and a half hours.
But Castro was late.
The talk with the former pitcher, which will most likely be broadcast as part of ABC's coverage of the Pan American Games in August, was scheduled for 2:30 P.M., but the man who has run Cuba for only slightly longer than McKay has been with "Wide World of Sports" didn't stroll in until 10.


Panel Urges $1,000-a-Child Tax Credit
A Federal advisory commission whose members span the political spectrum announced today that they had reached a fragile consensus to support tax cuts and an increase in Government spending to improve the lot of children.
The chief recommendation was for adoption of a $1,000 income tax credit for each child in America.


Jazz Festival; Bobby Short Celebrates New York
"I'm crazy about New York; it made me what I am today," announced Bobby Short at the beginning of "Bobby Short's New York, N.Y.," a pleasantly nostalgic JVC Jazz Festival concert at Carnegie Hall on Sunday evening.
With his guests Margaret Whiting, Ruth Brown and the Amherst Saxophone Quartet, Mr.
Short evoked a picture-postcard vision of Manhattan night life in a more optimistic era, when the Harlem Renaissance was in full swing and the Gershwins and Cole Porter were writing songs.
All of the evening's selections either had New York City as a subject or were composed by New Yorkers.
Mr.
Short performed alternately in a trio format and with a sextet, led by Dick Hyman, that included a number of distinguished jazz veterans, among them Harry (Sweets) Edison on trumpet and Bucky Pizzarelli on guitar.


British Trade Deficit Widens
Britain's trade deficit grew to $:523 million, or $852 million, in May, from $:437 million, or $712 million, in April.
Other figures from the Central Statistical Office illustrated the depth of the recession, with the economy contracting for the third successive quarter.
Britain's gross domestic product was down by 2.5 percent on a year-on-year basis in the first quarter.


Acquisition Planned by Wachovia
The Wachovia Corporation, one of the South's leading banks, announced yesterday that it would buy the South Carolina National Corporation in a stock swap valued at $835 million.
Wachovia, based in Winston-Salem, N.C., but with headquarters in Atlanta as well, has been seeking to expand in the Southeast.
The acquisition will increase Wachovia's assets to $32.7 billion, placing it among the 20 biggest banking companies in the country.


Reduce New York Taxes and Restructure the State Government; How to Raise Revenue
To the Editor:
"New York's Ordeal: The Tax Exit" (editorial, June 13) will be welcomed by working people throughout New York State.
Last March, the New York State A.F.L.-C.I.O. released a report, "Taxes We Can Live With," that made the same point.
Our study of taxation, produced by an independent economist, concluded that the way out of the fiscal crisis was to increase revenue by making the tax system more progressive and elastic, chiefly the personal income tax.


Defendant in Bombing Case Defends Lies in Court
Prosecutors tried today to portray the man charged in the mail-bomb slayings of a Federal judge and a civil rights lawyer as a deceitful, scheming witness.
In his fourth day on the stand the defendant, Walter Leroy Moody Jr., acknowledged he has previously lied in court.
But he said he was justified because the court system had used the lies against him.
"If I think it's justified, I can lie," Mr.
Moody said.


Profits Soar on Wall Street
The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that its member firms in the first quarter racked up their best quarterly profits since before the October 1987 stock market crash.
The earnings were the sixth highest and were a shot in the arm for Wall Street, whose ranks have shrunk by an estimated 50,000 employees since the 1987 crash.
In addition, 1991 is expected to produce better results for the industry than 1990, when Wall Street was hit by the emerging tensions in the Persian Gulf.


New Software for Apple Links With I.B.M. Units
As part of an increased effort to attract corporate customers, Apple Computer Inc. yesterday introduced its first software package that allows users of large networks of its Macintosh personal computers to communicate easily with I.B.M. mainframes and minicomputers.
Analysts said the Apple software was an improvement over the cumbersome communications software now available from third-party suppliers.


INSIDE
New Trial in Police Shooting
A court overturned the manslaughter conviction of a Miami police officer whose killing of a black man led to racial disturbances in 1989.
Page A24.


Brazilian Leader Acts to Protect the Amazon
Facing criticism over Brazil's Amazon policies, President Fernando Collor de Mello has dismissed the head of Brazil's Indian protection agency and has unveiled a program to allow foreign financing of environmental projects here.
In another move, he abolished tax subsidies today that had made it profitable to cut down Amazon rain forest for farming and ranching.


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices closed down today.
The Nikkei index of 225 stocks closed at 23,766.38, down 141.04, or 0.59 percent.


5 Bystanders, Including Child, Hit By Gunfire
Five bystanders -- a 5-year-old girl, an off-duty correction officer and three men in a grocery store -- were shot and wounded yesterday in Queens and the Bronx, the police said.
The 5-year-old girl was walking to her Queens home with her parents when she was struck by a bullet fired during a dispute among four young men over a girl, the police said.


Preparing for London Conference, Gorbachev Meets With Reformers
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev conferred today with the chief architects of a radical plan for reforming the Soviet economy and was reported to be "hard at work" on his own proposal to present to the leaders of seven economic powers next month in London.
The Soviet leader described as "remarkable" the complex free-market economic strategy fashioned by a group led by Grigory A. Yavlinsky, a liberal Soviet economist, and Graham Allison, a Harvard professor, the two said after visiting the Kremlin.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Traded Dan Petry, pitcher, to the Atlanta Braves for Vincent Rosario, infielder, and assigned Rosario to Toledo of the International League.
Recalled Rusty Meacham, pitcher, from Toledo.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Activated Candy Maldonado, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Kevin Brown, pitcher, to Denver of the American Association.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Acquired Dan Petry, pitcher, from the Detroit Tigers.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Recalled Gino Minutelli, pitcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
BASKETBALL World Basketball League
YOUNGSTOWN PRIDE -- Signed Ken Redfield and Kenny Sanders, forwards.
Waived Duane Washington, guard.
Placed Tim Jackson, forward, on the taxi squad.
FOOTBALL National Football League
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Jeff Mickel, offensive tackle.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Ron Goetz, linebacker, and Roderick Graves, running back.
SOCCER Major Soccer League
CLEVELAND CRUNCH -- Signed George Fernandez, defenseman, to a multiyear contract.
OLYMPICS
USOC -- Named Gary K. Alexander director of U.S. Olympic Festivals. COLLEGE
FULLERTON STATE -- Named Mike Bokosky men's assistant basketball coach.


Philadelphia High Schools to Offer Condoms
The Philadelphia school board voted on Monday to approve a policy permitting community health-care and social-service groups to distribute condoms in city high schools.
The school system joins New York City and several other systems allowing the distribution of condoms.
New York schools will begin distributing them in the fall.


Nets' Dilemma: Is It Anderson or Owens?
The Nets' coaching staff and Willis Reed, the vice president of basketball operations, want to pick Billy Owens tonight in the college draft.
Joe Taub and some of the other owners are considering Kenny Anderson with the second choice.
They are also listening to trade offers.
Who will win the tug-of-war?
Will the Nets choose Owens, the versatile forward from Syracuse, or Anderson, the flashy point guard from Georgia Tech?
Will they gamble and trade the valuable pick?


Disney Film's Cool Debut
The Walt Disney Company's highly awaited new release "The Rocketeer" had a lukewarm opening this past weekend, taking in roughly $9.5 million at 1,600 theaters.
While inital sales were considered respectable, according to one executive close to Disney, the company had hoped it would open stronger.
In the film industry, the initial performance is measured on a per-screen basis.
The figure for the 'Rocketeer' is about $6,000 a screen.
By way of comparison, "Robin Hood," the Warner Brothers film starring Kevin Costner, earned about $11,000 a screen on its opening weekend.


Prosecutor Presses Dropping Murder Case for 4 Officers
The new Queens District Attorney said yesterday that he would ask a judge to dismiss murder and all other charges against four police officers indicted in the death of a car-theft suspect because of insufficient evidence that they acted in concert with a fifth officer.
In addition, the prosecutor, Richard A. Brown, said he would seek to have the charges against the fifth officer reduced from murder to manslaughter and criminally negligent homicide.
While the officer's actions in using a chokehold might have been reckless or negligent, they did not amount to "depraved indifference to human life," Mr.
Brown said.


Gooden's Biggest Foe: The Doc of Yore
Dwight Gooden took the mound for the Mets at Shea Stadium last night, matched against Montreal's Dennis Martinez.
It was advertised as a pitching duel, as it should have been, because all the right ingredients, namely two very good pitchers, were in the mix.
For Gooden, though, being billed as very good often isn't enough to satisfy what he himself, what New York, the Mets, the news media and baseball in general thirst for: the return of what used to be.


Minorco Will Sell Its Stake in Adobe
Minorco S.A., the Luxembourg-based unit of the Anglo American Corporation of South Africa, said it intended to sell its 47.6 percent stake in the Adobe Resources Corporation, the American gas and oil exploration company.
It said the move was part of a strategy to transform Minorco into a mining and metals business and that all passive North American investments were under review.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Austine McDonnell Hearst, a former reporter whose husband is the editor in chief of the Hearst newspapers, misstated the occupation of her first husband, Igor Cassini.
He was a newspaper columnist. (Oleg Cassini, the designer, is Igor Cassini's brother.)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11
The states of Slovenia and Croatia issued declarations of independence, which could lead to full secession if their demands for a new, loosely bound Yugoslavia are not acceptable in Belgrade.
Page A1


Merc Disciplines 5 Traders
Five traders on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange have been disciplined for violating exchange rules, a Merc spokesman said.
One trader, Bruce P. Mattson, was fined $15,000 and suspended from trading for 15 business days for selling Swiss franc contracts in May 1988 for his personal account before selling for customers, the Merc said on Monday.


Review/Theater; Struggling to Love, But Aware of the Odds
"I think these are terrible times to be a parent in," says Christine Baranski, as one of the two wives trying to enjoy a Fourth of July Fire Island weekend with their husbands in Terrence McNally's fine new play, "Lips Together, Teeth Apart." Her sister-in-law, Swoosie Kurtz, counters: "I think these are terrible times to be
anything
in."
The times, of course, are our own, but on the surface they don't seem so terrible.
In "Lips Together," a comedy that hurts, two affluent couples laze about a newly inherited beachhouse that they liken to paradise -- and whose market value they estimate at $800,000.
As designed by John Lee Beatty at the Manhattan Theater Club, the house floats on a breeze-swept landscape of dunes and is equipped with a glorious expanse of blond-wood deck, a kitchen bespeaking the tyranny of shelter magazines and, reaching toward the audience's lap, a swimming pool whose crystalline blue is pure Hockney.
"I can see right to the bottom," says Nathan Lane, as Ms.
Kurtz's husband, a New Jersey building contractor, when he first goes near the water.


Aid Plan for New York City Snarled in State Fiscal Fight
With New York City government leaders still waiting to learn how much state aid to expect, state lawmakers said today that the city's aid package had become entangled in the broader issue of how to restore hundreds of millions of dollars in state aid vetoed by the Governor.
The linkage raised the possibility today that the city would have to prepare its budget for the coming fiscal year, which starts next week, without knowing precisely how much state aid it will receive.


Moscow Journal; Young Scholars Start to Disconnect the Party Line
Frustrated and embittered by the orthodoxy of the Soviet world of scholarship, many of Aleksei Titkov's young colleagues took to drink.
Others emigrated.
Most grew lazy and bored.
The most despondent killed themselves.
Mr.
Titkov, a 31-year-old political historian, said he could not take any of those paths, though he, too, felt constrained by the Soviet system's deference to age over excellence, conformity over controversy.


Japan Stock Inquiry Urged
Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu asked the Finance Ministry today to investigate a share-dealing scandal in which Japan's four leading brokerage houses have admitted to compensating some big customers improperly for stock market losses.
Later the Finance Minister, Ryutaro Hashimoto, said his ministry would continue to investigate the reported wrongdoing.
But he emphasized that Japan would not be influenced by the views of other countries, even though foreign investors were among those discriminated against by the practices of the Japanese brokerage houses.


The Poorest Americans; A Bold -- Flawed -- Remedy for Children
Six words stand out from the 30 months of work and 390 pages of report just issued by the bipartisan National Commission on Children: "Today, children are the poorest Americans." Of all the obstacles and miseries the commission addressed, the highest priority attaches to the fact that one of every five children lives in poverty.
It's a shaming fact, one that calls for a bold response, and the commission gives one.
It proposes a dramatic tax credit worth $1,000 for every child.
The commission, headed by Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th, also calls for health insurance for all pregnant women and children, a test of child support insurance and other programs.


Open Positions on Short Sales Up 3.8% on Nasdaq
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday an increase in the short interest in actively traded over-the-counter securities in its national market system for the four weeks that ended on June 14.
A total of 269.8 million shares were held short and not yet covered in mid-June, it said, compared with 260 million shares in the period that ended May 15.
The figure, an increase of 9.8 million shares, or about 3.8 percent, represents short selling in 2,299 stocks; in May the short selling was spread among 2,270 issues.


The Pop Life
Aaron Neville, Solo
No one else in the world sounds like Aaron Neville, the New Orleans tenor who has gained belated recognition as one of the greatest of all pop-soul singers.
That recognition should increase as listeners discover his first full-length solo album, "Warm Your Heart" (A&amp;M).


Amoco Approved For Soviet Project
The Amoco Corporation said it had received permission from the Soviet Union to work on the development of an oil field in the Caspian Sea.
The Azeri field was discovered in 1987, but production has been delayed by financial constraints.
Amoco said its subsidiary, the Amoco Eurasia Petroleum Company, would help develop wells and pipelines for the field.


DOCTORS CONDEMN ABORTION RULING
Delegates to the annual convention of the American Medical Association today condemned any Federal interference with doctors who provide advice about abortion or any other medical matter.
On a voice vote and without debate, the House of Delegates, the A.M.A.'s policymaking body, urged repeal of all laws and regulations that "prevent physicians from freely discussing with or providing information to patients about medical care and procedures or interfere with the physician-patient relationship."


600 Hasidim May Be Evicted From Suburban Enclave
Malka Taub, a mother of 10, moved with her family from the Borough Park section of Brooklyn 11 years ago to help establish a yeshiva in this heavily wooded suburb of northern Westchester, escaping what she remembered was a "rough city."
Now, with 600 others -- faculty members and students of the K'Hal Adas Kashau yeshiva and their families -- Mrs.
Taub faces eviction from this 169-acre site that has been transformed into a Hasidic enclave, because the yeshiva failed to meet its mortgage payments.


Quiet Czech Triumph: Russians Out
In a modest ceremony at the Foreign Ministry, a milestone in Czechoslovak history was reached today.
Lieut.
Gen.
Eduard Vorobyov, commander of Soviet forces, and Lieut.
Gen.
Rudolf Duchacek of the Czechoslovak Army signed a protocol ending 23 years of Soviet military occupation.
The last units of the army that arrived as invaders in 1968 left last week.
Only a rock concert on Monday night marked the event; it was attended mainly by people who were not yet born in 1968.


National Gallery Wing Set to Open in London
After a decade of planning, the building that fueled an angry national debate here about the merits of modern architecture -- and started Prince Charles on a career as architecture critic -- is ready to open.
The Sainsbury Wing, a $60 million extension of the National Gallery on the northwest corner of Trafalgar Square, is now filled with about 250 paintings by Giotto, van Eyck, Durer, Botticelli, Raphael, Leonardo and others.
It is to be inaugurated by Queen Elizabeth II in a formal ceremony on July 9 and opened to the public on the 10th.
By that time, gallery officials hope, the brilliantly understated rooms in which these works are hung will finally make everyone forget the furor.


Foreign Affairs; A Nuclear Ripoff?
Even as the Administration moves to cut the nuclear weapons stockpile almost in half, Congress continues to vote billions annually to fund nuclear warheads programs.
The program exceeds $7 billion, when the White House and Congressional leaders are saying they have no new money for children and cities.
And at the very time when extra Energy Department dollars should be going to clean up the dangerous pollution from past nuclear weapons production, a pivotal Senate subcommittee has taken $108 million away from cleanup programs and added these funds to weapons research and development programs already exceeding $2 billion.


Four Decades Later, Korean War Veterans March With Pride


Silver Supply Meets All of the Demand
To the Editor:
"Silver soared to an eight-month high yesterday amid speculative buying prompted in part by an industry report that demand for the metal was exceeding production" (Business Day, June 7).


A REVIVAL IS SEEN FOR 'JUNK BONDS' AS MARKET GAINS
The Wall Street market for high-risk corporate bonds, which fueled the corporate takeovers of the 1980's only to collapse after a series of defaults and bankruptcies, is showing signs of life.
More than a year after the bankruptcy of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., which pioneered and promoted the market, prices for high-risk, low-grade "junk bonds" have improved sharply, the market seems calmer and major buyers, sellers and underwriters are starting to describe the recovery as viable and real.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about a new satellite radio service misidentified the company that lost large sums on videodisk technology in the early 1980's.
It was the RCA Corporation, not Sony.


White House Memo; 'Indispensability' of Sununu Is Creating Hard Questions
In this city of hyperbole and illusion, myths grow like Jack's beanstalk.
One of the capital's most beloved myths is the one about indispensability.
Important officials begin to believe they are irreplaceable and invulnerable.
The doppelganger effect sets in, as staff workers confuse themselves with their bosses, the elected officials, and that is where the trouble begins.


Simon Siegel, 85, Dies; Former ABC Executive
Simon B. Siegel, a former executive vice president in the American Broadcasting Companies and an instrumental figure in the growth of the broadcasting conglomerate, died on Sunday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Eastchester, N.Y.
He died of cancer, a spokeswoman for ABC said.


Pilot Confusion Blamed in Detroit Jet Crash
Confusion in the cockpit of a Northwest Airlines jetliner was blamed by Federal safety officials today for a runway crash that killed eight people in Detroit last Dec. 3.
Ruling on the probable cause of the accident, the National Transportation Safety Board cited "lack of proper crew coordination" in the cockpit of the DC-9 as it moved in heavy fog shortly before being struck by a Northwest Boeing 727 that was rolling down the runway before takeoff.


Graham Leaves Her Estate To Head of Dance Company
Martha Graham has left her estate to Ron Protas, artistic director of the Martha Graham Dance Company and an associate of Miss Graham for 22 years.
The choreographer, who died on April 1 at age 96, had no immediate survivors.
In a will that was executed in 1989 and is soon to be filed for probate, Miss Graham made no specific bequests of any kind but asked that Mr.
Protas distribute some personal effects "in accordance with my wishes, which are known to him."
"She worked out a list of friends and dancers," Mr.
Protas said this week.
"She loved doing that."


Inquiry on AIDS Dentist Finds Unsettling Pattern
Medical sleuths investigating a Florida dentist who infected five patients with the AIDs virus are piecing together a disturbing picture of deception, self-interest and unsafe professional practices.
Dr.
Harold W. Jaffe, deputy director for science at the Centers for Disease Control's division of HIV/AIDS in Atlanta, said health officials there were still trying to explain how the virus spread to patients of Dr.
David J. Acer, the only health worker in the United States known to have transmitted the virus to a patient.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
New York City Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority priced $399.7 million in general purpose revenue bonds through a group of underwriters led by Goldman Sachs &amp; Co.
Yields on the short-term serial bonds range from 4.75 percent in 1992 to about 7.08 percent in 2007; long-term yields range from 7.168 percent in 2011 to 7.229 percent in 2020.
Another long-term bond has been priced with a 6 percent coupon to yield 7.178 percent in 2022. *
West One Bancorp, Boise, Idaho, priced $50 million in convertible debentures due in 2006 to yield 7.75 percent through Salomon Brothers.
COMMON STOCK *
Mutual Risk Management's 2.5 million shares of common stock were priced at $16.50 a share and listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol MM.
The company is based in Hamilton, Bermuda.
Morgan Stanley was the lead manager.
RATINGS *
Consoldiated Natural Gas Co.'s ratings on $1.4 billion in senior debt and commerical paper -- AA- and A-1+, respectively -- were reaffirmed by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp., which said the Pittsburgh-based company's pipeline operations have not been affected by the current low prices for natural gas.


Comparing Before and After In a Salute to Film Sequels
Did time treat these movie characters kindly?
Did they learn from their mistakes?
Did they change, or was someone simply just eager to take an old vehicle out for a new spin?
The answers can be found in the next 10 weeks at the Biograph Cinema, 225 West 57th Street, Manhattan, where a series called Sequels, Prequels and Close Relations centers on some familiar movie figures, showing us where they were going and where they had been.
No series on this subject would be complete without the trio of "Godfather" films (Aug. 25 to 31), or without the expertly paired Robin Hood duo that began its six-day run this week (the 1938 Errol Flynn swashbuckler, "The Adventures of Robin Hood," and Richard Lester's 1976 "Robin and Marian," with Sean Connery and Audrey Hepburn).
The first and third Indiana Jones films (July 4 to 6) and the first and third "Rockys" (July 30 to 31) can also be seen.
Rough and Royal
But this program, which also includes the two "Die Hard" shoot 'em ups (July 23 to 24), is more eclectic than the usual group of Hollywood follow-ups.
Francois Truffaut's Antoine Doinel films "The 400 Blows" (1959) and "Stolen Kisses" (1968) may be seen Aug. 15 to 17; Henry VIII and his daughter Elizabeth I are represented by "The Private Life of Henry VIII" (1933), with Charles Laughton, and "Young Bess" (1953), which stars Jean Simmons and which has Laughton in a reprise of his earlier role.


Beazer Shifting to U.S. In Sale of Europe Units
Beazer P.L.C. said today that it planned to sell its European house-building, real estate and contracting operations to concentrate on its building-materials businesses in the United States.
The conglomerate, which owns the Koppers Company in Pittsburgh, a building-materials concern, said it would offer all of its European operation to the public and would list the stock on the London Stock Exchange, probably in late September.
It had said on April 23 that it was considering such a move.


Food Notes
Tradition on S.I.
On the Fourth of July, the Richmondtown Restoration of the Staten Island Historical Society will stage an old-fashioned ice-cream social.
Starting at 2 P.M., visitors to the restored colonial village can watch ice cream being made and sample the results.


FLORIDA EXECUTES INFORMER'S KILLER
A man who had tried to inject a drug informer with Drano and battery acid and then shot him to death was executed today in the electric chair at the state prison here.
The 46-year-old prisoner, Bobby Marion Francis, was put to death less than 24 hours after the United States Supreme Court sharply limited the right of inmates to pursue Federal court appeals after missing deadlines for appealing their cases in state court.


Blurred Color Line
To The Living Section:  Re: Elizabeth Atkins's piece, "When Life Isn't Simply Black or White,"  [ June 5 ] .
Do we suddenly have more racial categories, or could this perhaps mark the beginning of the end for racial categories as a dominant force in American life?
We are limping to the end of the century that W. E. B. Du Bois predicted would be dominated by the color line.
As that line blurs, and we realize that we are
all
of "mixed race," perhaps we can learn to look beneath the skin.
WILL MASTERS Palo Alto, Calif.


Why Bridgeport Had To File for Bankruptcy
To the Editor:
"Needless Bankruptcy in Bridgeport" (editorial, June 14) observes that bankruptcy should not provide an easy alternative to municipal deficits, but should be resorted to only when all else fails.
Unfortunately, you fail to note that protective legislation pending in the Connecticut Legislature would have precluded Bridgeport from filing for bankruptcy.
Political observers believed that such legislation would have been passed on the final day of the Legislature's regular session, and if the option were ever to be available, it had to be exercised before such enactment.
More than 35 states now preclude such a filing without state consent.


Robert O'Byrne, Writer and Producer, 74
Robert O'Byrne, a theater producer and writer, died on June 18 at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 74 years old and lived in Bel Air and Rancho Mirage, Calif.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, the former Gloria Monty.


Knicks Will Take the Best of What's Left
Barring an 11th-hour trade today, the Knicks will have the 12th pick in tonight's draft.
They will not get a franchise player drafting from that position.
But they should get someone who can help the franchise.
If the draft proceeds as anticipated, the Knicks should select one of six players -- Greg Anthony, Stacey Augmon, Rich King, Luc Longley, Stanley Roberts or Brian Williams.
Keeping with the cloak-and-dagger tradition of pre-draft posturing, the Knicks' player personnel director, Ernie Grunfeld, has refused to reveal which player New York covets most.


Manufacturers' Europe Plan
The Manufacturers Hanover Corporation said yesterday that it would revamp its European operations and begin overseeing them from London rather than New York.
The European business will be split into a credit-linked group and a capital markets group, instead of many units operating independently, the company said.
Job changes will include cutting 50 of the 1,000- member London staff this week.
Further cuts may follow, Manufacturers Hanover said, explaining that the job cuts in London were part of a plan announced a year ago to eliminate 1,400 positions worldwide.


Sumner Locke Elliott, a Novelist, Playwright and Actor, Dies at 73
Sumner Locke Elliott, a novelist and playwright whose fiction drew upon his formative years in his native Australia, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old.
He died of colon cancer, a friend and fellow writer, Whitfield Cook, said.
Mr.
Elliott's career was divided into three parts, first as an actor in major English-language plays in Australia, then as a leading writer of more than 30 original plays and scores of adaptations in the golden age of live American television of the 1950's and then as a best-selling writer of a dozen artful novels.


Visits for the Elderly
To The Living Section:
Elisabeth Rosenthal's article "These Psychiatrists Make House Calls For Trapped People"  [ May 22 ]  accurately describes the effectiveness of servicing the homebound.


60-Minute Gourmet
IN the world of glamorous fruits and vegetables, prunes probably rank near the bottom, somewhere close to rutabagas.
Yet these luscious, sweet dried plums are commonly used in cakes, pies and desserts.
They also have a useful role in meat dishes, especially with pork.
A traditional American recipe is roast loin of pork stuffed with prunes and apples.
Usually the fruit is stuffed between the chops and roasted along with it, imparting a lovely sweetness to the meat.


High-Tech Medicine Plays Physicians Best; Blame Congress
To the Editor:
Referrals by physicians to diagnostic facilities in which they have a financial interest (front page, June 2) must, inevitably, distort their judgment, breed overuse and encourage greed.
It is fundamentally wrong, self-dealing and ethically no different from fee splitting.
But the early stimulus that created this trend was Congress and Federal regulation.


The Kindest Cuts of All: A Master Butcher's Master Strokes
FORGET the baker and the candlestick maker. For Bruno Guibert, butcher was enough.
"For some reason, being a butcher was what I wanted to do from the time I was a kid, and I had made up my mind for sure when I was about 16," he explained in rapid-fire French one morning last week at Les Halles (pronounced lay-AHL), a restaurant and butcher shop at 411 Park Avenue South (28th Street).
A native of Nantes in Brittany, a son of grape growers, Mr.
Guibert, who is now 23 years old, has been the head butcher Les Halles since last November.


Kuwait Says Martial Law Ends Today
The Justice Minister said today that martial law in Kuwait will end on Wednesday.
His announcement ended speculation that the rule by martial law imposed at the end of the Persian Gulf war might be temporarily extended again, as it was a month ago.
With the expiration of martial law, further trials of defendants charged with collaborating with Iraq during its occupation of Kuwait will move to regular civil courts.
But beyond that, the change is expected to have little immediate effect on how Kuwait's royal family rules the emirate.


Gillett Holdings Seeks Shelter in Chapter 11
Gillett Holdings Inc., the owner of the Vail and Beaver Creek ski resorts in Colorado, said late yesterday that it had filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
Several of the creditors of the financially troubled company, which also owns meatpacking and broadcasting businesses, had filed a lawsuit against Gillett in February to force it into Chapter 11 proceedings.
Among Gillet's creditors are the Fidelity Management Trust Company, Apollo Partners, the Massachusetts Financial Services Company and the Allstate Insurance Company.


Atlantis Is Readied for Its Next Mission


A.T.&amp;T. Executive Is Given Global Duties
Randall L. Tobias, a vice chairman at the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, has been put in charge of the communications giant's international business.
Mr.
Tobias, 49 years old, will oversee all of A.T.&amp; T.'s planning, development and operations outside the United States, the company said yesterday.
Other executive responsibilities have also been changed as A.T.&amp; T. focuses more sharply on what its chairman, Robert E. Allen, has labeled the company's primary objective: globalization.


Durables Orders Up 3.8% in May
New orders for manufactured durable goods rose 3.8 percent in May, the second straight sizable increase and the biggest in more than a year, the Commerce Department reported today.
The rise, combined with other figures released today on home sales, consumer confidence and auto sales, added significantly to evidence that the economy is climbing out of recession.
The report also dispelled doubts raised by recent data on unemployment claims and machine tool orders.


Another Thorn In Plan to Install New Turnstiles
Efforts to bring an automated fare-collection system to New York City's subways and buses were further complicated yesterday when a third competitor for the contract to install electronic turnstiles accused the Metropolitan Transportation Authority of unfair bidding practices and threatened legal action.
General Farebox Inc. of Elk Grove Village, Ill., called the M.T.A.'s procurement procedures "illegal and unethical" because the authority has refused to let the company submit a new bid for the contract, while at the same time the agency has reopened the bidding to two other competitors.


Consumer Confidence Up Slightly
Consumer confidence has risen slightly this month but remains at a level that suggests the economy is still weak, the Conference Board said yesterday.
The private business research group said its consumer confidence index rose to 78, from the 76.4 reading in May.
The figures represent a comparison to a reading of 100 for the base year of 1985.


Winery Wants 'Pacific Coast' Appellation
ALLEN C. SHOUP, who runs Chateau Ste.
Michelle, Washington State's largest winery, wants the Federal Government to allow a "Pacific Coast" appellation for wines blended from grapes grown in California, Oregon and Washington.
Stimson Lane, a wine and spirits company that owns Chateau Ste.
Michelle and its huge sister, Columbia Crest, asked the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in 1990 whether it would permit a tristate label, the nation's first.
Last month the bureau said yes, adding that the three states must consent.


Allied-Signal Aerospace Names President-Elect
Daniel P. Burnham says he has loved every job he has ever had, and most of them have been within the conglomerate Allied-Signal Inc.
Now, Mr.
Burnham is moving to still another post in the corporation: president-elect of its Allied-Signal Aerospace Company.
Mr.
Burnham will become president of the aerospace unit in January, upon the retirement of the current president, Roy H. Ekrom, 62.
Mr.
Burnham, 44, will also become an executive vice president of the parent company.


Two Small Agencies Unite To Pull In Bigger Accounts
TWO of New York's promising young agencies are merging, hoping that by pooling their expertise the new agency will attract more and bigger clients.
The merger, scheduled to be announced today, combines Carroll Raj Stagliano, skilled in account management and planning, and Weiss, Whitten, known for its creativity.
The new agency, which keeps the clients each had before, is named Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano.


Study Questions Routine Molar Removal
AMERICAN dentists and oral surgeons are extracting far too many wisdom teeth, a new study suggests.
If surgeons removed only those wisdom teeth that actually caused problems, researchers say, the nation would save at least $150 million a year in medical expenses with no ill effects.
And tens of thousands of people, mostly teen-agers, would be spared the aches, pains and complications that can result from the surgery.


Prisoners' View of Riot: A Reaction to Brutality
A lawyer for inmates in New York State's highest-security Southport Prison today presented their version of what he described as inhumane and racially inflamed conditions that had contributed to a riot last month.
The representative, Tom Terrizzi, a managing attorney for Prisoners Legal Services of New York, asserted that Southport guards frequently beat inmates without provocation and taunted them with racial slurs.
He said an inmate had told him that on May 26, two days before the uprising, a guard, whom Mr.
Terrizzi did not identify, threw prisoners' food on the floors of their cells and chanted his support for the Ku Klux Klan.
Inmates Mostly Minorities
Mr.
Terrizzi did not elaborate, nor was he questioned, about the incident in his testimony before the State Commission of Correction, an oversight panel, which is looking into the Southport uprising.
He said his testimony, and a written report that accompanied it, were based on interviews with more than 20 inmates and letters from almost 200 prisoners at Southport.


P.&amp; G. Paper Deal
Canadian Pacific Forest Products Ltd. agreed to sell its Facelle tissue business to the Canadian subsidiary of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company for undisclosed terms.
Under the agreement, which requires approval of Canadian Government authorities, Procter's Canadian unit will acquire all of the tissue business of the Canadian Pacific operation, including a manufacturing plant in Toronto and the Facelle franchise for facial and bathroom tissues and paper towels.
Sales for those products totaled $170.5 million (Canadian) last year, or about $148 million (United States) at current exchange rates.


Rebels in Peru Open Drive, Killing 60 People in a Week
Peru's most violent and powerful insurgency group has mounted an offensive against the Government of Alberto Fujimori that has left more than 60 dead in just the last week.
The drive by the Shining Path guerrilla movement commemorates the fifth anniversary of the execution of more than 100 of the group's members in a Lima prison.
Though the Government said it was prepared for the attacks, the killings were carried out with near impunity in many parts of the country, taking the lives of elected officials, students, peasant workers and soldiers.


Paul Ecke Dies at 96; Poinsettia Developer
Paul Ecke Sr., a German immigrant who turned the poinsettia into a traditional Christmas plant, died Friday at his home.
He was 96 years old.
Mr.
Ecke (pronounced EH-kee) was nicknamed "Mr. Poinsettia" for developing varieties of the plant that could be grown during Christmastime and for promoting the Yuletide merits of a relatively obscure plant.


Mutombo: It's When Not Where He Goes
Ask Dikembe Mutombo where he thinks he will be selected in tonight's National Basketball Association draft and the 7-foot-2-inch Georgetown center from Zaire smiles and says: "I don't know and I have no preference. All I know is I'm going to get a check."
It will be a big one, too, its size depending on where he will be chosen.
Mutombo has been projected to be taken anywhere between first and fourth.


About New York
As an estates and trusts lawyer, Josh Rubenstein learned never to discuss something as crass as death's inevitability.
To well-heeled clients, he says, "Should you someday die. . . ."
This expert in tying up loose financial ends for handsome fees at the Manhattan firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin also advises people whose lives seem nothing but loose ends.
He gives free counseling on estate planning to people with AIDS.
As the epidemic spreads, these clients are now mostly poor women.


Wells Fargo's Wall St. Shocker
Wells Fargo &amp; Company stunned Wall Street today by announcing that it would increase its reserve for loan losses in the second quarter to about $350 million, or more than four times the $85 million it set aside in the first quarter of 1991.
The increase will sharply lower earnings.
The announcement confirmed some investors' fears that the recession and the real estate slump would drag down California banks as it has banks in the Southwest and Northeast.


2 YUGOSLAV STATES VOTE INDEPENDENCE TO PRESS DEMANDS
The Parliaments of the Yugoslav republics of Slovenia and Croatia overwhelmingly passed declarations of independence Tuesday that could lead to full secession if their demands for a new, more loosely bound Yugoslavia are not met by Belgrade.
After an emergency late-night meeting, Yugoslavia's federal Government responded early this morning by calling the republics's actions illegal and ordering national army and police units to seize control posts along Slovenia's borders.


Tom P. Peters Sr., Hatmaker, 100
Tom P. Peters Sr., a hatmaker who sent his products to Presidents and other celebrities, died of liver cancer on Sunday at All Saints Episcopal Hospital-Cityview.
He was 100 years old.
Mr.
Peters and his brother Jim came to Fort Worth from Greece in 1911 and ran shoeshine parlors before they began making hats.


European Labor Law
Labor ministers of the European Community agreed on a law today that would make companies give workers a document detailing the terms and conditions of employment, officials said.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 21
June 14
June 22
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.5
7.1
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.0
3.0
Gasoline stocks
218.0
218.2
216.2
Distillate stocks
113.1
111.3
109.8
Crude imports, daily
6.1
6.2
6.5
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.9
3.0
Crude stocks
354.0
352.3
383.9
Crude production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
90.8
90.4
87.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


CHRONICLE
SHARON PRATT DIXON, the Mayor of Washington, and Dr.
RUTH WRIGHT HAYRE, president of the Philadelphia Board of Education, are among the nine winners of the Candace Awards, which were presented last night at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
The awards, for outstanding achievement, are given by the National Coalition of 100 Black Women.
Ms.
Dixon is the first woman to be elected Mayor of Washington.
Dr.
Hayre, who became Philadelphia's first black high-school principal in 1956, is the first woman and the first black to be elected president of Philadelphia's Board of Education.


York College Gets President
Dr.
Josephine D. Davis, a Kellogg Foundation fellow and vice president for academic affairs at St.
Cloud State University in St.
Cloud, Minn., has been appointed president of York College in Queens, City University of New York officials said.
They said Dr.
Davis, 48 years old, was the first black woman to be named president of a senior college in New York City.
She succeeds Milton Bassin, who retired last year.
She received degrees in mathematics from Spelman College and the University of Notre Dame and a doctorate in math education from Rutgers University.
Her appointment is effective Sept. 1.


Cannes Films Set for Modern Museum
The Museum of Modern Art will celebrate the Cannes International Film Festival next summer by presenting films from the festival's inception in 1946 through the one in May 1992.
"Cannes: Le Festival, 45 Years of Cinema," scheduled from June 19 through Oct. 10, 1992, will offer more than 120 classics and rarely seen movies, including some selected for what was to have been the first festival, in 1939.
That event was canceled when war broke out.


Congress Party Has Served India Well
To the Editor:
In "Mohandas Gandhi Was Right" (Op-Ed, June 12), Arun Gandhi portrays Mahatma Gandhi as all-knowing and wise and the Congress Party as having deserted the Mahatma's ideals to the detriment of India.
The facts do not support him.


Slam by McReynolds Catches Expos in the Ninth
One swing, countless calculations.
Kevin McReynolds, who had hit the baseball, calibrated in his mind how well he had hit it.


Support for Mariners
A New York investment bank has agreed to put off repayment of a $40 million loan to the Seattle Mariners until the economy improves, according to the club's owner, JEFF SMULYAN.
Smulyan, an Indianapolis broadcast executive who bought the team two years ago, disputed a report in The Seattle Times that said the loan he negotiated with Morgan Stanley of New York had not been repaid on schedule and that the bank could take control of the Mariners.


Frozen Yogurt: Tasty, But No Health Food
EVER since Alison Weiss, a homemaker and sculptor from Short Hills, N.J., discovered that frozen yogurt is "permissible," because it has virtually no fat, she has been eating it almost daily.
"Eating ice cream has a stigma now, like smoking," Ms.
Weiss said.
"If someone comes into the store while I'm waiting for my frozen yogurt and asks for ice cream, I stare at them. There's a whole guilt thing about ice cream."


Jazz Festival; Two Groups, Two Sounds
Two different approaches to the music of Louis Armstrong and Jelly Roll Morton were used by the two groups who played their music on a program called "New Orleans to Chicago" on Monday at the Equitable Auditorium as part of the JVC Jazz Festival.
The members of the New Black Eagle Jazz Band, a group based in the Boston area that has been playing avocationally for almost 20 years, used their long experience together to make the recorded performances of Morton's and Armstrong's groups a loose framework for their own playing.
Tommy Sancton's New Orleans All-Stars, five full-time New York musicians led by a New Orleans native who is now a senior editor of Time magazine, were more conscientious in reproducing Armstrong and Morton recordings.


Volcanic Activity Continues in the Philippines


Jazz Festival; Danish, but Not a Pastry
When a pianist fails to bring a sensitive touch to his instrument, all the pretty melodies and lush chords in the world cannot compensate for a sound that in some fundamental way is nonmusical.
Neils Lan Doky, a 26-year-old Danish pianist who performed at Weill Recital Hall on Monday evening as part of the JVC Jazz Festival's twilight solo piano series, is such a performer.
Despite fairly advanced technique and a style that veers toward the romantic, he bangs at the piano as though it were an antagonist, bringing forth a harsh, grating sound that strains the ears.


New U.S. Dispute With Israel Seen
The Bush Administration's efforts to organize an Arab-Israeli peace conference in the aftermath of the Persian Gulf war have become bogged down in recent weeks as Israel has rejected President Bush's compromise proposal for organizing the talks and Syria has not responded to Mr.
Bush's ideas.
At the same time, another confrontation appears to be shaping up between the Administration and Israel over the Israelis' impending request for an additional $10 billion in housing-loan guarantees to settle Soviet Jews.


Big Five Accept Spectrum Deal
The Philadelphia area colleges known as the Big Five -- La Salle, Pennsylvania, St.
Joseph's, Temple and Villanova -- have signed a deal with the Spectrum to play three basketball doubleheaders a season for the next three years.
The Spectrum will pay nearly $30,000 each to the colleges, The Philadelphia Inquirer reported today, citing unnamed sources.


European Bank Aid for Poland
The first loan offered by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development will help heating businesses in Poland, the new bank said today.
The bank said its board approved the $50 million loan today.


Julian Francis Deeken, Franciscan Priest, 62
The Rev.
Julian Francis Deeken, a Franciscan priest and former chaplain to the New York City Fire Department, died on Sunday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, a spokesman for the Franciscans said.


Metro Air Suing On American Deal
Metro Airlines Inc., a commuter carrier forced into bankruptcy by the demise of Eastern Airlines, said it was suing American Airlines for contract violations.
Metro, formed in 1967 in Houston, once operated commuter flights for Eastern out of Atlanta and lost a quarter of its revenues after Eastern's collapse earlier this year.
Metro now operates as a commuter feeder for American Airlines at Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport and its Metroflight unit operates 260 American Eagle flights daily.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
The scene, a quiet moment in our Congers, N.Y., post office.
Kathy is behind the counter.
A late-yuppie woman in workout gear moves forward.
"Have you any commemorative stamps?" she asks.


Johnny Carson's Son Dies in an Auto Crash
A son of the entertainer Johnny Carson was killed last Friday when his car went off a rural road and fell 100 feet down an embankment, the authorities said Monday.
The 39-year-old victim, Richard Wolcott Carson, was thrown from his four-wheel-drive vehicle, which then landed on its top in a culvert, said Russ Johnson of the California Highway Patrol.
Mr.
Johnson said Mr.
Carson had been killed instantly.


Proposed Base Closings Criticized By the Pentagon as 'Disruptive'
In the Pentagon's first detailed criticism of proposed base closings, senior officials have asked an independent commission to save four installations that the panel is thinking about shutting down.
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, advised Defense Secretary Dick Cheney in an internal memorandum last week that the actions by the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission could be "disruptive" to the military's sea, air and recruitment operations.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the TV Sports column on Tuesday misstated the figures represented by a Nielsen rating point in four cities.
In Tampa, a rating point equals 13,497 homes; in Miami, 13,135; in Washington, 17,491, and in Denver 10,536.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION AGAINST APARTHEID IN SPORTS -- 11:30 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.


Arts Festival a Success, Early Reports Suggest
The second New York International Festival of the Arts lasted half as long as the first festival three years ago, cost $3 million less and had only a third as many events.
But judging by an informal sampling of festival administrators, presenters, performers and devoted -- albeit weary -- audience members, this year's version was more successful than the previous, mammoth undertaking, which drew almost as much criticism as applause.


Public Universities Are in No Way Second Best
To the Editor:
President Bush's proposal to reduce eligibility for Federal college financial aid to the very poorest is bad enough.
But must you suggest, in "Higher Education Feels the Heat" (The Week in Review, June 2), that admission to high-tuition private institutions is the only avenue to true educational achievement?


Dow Falls 2.90; Bank Stocks Are Battered
Stock prices fell slightly yesterday, with the day's bad news coming in banking stocks, which, led by Wells Fargo, were battered from coast to coast.
The shares of all major commercial banks closed with minus signs, even such prospering Wall Street favorites as J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
In recent sessions, natural gas, software and technology shares in general took their turns at being out of favor with investors, usually because of estimates of lower earnings.
Because trading in the other groups was listless in the wake of Monday's sharp 52-point selloff, the Dow Jones industrial average closed down 2.90, at 2,910.11.
Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index slipped 0.29, to 370.65.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in the Company News columns of Business Day yesterday about a move by the Northrop Corporation to protect a surplus in its pension fund misstated the company's closing stock price on Monday.
It was $25.


Economic Scene; Car Wars: More Bad News
HAVE you driven a Ford (or a Chrysler or a G.M. car) lately?
As Detroit learned in the 1980's, a customer lost to Japanese car makers is often lost for good.
But according to Fred Mannering and Clifford Winston, that is only the beginning of the bad news, not the end.
American auto companies may finally be making cars that are attractive to owners of foreign cars.
But the gap in brand loyalty between American and Japanese makes, the researchers conclude, virtually guarantees that the Detroit auto makers will continue to lose sales to their Japanese rivals.


Doctors Warn of Interference
Without using the word abortion, the American Medical Association assailed interference with "the physician-patient relationship." Page A17.


In the Nation; A Necessary Inquiry
Despite Democrats' fears of the political result, they can hardly avoid a formal Congressional inquiry into the charge that Ronald Reagan's aides conspired with Iran in 1980 to hold up release of American hostages until after the election.
That charge, bruited about for years and vigorously denied by Mr.
Reagan, has taken on weight recently, owing mainly to support from Gary Sick, a member of President Carter's national security staff.
He now teaches at Columbia University.


Marchi Undergoes Surgery
State Senator John Marchi, the 70-year-old Staten Island Republican, has undergone a successful angioplasty procedure, a spokesman, Gerald McLaughlin, said today.
The procedure, in which a balloon is inserted in a blood vessel to remove plaque, took place on Monday at a New York City hospital.
He also underwent the procedure in 1987.


Theater in Review
Currents Turned Awry Nat Horne Theater 440 West 42d Street Through Sunday By D. L. Coburn; directed by Philip Galbraith; assistant director, Sharon Fallon; lighting, Richard Kent Green.
Presented by Love Creek Productions and Isy Productions.
MEET DOYLE MACINTYRE  WITH: Michael Cannis, Larry Collis and Robert Lindley Sutton.
DINNING OUT ALONE  WITH: Nick Stannard.


Nevada Set With Report On Ticket Irregularities
Investigators looking into possible ticket fraud and forgery within the University of Nevada-Las Vegas athletic program are expected to deliver the results of their inquiry to the University of Nevada system's Board of Regents in a private meeting tomorrow.
Although the yearlong investigation by the Nevada Attorney General's office is not expected to result in criminal charges, it is expected to increase the flood of negative publicity surrounding the school's athletic department and the university's administration.


Theater in Review
Club Soda WPA Theater 519 West 23d Street By Leah Kornfeld Friedman; directed by Pamela Berlin; setting by Edward T. Gianfrancesco; lighting by Craig Evans; costumes by Deborah Shaw; sound by Aural Fixation; choreography by John Carrafa; musical direction by Edward Strauss.
WITH: Dan Futterman, Aaron Harnick, Katherine Hiler, Patricia Mauceri, Alanna Ubach, Lenny Venito and Danny Zorn.


DDB Needham Names Two Creative Directors
DDB Needham Worldwide's Chicago office went outside and inside to name two co-executive creative directors.
From outside, the agency is bringing in David Jenkins, 37 years old.
He was an award-winning senior art director with Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore., where he worked on the Nike account.


U.S. Allows Oldest A-Plant To Continue Its Operations
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission said today that the steel reactor vessel at the aging Yankee Rowe nuclear power plant in western Massachusetts was safe enough to allow the plant to continue operating for at least another year.
The agency did find possible problems with the reactor vessel at Yankee Rowe, the nation's oldest operating nuclear power plant, which opened in 1960.
The questions concerned the vessel's strength and its ability to withstand temperature change.
But the agency rejected a petition by the Union of Concerned Scientists, which had said the problems were so serious that the plant should be shut down.


Janis Burenga Weds
Janis Marie Burenga, a radio executive, and Timothy James Martin, a painter and sculptor, were married last evening in Sergeantsville, N.J.
Mayor Marcia Nelson of Sergeantsville performed the ceremony at the Sergeantsville Inn.
Ms.
Burenga, 40 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Burenga of Ringoes, N.J.
A graduate of Lock Haven State University, she is the vice president for creative services at the Unistar Radio Networks, a distributor of radio programming in New York.
She is keeping her name.
The bridegroom, 43, is a son of Pauline Martin of Flemington, N.J., and the late Thomas F. Martin.
A graduate of Trenton State College, he has a studio in Sergeantsville.


People
*
David Meador has been promoted to senior vice president and senior art director at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, from vice president and senior art director. *
Robert J. Clancy has joined Griswold Inc., Cleveland, as executive vice president and executive creative director.
He had previously been vice president and associate creative director at McCann-Erickson New York. *
Kathy M. Hyett has been named senior vice president and director of the consumer marketing, food, health-care and creative services group at Creamer Dickson Basford, New York.
She had previously been senior vice president and group manager at Burson-Marstellar, New York.


James Walsh, 68, Actor and Producer
JZames Walsh, an actor, producer and director, died on Thursday at the Westerly (R.I.) Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in Stonington, Conn.
He died of a heart attack, said his stepdaughter, Nicole Oliver-Plummer.


Peter A. D'Arcy, Actor, 77
Peter A. D'Arcy, a character actor who appeared in films, Off Broadway theater and television, died on May 31 at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Courville Gains 2d Ike in a Row
Jerry Courville Jr. made up nine strokes over the last seven holes of regulation play today and then won a three-hole playoff against Jeff Thomas to capture his second consecutive Ike tournament, the stroke-play championship of the Metropolitan Golf Association.
Courville, who plays out of Shorehaven Golf Club in East Norwalk, Conn., made three straight birdies and an eagle in the last seven holes.
He won the playoff with a par on the third hole when Thomas, from Plainfield West in Edison, N.J., made double-bogey.
The players were even after the first two playoff holes.


Study Finds Mysterious Rise In Childhood Cancer Rate
The overall rate of cancer among children is mounting steadily, and the increase for the two most common childhood malignancies, leukemia and brain tumors, is particularly sharp, a new study reports.
Researchers said they had few clues to the reasons for the jump, and many are just now learning of the latest statistics, but in their efforts to identify possible causes they are proposing everything from older parental age to the use of pesticides in the home.


Michigan Business School Gets $20 Million Donation
An executive in the home-building industry who was reared in the Midwest and has been alarmed by the region's waning manufacturing competitiveness today donated the largest gift ever by an individual to the business school of a public university.
Eli Broad, 58 years old, the chairman of the Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corporation, is giving $20 million to the Michigan State University business school to strengthen its M.B.A. program and provide students skills to help American manufacturers compete more effectively.


Dykstra Makes Trip
Philadelphia Phillies outfielder LENNY DYKSTRA yesterday made his first trip with the team since he was injured in a car accident May 6.
"All I'm doing is running, lifting light weights and throwing and playing a little bit of pepper," Dykstra said after an afternoon workout at Busch Stadium in St.
Louis


Abortion Rules Force Clinics To Weigh Money and Mission
For Kimberly Edwards and the family-planning clinic she works for here, the choice offered by the United States Supreme Court was painful but clear: abandon abortion counseling or forgo $600,000 in Federal funds.
Two weeks after the Court's ruling, Ms.
Edwards's organization, Planned Parenthood of Northern New England, announced that it would give up the money, about 10 percent of its budget, rather than abide by the Federal regulations governing Title X family-planning funds.


Quotation of the Day
"Teach for America came to be 500 points of light, the idea that certain individuals with enthusiasm can help a troubled system. But I think much more profound changes are needed." -- Hilary Abell, a Princeton graduate who taught in a Bedford-Stuyvesant junior high.  [ A21:4. ]


Walter Benedict Dies; Methodist Minister, 88
The Rev.
Walter J. Benedict, a retired Methodist minister, died on June 15 at his home in Venice, Fla.
He was 88 years old.
He died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Wine Talk
VOUVRAY is one of those wines that stir up strong feelings of ennui.
There are problems.
First of all, the grape: chenin blanc.
Chardonnay it's not.
"A magical chameleon of a grape," says Jancis Robinson in her valuable book "Vines, Grapes and Wines." But she adds: "Remarkably few of the thousands of growers who harvest it each year even realize that magic is there."


Salaries to Be Cut At Columbia Gas
The Columbia Gas System Inc., the embattled utility that serves 15 mid-Atlantic states, will reduce the salaries of its nonhourly workers by as much as 10 percent and freeze those of manual and clerical workers, effective July 1.
The company said it expected the move to cut operating costs by $6 million for the rest of the year.
The action affects 8,000 nonunion employees, the company said.


Democrats Ready to Battle Bush on China
With votes imminent in two important Congressional committees, Democrats in the House and Senate have reached a broad consensus on how to oppose President Bush's decision to renew unconditionally China's preferential trade status.
Their inability to agree on a common plan helped the President prevail last year in the struggle to renew China's trade treatment, called most-favored-nation status.


Books of The Times; Shifting Causes: Updates From the American Left
Political Protest and Cultural Revolution Nonviolent Direct Action in the 1970's and 1980's By Barbara Epstein Illustrated. 327 pages.
University of California Press. $24.95.
Uncommon Martyrs The Berrigans, the Catholic Left and the Plowshares Movement By Fred A. Wilcox 249 pages.
Addison-Wesley. $18.95.


Senate Defeats Measure Backing Searches Without Warrants
The Senate dealt the Bush Administration a significant setback on its anti-crime legislation today, voting to defeat an amendment that would have allowed the police to submit evidence in court that was seized in searches without warrants.
Senate Democrats who are seeking a more limited provision were joined by eight Republicans in defeating the amendment offered by Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina, 54 to 43.


Deadlock on Child Beeper Ban
This city's Board of Supervisors has deadlocked on a proposal that would bar children who lack written permission from carrying an electronic beeper, a device often used by drug dealers.
The supervisors debated the legislation on Monday and then wound up in a tie vote, 5 to 5.
Six votes were needed for passage; the board plans to take up the matter again in three weeks.


The New York Bloc
While the privatization of city services is one of the hottest topcs in municipal finance, the privatization of the Florida prison system and the Fort Worth Zoo is dwarfed by the return to private hands of the enterprises of half of Europe.
The experience of those who've returned from trying to privatize Eastern Europe's industrial base may offer useful insights -- or at least a bit of perspective -- to those hoping to privatize city services in the U.S.
The Eastern Europeans have found that creating a new system of controls and incentives to replace old patterns of direction and command is time consuming and leaves little room for error.
As one Polish commentator has observed, it's easy to make an aquarium into fish soup but hard to go in the opposite direction.


Nutri/System Ban Remains
A Federal judge today extended an order blocking certain advertisements by Nutri/System Inc., ruling that the ads by the weight-loss chain could be misleading, people involved in lawsuits against the company said.
Federal District Court Judge D. Lowell Jensen also ruled that Nutri/ System must distribute a copy of his order to all its managers.


High-Tech Medicine Pays Physicians Best
To the Editor:
"When Healers Are Entrepreneurs: A Debate Over Costs and Ethics" (front page, June 2) discusses the proliferation of magnetic resonance imaging scanners, the investment of physicians in M.R.I. clinics and the supposed conflict of interest problem.
However, you omit the real reason for proliferation of these scanners and similar technologies.


Homeless Living Outside Coliseum Face Removal Tonight
Just weeks after removing the homeless from Tompkins Square Park, New York City has begun gently ousting about 40 to 50 homeless people from the front of the Coliseum at Columbus Circle, where dozens of homeless have been living for more than a year.
The decision to remove the homeless, which city officials said was made in response to neighborhood complaints, comes as the Metropolitan Transportation Authority prepares the area for use as a restaurant.


Carolco Flexes Its Muscle Overseas
If any company illustrates the rewards available to Hollywood by tapping into the rapid growth in foreign markets for American films, it is Carolco Pictures Inc.
And if any movie typifies the risks of Carolco's innovative and free-spending strategy for exploiting those markets, it is "Terminator 2: Judgment Day," which opens next week.
The Hollywood establishment has long seen Carolco as a reckless upstart, a company that bought its way into the business by paying exorbitant sums for stars, directors and scripts.
"Terminator 2" does nothing to counter that notion.
One of the most expensive movies ever made, at more than $90 million, the science-fiction thriller stars Arnold Schwarzenegger as a menacing cyborg from the future.
It is a strong candidate to be the big movie of the summer.


Dragnet on a Bus
When two armed officers board a Greyhound bus and politely ask to search a passenger's handbag, does the passenger feel compelled to say yes?
Not necessarily, says the Supreme Court.
A 6-to-3 majority doubts that most folks would feel obliged to submit to the search.
On its face, that's an astounding argument, blithely ignoring how most people tend to react when cornered by sheriff's deputies in tight places.
Yet so the Court argued when, last week, it sustained a police tactic called "working the buses" without requiring the usual cause -- or even suspicion -- to justify searches.


Needle-Exchangers Had Right to Break Law, Judge Rules
Eight people who had tried to give clean hypodermic needles to drug addicts to prevent them from getting AIDS were acquitted of needle-possession charges yesterday by a Manhattan judge on the ground that the AIDS epidemic was such a grave medical emergency that their illegal conduct was justified.
In her ruling, Judge Laura E. Drager invoked the so-called necessity justification in the state penal law.
It states that "conduct which would otherwise constitute an offense is justifiable and not criminal when such conduct is necessary as an emergency measure to avoid an imminent public or private injury."


Fear of AIDS Is Higher In New York, Poll Finds
New York City and the rest of the nation have similar views on AIDS and what should be done about it, but New Yorkers are far more familiar with the disease and more afraid of getting it, according to a poll released yesterday.
Far more New Yorkers say they personally know someone who died from AIDS, has AIDS or has tested positive for the AIDS virus, and their answers to the survey in general reflect a greater sense of urgency, said officials of the Roper Organization, which conducted the telephone poll last month.


For Freshman Teacher Corps, a Sobering Year
Amparo Gonzalez, who used to call in sick because she was afraid to face her Harlem pupils, by spring was presiding over a spellbound class.
Tarik Lemtouni loved coming to school in rural Georgia until one of his students smashed his head against a wall for taking away some candy.
Mary Stechschulte, who had to fend for herself after her supervisor vanished in the third week of school, nonetheless plans to return for a second year of teaching in Brooklyn.
These are a few of the reports from the first year of Teach for America, the widely publicized program that seeks to revive public education by persuading many of the nation's brightest college graduates to enlist for a two-year stint in teaching.
Some of the fledgling teachers have left, some have triumphed, and all have confronted the desperation and yearning of students in America's most beleaguered schools.


For One Night, It's Like the Old Magadan
The first of the two hits went over the right-field fence.
The second was played on one hop in left.
Both were pretty pieces of hitting by an artist who has been painting slop.
But maybe the best picture of all was Dave Magadan holding back his swing on a curve ball in the dirt.


Corrections
A picture caption on June 15 with an article about continuing unease in the Falkland Islands misidentified the man shown.
He was Harold T. Rowlands, a member of the Falkland Islands Legislative Council.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.73
5.83
8.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.56
7.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.76
7.70
7-YR. TREAS.NOTES
8.18
8.18
8.55
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.50
8.50
8.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.55
9.55
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.24
7.24
7.54
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Low-Fat Diet Might Add Only Months To Lifetime, Study Says
IF everyone adopted a diet deriving no more than 30 percent of its calories from fat, the average American's life span would increase only three to four months, according to a new statistical analysis.
But experts who have studied the results of low-fat diets challenged the validity of the assumptions that were considered in reaching this conclusion in the analysis, being published today in the Journal of the American Medical Association.


A Korean War Parade, Decades Late
There was a parade through the Canyon of Heroes on lower Broadway yesterday, but no need this time for the abstruse municipal calculus of crowd measurement (the spectators could be counted).
It was, somehow, a simpler scene: The confetti could be measured (by the pound, not the ton).
And paunchy, graying men strutted where the giddy footfalls of euphoric, battle-fresh young soldiers still echoed.
Thirty-eight years late, veterans of the Korean War finally had their New York parade.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Stock Exchange Inc., New York, named Sarah Porter Boehmler executive vice president-market development and Delia McQuade Emmons senior vice president-corporate services. *
L &amp; W Supply Corp., Chicago, a USG Corp. subsidiary that distributes gypsum board, named William C. Foote president and chief executive.


CHRONICLE
Two daughters of MIA FARROW and ANDRE PREVIN were arrested last Wednesday in Danbury, Conn., after being caught shoplifting.
The police said DAISY FARROW PREVIN, 17 years old, and LARK FARROW PREVIN, 18, tried to steal $342 worth of lingerie from a store in the Danbury Fair Mall.


K.G.B. Aide Tells of Defector Who Was Kim Philby's Handler
The deputy spokesman of the K.G.B. said today that a top Soviet intelligence officer who controlled the Philby-Burgess-Maclean spy ring was in the United States as a defector when they came under suspicion.
The spokesman, Oleg Tsarev, said at a news conference here that he was collaborating on a book about the Soviet intelligence officer, Aleksandr Orlov, who defected in 1938 to the United States after serving as control officer of Kim Philby, Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean.


Mariners Held Hitless for 7 As White Sox Win 5th Straight
Jack McDowell pitched seven and one-third hitless innings and finished with a three-hitter and his first major league shutout as the Chicago White Sox won their fifth straight game tonight by beating the Seattle Mariners, 4-0.
McDowell was five outs away from becoming the first White Sox pitcher since Joel Horlen in 1967 to throw a no-hitter in Chicago when Scott Bradley lined a sharp single to right field.
Omar Vizquel followed with a single to left, but McDowell preserved the shutout by getting Harold Reynolds to fly to deep center and by striking out Greg Briley.
Pete O'Brien had the other hit, a one-out single in the ninth.


Countdown to Tyson-Ruddock Rematch in Final Stages
As is usually the case at news conferences on the week of his big fights, Mike Tyson was acting today as though he would rather be somewhere else.
Tyson, who will fight a rematch against Donovan (Razor) Ruddock Friday at the Mirage Hotel, delivered unadorned answers to ritualistic questions.
When he was asked to envision the bout as it would unfold, Tyson said, in his best deadpan: "Gonna knock him out. No question."


Wide Abuse Cited in Nursing Home Insurance
Private insurance intended to cover the costs of nursing home care is "not a good buy" for elderly people because most of the policies do not pay for care when people need it, two Congressional committees said today.
Investigators from the House Select Committee on Aging and the House Committee on Small Business said in interviews and in a report that they had found widespread abuses in the sale of such insurance.
They reported that many insurance agents misrepresented the policies they were selling, answered questions incorrectly and were evidently ignorant of the details of the coverage.


New Disclosure in Wilder-Robb Dispute Over Tape
A social acquaintance of Senator Charles S. Robb gave the Virginia lawmaker's office a secretly recorded tape of a car-phone conversation by Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder, a source familiar with the investigation said tonight.
Mr.
Robb has spoken of receiving an "anonymous" tape on which Mr.
Wilder, his chief political rival, criticizes him, but he has never made clear how much he knows about its origin.


David Harshaw, 87; Headed Hat Company
David Hare Harshaw, former president of the John B. Stetson Company, the hat manufacturer, died Saturday at the Dowden Nursing Home in Newtown Square, Pa.
He was 87 years old and lived in Drexel Hill, Pa.
He died of a stroke, said his wife, June.


Gunmen in South Africa Kill 6 Riders on a Soweto Train
Gunmen killed at least six people on a Soweto commuter train today, bringing the toll in black township violence to 28 in the three days since a peace conference attended by the major black factions.
"We are more concerned about the fact that every time there is some peace initiative, some kind of orchestrated killings begin," said Carl Niehaus, a spokesman for the African National Congress.


Corn and Soybeans Drop But Wheat Shows a Gain
The threat of weekend rain pushed down corn and soybean futures prices yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade, while wheat ended higher on rumors of potential export business.
On other commodities markets, precious metals gained and meat and livestock futures were mixed.


McEnroe Rolls Beyond Spotlight
John McEnroe has had his moments on the place named Centre Court, including championships in 1981, 1983 and 1984.
Perhaps the most memorable moment was the 1980 tie breaker, the one they still show during all the rain delays, which is to say, often.
Bjorn Borg may beat McEnroe 1,000 times before this tournament is through.


Army Sends Tanks To Algerian Capital After Day of Rioting
Columns of tanks rolled into the Algierian capital tonight after clashes between the police and Muslim fundamentalist youths left at least 1 person dead and 12 wounded.
The fundamentalists were infuriated over removal of Islamic insignia from public buildings.
The confrontations were the worst since the Government of President Chadli Benjedid proclaimed a state of emergency June 5.


Now a Stolen Car Can Summon the Police
In the never-ending battle between car owners and car thieves, the good guys have a new weapon.
In recent years, several companies have produced homing devices that consumers can hide in their cars so police can track the vehicle once a theft is discovered.
But some of the latest models take the concept one step further: They enable cars to call for help the moment they are stolen.


The Teamsters Rush Headlong Into Democracy
The International Brotherhood of Teamsters, the nation's biggest and richest union and one so corrupt that three of its last five presidents were put in prison, is hurtling toward democracy, kicking and screaming all the way.
For the union's first convention in five years, 1,900 teamster delegates, accompanied by some 6,000 alternates and retired teamsters -- and 70 dark-suited Government overseers -- have assembled here at the squeaky-clean family resort of Disney World.
The delegates are nominating candidates for the teamsters' presidency -- candidates, plural, for the first time.
Nominees for the presidency will be voted on Thursday.
In December, the union membership will choose their leader.


Treasury Issues Narrowly Mixed
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were narrowly mixed again yesterday, as dealers placed bids at an auction of $12.5 billion worth of new two-year notes.
Memories of last month's two-year note auction, when a small handful of firms made an aggressive, enormous bid for the securities, hung heavy over yesterday's sale, traders said.


Sports of The Times; Nets Risk Missing Shot At Anderson
DEPENDING on how history judges a team's wisdom in the annual National Basketball Association grab bag of alleged student athletes, an early choice can be a blessing or a curse.
With a first, second or third choice, a team can obtain a franchise player.
Or a franchise embarrassment.
In retrospect, the Houston Rockets can't be faulted for having taken Hakeem Olajuwon with the first choice in 1984, but when the Portland Trail Blazers used that year's second choice for Sam Bowie, the Chicago Bulls didn't hesitate.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 26


Nightclub Fined For Suing Foes In Community
In an unusual decision, a judge has fined the owners of a Manhattan nightclub for suing people in the neighborhood who tried to stop the club from opening.
The owners, the judge said, tried to use the threat of a protracted and expensive court battle to stifle public opposition.


Vehicle Sales Dropped 2.4% In Mid-June
Sales of domestically made cars and light trucks fell 2.4 percent in mid-June, but the decline did not dampen hopes that the auto market is recovering.
The nine United States and Japanese auto makers that assemble cars in North America sold 212,116 cars in the June 11-20 period, a drop of four-tenths of a percent from the 212,910 cars sold a year earlier.


Sesquipedalians
Daniel Patrick Moynihan is a man of many accomplishments: scholar, urbanist, Presidential adviser, diplomat and, since 1977, a distinguished Senator from New York.
He now aspires to fame also as a celebrated sesquipedalian, but in that ambition he is destined for defeat.
Sesquipedalian, from Latin for a foot and a half, describes a lover of long words.
Like the Senator.
The other day he told his colleagues he wanted to make a word of his coinage the longest word in the English dictionary.


Anti-Homosexual T-Shirts Prompt Suspension of Syracuse Fraternity
The distribution of T-shirts with anti-homosexual slogans has led a fraternity to suspend permanently all the members of its chapter at Syracuse University.
National officials of the fraternity, Alpha Chi Rho, notified the 54 members here last week, said Jim Spencer, executive director of Alpha Chi Rho.


Market Place; America West's Fight to Survive
FOR most of this year America West has been trying to avoid a filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
To cope with its financial crisis, caused largely by the falloff in traffic and the high fuel prices that resulted from the Persian Gulf war, the airline has already cut salaries, reduced service to marginal cities and suspended payments on its aircraft leases.
Now more Draconian measures are being considered, including layoffs and more wage cuts and freezes.


Irving Lerner, 77, Dies; Headed Clothing Chain
Irving Lerner, president of the Mary Lerner chain of women's clothing stores, died on Saturday at his home in Harrison, N.Y..
He was 77 years old.
He died of cancer, a family spokesman said.


Jazz Festival; Doc Cheatham and His Admirers Give Clinic on How to Play Swing
The stage was littered with gloriously bent and bruised notes at Town Hall on Monday night, and not a single one was superfluous.
The show, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, was a tribute to the trumpeter Doc Cheatham that turned into a seminar on pre-be-bop playing.
For three hours some of jazz's best musicians -- including Dizzy Gillespie, Wynton Marsalis, Harry (Sweets) Edison and Buddy Tate -- took turns on perfectly edited solos, nudging notes toward significance by fooling with their pitch, or by blasting or massaging them.
In playing swing, the value is on concision and tonal control, and the musicians, ranging in age from 23 to the 86-year-old Mr.
Cheatham, made the most out of the fewest number of notes possible.


Johnson Buyout Bid Dropped
The family that controls the Johnson Products Company, the second-largest maker of hair-care products for blacks, said today that it had dropped plans to take the company private in a $20.6 million buyout.
Johnson Products, based in Chicago, late last month offered $17.25 for each of company's approximately 1.2 million outstanding shares.
The shares represent 39 percent of Johnson's stock, with the remaining 61 percent owned by the chairwoman, Joan B. Johnson.


BRIEFS
*
Bolar Pharmaceutical Co., Copiague, L.I., said a U.S.
District Court in Missouri had dismissed a complaint brought by the former shareholders of Marion Laboratories Inc. *
Carlsberg A.S., the Danish brewer, accepted a bid for its 60-percent-owned Spanish brewer Union Cervecera S.A. from Cruzcampo, Spain's largest brewer and a unit of Guinness P.L.C. of Britain.


Braves Get Petry
DAN PETRY, a veteran of 13 years in the majors, was acquired by the Atlanta Braves yesterday from the Detroit Tigers for minor league infielder VICTOR ROSARIO.
The 32-year-old Petry had a 2-3 record and a 4.94 earned run average in 17 games for the Tigers.
He has a career record of 125-104.


U.S. Company Linked to Iraqi Atom Program
A maker of electrical equipment in Brewster, N.Y., has been identified as a supplier of special power units that Iraq has used to try to make weapons-grade uranium at a secret underground site in the mountains north of Baghdad.
An Iraqi defector has told American officials about the site not far from the northern city of Mosul, and intelligence officials in Washington now say they have obtained information that corroborates the defector's assertions.


Franz Cardinal Hengsbach, German Prelate, 80
Franz Cardinal Hengsbach, who wore a piece of coal in his bishop's ring to symbolize his concern for miners and other workers, died on Monday, church officials said.
He was 80 years old.
A statement from the Roman Catholic Ruhr Diocese said Cardinal Hengbach had died at a hospital of complications from stomach surgery that he underwent on Tuesday.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Vietnamese Communist Party congress misstated the year of the last one.
It was 1986, not 1976.


Navratilova Survives After a First-Round Scare
On another soggy day when the raindrops outnumbered the tennis balls sprinkling the skies at Wimbledon, a few too many misty memories almost overtook Martina Navratilova as she made her first defense of her record ninth title on Centre Court this afternoon.
"I was all over the place emotionally," said Navratilova, who was thrilled by the opportunity to start off on Centre Court before the defending men's champion -- who customarily plays in the first match -- got onto it and "blemished" it.
The opening-day matches on Monday were rained out, forcing rearrangement of the schedule.


Kate Hall, Soprano, 82
Kate Hall, a soprano who appeared in several Broadway productions, including the original "Porgy and Bess" in 1935, died on Friday at St.
Clare's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of complications from diabetes, said Alan Eichler, a friend.


Koch's Co-Skipper Withdraws From Crew
A difference of opinion on who should steer WILLIAM KOCH'S new America's Cup yacht has prompted GARY JOBSON, Koch's co-skipper, to resign this week.
Jobson said yesterday in a telephone interview from San Diego that the parting, which Jobson termed as "amicable," stemmed from "philosophical differences" with Koch.


EUROPEANS WARN ON YUGOSLAV SPLIT
Fearful that the dismemberment of Yugoslavia could lead to violence and spread instability throughout the Balkans, Western European governments signaled their disapproval of the decision by Slovenia and Croatia today to move toward independence from Yugoslavia.
Warning Slovenia and Croatia that they will not be recognized as independent states, the governments also urged the rebel republics to continue their negotiations with the rest of Yugoslavia with the aim of constructing a new federalist structure.


Review/Television; 'Tales From the Crypt' Raises Ratings for HBO
These are curiously unsettled times for the horror genre.
In the movies, "Darkman" and "Tremors" seem puny when stacked up against classics like "Psycho" or "Night of the Living Dead." On television, some Stephen King adaptations have worked, most notably "It," and others haven't.
Still more will be coming up soon.
Meanwhile, NBC failed to induce mass goosebumps with its revival of the cult soap "Dark Shadows." A "Horror Hall of Fame" has been established to bestow awards on "the movies and the artists who have brought our nightmares to life." Once you get past such obvious names as Boris Karloff and Vincent Price, though, the pickings turn a bit slim.
But at least one form of horror is selling briskly these days.
Just ask Home Box Office.
Its "Tales From the Crypt" series is back with new episodes, and the ratings are humming.
On one recent evening, immediately following the premiere showing of "Gremlins 2" on HBO , the cable network's audience for "Tales From the Crypt" jumped by 50 percent.
That's the kind of performance that prompts Crypt-Keeper cackling among the pay-cable crowd.


Accounts
*
Bayer A.G., Leverkusen, Germany, to RWR Advertising Inc., New York, for promotional materials for the international marketing of Kogenate, a treatment for hemophiliacs.
The agency, which has handled advertising for the product in the United States, said the billings are about $3 million.


Lower-Fat Foods Vs. U.S. Standards
"LIGHT butter" is a world-class oxymoron.
Right up there with sweet sorrow, jumbo shrimp and military intelligence.
The existence of a product that calls itself light butter is the result of a clash between late 20th-century technology and early 20th-century law.
The former, which is an effort to accommodate modern-day health concerns, has rendered the latter obsolete.


Clemens Reversal: To Lose Is Human
The last time Roger Clemens started a game against the Yankees, a businesslike effort in New York nearly a month ago, he seemed on his way to a third Cy Young Award in six years.
Tonight, after his first loss to the Yankees since August 1989, business is not so good.


COMPANY NEWS;
Baltia Air Lines, the little carrier with nothing to its name but a few routes, got a promise of money yesterday that would enable it to buy something else it should find handy: a few airplanes.
Baltia received a commitment of $148 million in financing from the Waterford Group, a Houston-based investment firm, which believes that the new airline will be able to build up traffic between New York, the Baltic states and the Soviet Union.


High-Tech Medicine Pays Physicians Best; 'A Killing on AIDS'
To the Editor:
You sound a necessary alarm about the growing practice of physicians referring patients to health-care facilities in which they have a financial interest (front page, June 2).
However, you overlooked an area of health care in which this practice is extensive and expensive: home infusion therapy, particularly for AIDS patients.


Theater in Review
Working One-Acts '91 Theater Row Theater 424 West 42d Street Through Sunday Presented by the Working Theater, Bill Mitchelson, artistic director; Mark Plesent, general manager.
NEW HOPE FOR THE DEAD, by John Sayles; directed by Earl Hagan.
BETTING ON THE DUST COMMANDER, by Suzan-Lori Parks; directed by Liz Diamond.
ABANDONED IN QUEENS, by Laura Maria Censabella; directed by Mr.
Mitchelson.
WITH: Kevin Davis, Linda Marie Larson, Dean Nichols, Joseph Palmas, Roger Serbagi, Pamala Tyson.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL Yugoslavia in Semifinal Defending champion Yugoslavia, led by Toni Kukoc, Dino Radja and Vlade Divac, beat Poland, 103-61, yesterday to clinch a semifinal berth in the European championships in Rome.


For Scholarly Nirvana, Familiar Questions as Leaders Change
In 1988 Frank Wilczek, a theoretical physicist of the first order, was a hot prospect pursued by the finest university departments in the country.
In the end it came down to a duel between Harvard University and the Institute for Advanced Study, the scholarly nirvana in the Princeton woods where Einstein, Oppenheimer, von Neumann and a panoply of other intellectual gods once lived and worked.
Each Harvard offer was met by an institute counteroffer.
The stakes rose steadily, until the institute's director decided to play his trump card.
Beyond prestige, remuneration and scholarly atmosphere, points on which the two institutions rivaled each other, the institute had something Harvard never would: Einstein's house, which it offered to sell to Mr.
Wilczek.


Bridge
The demise of the Cavendish Club on May 31 serves as a reminder that this famous institution was fortunate in its secretaries.
The most famous was Rudy Muhsam, who held the position more than two decades.
Ely Culbertson, whose Crockford's Club was a rival of the Cavendish, helped Mr.
Muhsam to leave Austria during the Nazi period.
Other Cavendish secretaries have been noted as players as well as administrators: B. Jay Becker, Tom Smith, Tom Snow and Richard Reisig.
Reisig, the last of the series, defended skillfully as East on the diagramed deal.
It occurred in the Goldman Pairs, just a week before his club expired.


Plastic Bottles Move Beyond Soda
Plastics companies, having conquered the $5.7 billion market for large soda bottles, say they now have the technology to dominate sales of large juice and drink bottles as well.
Shoppers are beginning to find Hi-C and various fruit juices on supermarket shelves in plastic containers with ribs and raised panels, unlike the familiar smooth plastic bottles that contain soft drinks.
The soda bottles shrivel when filled with anything warmer than 180 degrees, but the new "hot-fill" bottles can handle many of the drinks and juices processed at higher temperatures.


New Trial Ordered in Miami Police Shooting
A state appeals court today overturned the manslaughter conviction of a Miami police officer whose 1989 killing of a black motorcyclist set off three days of racial disturbances that scorched the city.
Florida's Third District Court of Appeals also ordered a new trial for the officer, William Lozano, ruling that a lower court had erred by not considering a defense motion to move the trial out of racially charged Miami.


Dr. Charles G. Child, 83, Is Dead; Surgeon and Hypertension Expert
Dr.
Charles Gardner Child 3d, former chairman of the departments of surgery at medical schools at Tufts University and the University of Michigan, died on Sunday at the Veterans Affairs nursing home in Atlanta.
He was 83 years old and lived in Atlanta.
He apparently died of a heart attack, a family spokesman said.


Doctor Tied to Steroid Sales
Four professional wrestlers told a Federal jury today that they purchased anabolic steroids from a suburban Harrisburg doctor who is on trial as a drug dealer.
Rick Martel, Roddy Piper, Daniel Spivey and Brian Blair faced the crowded court room and admitted they used the muscle-building drugs.
They said they had bought steroids and painkillers from Dr.
George Zahorian 3d, who was the Pennsylvania Athletic Commission physician at wrestling matches in Allentown and Hershey.


Two Wrecks of 1850's Are Found in Lake Erie
Salvagers announced here today that they had discovered in Lake Erie the wreck not only of a sidewheel steamer built in 1848 but also of an experimental 19th-century submarine that tried to find the steamer the year after she sank.
The steamer, the Atlantic, was operating as a casino when she went down on Aug. 20, 1852, after colliding with a freighter near Buffalo.
More than 300 people are believed to have drowned in the accident.


Hypertension Drugs Said to Cut Coronaries Among Elderly
Using inexpensive medications to treat a common type of high blood pressure found primarily in the elderly can cut the incidence of stroke by 36 percent and heart attack by 27 percent among people with the condition, said a nationwide Federal study released today.
Scientists said results from the five-year study, the Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program, proved conclusively that elevation of systolic blood pressure in older people was not a benign condition that should go untreated.


David R. Meinster, Economics Professor, 49
David R. Meinster, a professor of economics at Temple University, died last Wednesday at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 49 years old and lived in Churchville, Pa.
He died of Hodgkin's disease, a spokesman for the university said.


Alvin Tanenbaum, 63, Electronics Executive
Alvin Tanenbaum, founder of Yorx Electronics Inc. of Totowa, N.J., died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 63 years old.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Campaigns Look to News Media for Travel Money
Confronted with complaints from the Democratic Party that the Secret Service does not pay its share of travel costs on campaign flights, the Federal Election Commission decided last week to let Presidential campaigns force news organizations to pay the difference.
The Secret Service pays no more than first-class air fare for its agents, while the costs on campaign charters are considerably higher.
As a result, the 1988 campaign organization of Michael S. Dukakis still reports a debt of $523,555.36 on its books for unpaid Secret Service travel.


CHRONICLE
JEFFREY ARCHER, the author and former deputy chairman of Britain's Conservative Party, has announced that his appeal to aid Kurdish refugees, including a star-studded concert in London in May, has raised about $97 million.
The concert was broadcast to 36 countries and featured M. C. HAMMER, WHITNEY HOUSTON, ROD STEWART and SINEAD O'CONNOR, among many others.
Proceeds of a recording of "The Simple Truth," by CHRIS DE BURGH, also benefited the appeal.


Sales of Existing Houses Rose 6 Percent Last Month
Lower mortgage rates continued to lure home buyers in May, lifting sales of existing single-family houses by 6 percent, to their highest level in 18 months, a real estate trade group said today.
"Low mortgage rates and increased consumer confidence are fueling momentum in the housing market and allowing entry-level buyers to finally get up the courage to dive into the market," said Harley E. Rouda, president of the National Association of Realtors.


It's No Illusion: Yankees Beat Clemens
It was Roger Clemens out there, not some aging and overworked veteran.
And that was Tim Leary, struggling again, trying to get outs but giving up runs instead.
There is little reason to believe the Yankees could win such a game, but tonight they did.
Who would have guessed it?


Bank Funds And C.D.'s Off Slightly
Yields on certificates of deposits and money market accounts continued their slide in the week ended yesterday.
But the Bank Rate Monitor, an interest rate publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla., predicts the numbers will probably remain stable for a while.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher After Durable-Goods Report
The dollar closed mostly higher yesterday after the Government reported that orders for durable goods were showing more strength than had been expected.
Gold prices also advanced.
In New York, gold rose $1.60 to $364.60 an ounce on the Commodity Exchange.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $364.25, up $1.05.
The Commerce Department said durable goods orders rose 3.8 percent in May, the largest gain in more than a year.
The report was considered further evidence of a strengthening economy.
An improving economy raises the prospects for higher interest rates, which support the dollar by increasing demand for American investments.
The dollar tends to rise on good economic news.
But Kevin Logan, chief economist with the Swiss Bank Corporation in New York, said the dollar's gains were limited, in part because "the recovery idea is already built into the market."
"What the market would need to advance," he said, "is stronger news." Pound Drops
The British pound fell against the dollar, closing at $1.6310 in New York, down from $1.6470 late Friday.
In earlier London trading, sterling fell to $1.6280, from $1.6425 late Monday.
But the dollar fell against the Japanese yen.
Mr.
Logan said the yen was helped by a Japanese news report that said the monetary officials of the Group of Seven industrialized nations had agreed to intervene in currency markets if the dollar rose to 140 yen.
The dollar fell to 138.30 yen in New York from 138.70 yen late Monday.
In Tokyo overnight, long before the report crossed news tickers, the dollar fell 1.39 yen, to 138.38 yen.
In London, it was quoted at 138.75 yen.
Other late dollar rates in New York, compared with late Monday's quotes, included: 1.7935 German marks, up from 1.7830; 1.5498 Swiss francs, up from 1.5345; 6.0890 French francs, up from 6.0545; 1,336.00 Italian lire, up from 1,326.00, and 1.14195 Canadian dollars, down from 1.14255.
Other late dollar rates in Europe, compared with late Monday, included: 1.7965 German marks, up from 1.7845; 1.5525 Swiss francs, up from 1.5335; 6.0980 French francs, up from 6.0595; 1,337.25 Italian lire, up from 1,328.00, and 1.1419 Canadian dollars, down from 1.1427.
In early trading in London, gold rose to a late bid of $364.20, from $361.20 late Monday.
In Zurich, the metal rose to a closing bid of $363.50, from $361.00.
In Hong Kong, gold fell $2.29, to close at a bid of $363.63.


Personal Health
IT'S time for walking in the woods, picnicking in the park, lying on the lawn and otherwise becoming a candidate for Lyme disease, a tick-borne bacterial infection that is spreading faster than any other ailment except AIDS.
Lyme disease has been reported in 46 states, Canada, Europe and Asia and, according to official reports, afflicted 30,000 people last year in this country alone.
But there are steps you can take that can greatly reduce the chances that you or a member of your household, including your pets, will be among the victims.
The Ailment
Lyme disease is caused by a spiral bacterium spread to animals and people by ticks.
When an infected tick bites it can inject the organism into the victim's blood.


Davy to Merge With Trafalgar
Trafalgar House P.L.C., a British building and engineering group, today agreed to buy the troubled Davy Corporation P.L.C. in a deal that would create the world's third-largest construction concern.
The London-based Trafalgar, which also has interests in shipping and hotels, agreed to pay $:114 million, or $186 million -- about 95 pence, or $1.55, a share -- for Davy.


U.S. Deplores Moves
The Bush Administration today deplored the actions of Croatia and Slovenia to move toward secession from the Yugoslav federation as "a threat" to stability and "a dangerous situation." But these characterizations were couched more in terms of sorrow than anger.
An Administration official said the sorrow reflected the fact that the United States, long friendly with Yugoslavia, had made great efforts over many months to persuade the various contending parties to settle their differences -- including a day of meetings by Mr.
Baker with all major Yugoslav leaders in Belgrade last Friday.


Subaru Media Business Goes to Wieden, Too
Subaru of America yesterday ended speculation that the media portion of its advertising account would be assigned to a media-buying service.
Instead Wieden &amp; Kennedy, which gained the creative portion of the account last week, won the business.
Subaru said it had considered splitting media buying from creative, but decided it wanted to award the entire account to Wieden.
The Portland, Ore., agency succeeds Subaru's agency of 17 years, Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, New York.


New Yorkers Roar Over Cuts, And Officials Urge Them On
Suddenly, the protesters are everywhere.
Hundreds of New Yorkers are winding their way to City Hall, seeking to influence budget negotiations as the clock ticks toward the start of the new fiscal year.
To those watching from afar, the outpouring may seem like an entirely impromptu rising of irate citizens.
But in fact, Mayor David N. Dinkins and his staff, who for months defended their own budget cuts, are now actively promoting opposition to even deeper cuts proposed by the City Council.


Salvadorans, Victims of a Glitch
Imagine someone from El Salvador who's living in the U.S. and is afraid to return home because of the civil war.
Under a program approved by Congress last year, he would be granted safe haven and temporary work here in exchange for combined fees of $255.
Now imagine a Kuwaiti afraid to return home after the Persian Gulf war.
He, too, could win safe haven and employment -- but for a mere $50.
Why the unequal treatment?
An incredible glitch in the law.
Amends are due the Salvadorans.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Virtually everyone agrees that the Resolution Trust's program to provide low-cost housing has fallen short of its goals, though how far short is in dispute.  [ Page A1. ]
The Wall Street market for high-risk corporate bonds, which fueled the corporate takeovers of the 1980's only to collapse after a a series of defaults and bankruptcies, is showing signs of life.  [ A1. ]


Book Notes
Story Editor or Spy?
They call themselves story editors, an innocuous-sounding title, but their relentless marauding around town in search of manuscripts for Hollywood is giving rise to charges of larceny, corruption and spying.


Interstate Banking Provision Survives House Panel Votes
The Bush Administration's proposal to eliminate barriers to interstate banking survived a concentrated assault in the House Banking Committee today.
In the Administration's banking package, the interstate provision is widely considered the plank most likely to succeed in Congress.


Few of the Working Poor Get Houses in S.&amp; L. Rescue Plan
It's a tale of dreams gone awry.
When Congress created the Resolution Trust Corporation in 1989 to clean up the savings and loan mess, it decided to set aside thousands of foreclosed houses and apartments as low-cost housing for low-income people.


Spending for 1988 Campaigns Set a Record
Spending at the local, state and Federal levels in the 1988 political campaigns reached an all-time high of $2.7 billion, an analysis of the campaign made public today has found.
But at a news conference here, Herbert E. Alexander, an author of the analysis and a political science professor at the University of Southern California, argued that the trouble with how campaigns are financed is not the overall cost but where the money comes from.
His view differs from that of many advocates of changing the way campaigns are paid for, who argue that the rising costs of seeking and staying in office are out of control.


Goode Won't Run for House
Mayor W. Wilson Goode said today that he would stay in office until his term is over in January instead of seeking the seat of Representative William H. Gray 3d, who is resigning from Congress to head the United Negro College Fund.
Mr.
Goode told reporters that he had considered the idea of running for the House seat but that after discussing it with his family, he had agreed to abide by the wishes of his wife.
"My wife said, 'Stay in office,' " the Mayor said.
"I always listen to my wife."


Dream Date? Hardly, So He Gets $2,888
A man has been awarded $2,888 for two years' worth of what he said were dud dates set up by a matchmaking service.
District Judge Richard McLean awarded the plaintiff, Gregory R. Hoesli, that amount in a default judgment Monday against Successful Singles International Inc. after the matchmaking service had failed to reply to the lawsuit.


Cognos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Making Child Care America's Business
WHEN the good times rolled in the 1980's, business school graduates could not get to Wall Street fast enough.
Just about the last venture on graduates' minds was the child-care industry, a business that operates, at best, with fragile profit margins.
But Linda A. Mason and Roger H. Brown, who hold degrees from the Yale School of Organization and Management, are not typical business school graduates.
This husband-and-wife team had worked with children as managers of large-scale relief programs for Cambodian refugees in Thailand and famine victims in the Sudan.
To them, the child-care business made perfect sense.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Cimarron Petroleum Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Ketema Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Philip Rastelli, 73, A Reputed Leader Of a Crime Family
Philip Rastelli, a reputed head of the Bonanno organized-crime family, died on Monday at Booth Memorial Hospital in Queens.
He was 73 years old and lived in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn.
He died of liver cancer, his lawyer, Stanley Teitler, said.


Sun Ice reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


G.E. Seeks to Sell to Agency Buildings Set Aside for Poor
The General Electric Company has negotiated what critics say will be a highly profitable deal with the Government by taking advantage of a housing program intended to help the poor.
The company is now trying to reduce its initial costs even further.
It is seeking $27.6 million in financing for a nonprofit agency it has selected as a business partner.


A Family Affair: Paying for the Wedding
GONE are the days when only the father of the bride picked up the wedding tab.
In these tight economic times, splitting the wedding bill is very much a family affair.
"It's no longer shameful to say you're having financial difficulties, and very often the parents of the bride will let that be known," said Marcy Blum, a wedding consultant in New York.


New Banks in Taiwan
Taiwan granted licenses for 15 new private commercial banks today, breaking the Government's near-monopoly on banking and moving closer toward making the island a regional financial center.
The new banks, most of them backed by large business groups, are the first to be approved since 1975.


At the End of a Long Cocaine Trail, a Trap
On a brisk sunny morning in January, Raul Barreto and his wife, Aida, met a friend at a midtown Manhattan coffee shop.
They had just set up a big cocaine deal, Federal authorities say, and were expecting a nice commission.
The friend had been showing them around New York for a couple of weeks, and they seemed relaxed as he led them up Ninth Avenue, into a high-rise office building, through a lobby marked Drug Enforcement Administration, past several detention cells and into a small bare room.
There, the Barretos realized they were never going to see their $50,000 commission.
They were under arrest.


It Wasn't Arsenic
Zachary Taylor, the 12th President of the United States, died of natural causes, not arsenic poisoning, Kentucky's chief medical examiner announced after a study of Taylor's remains in Oak Ridge, Tenn.
For now, intestinal inflammation remains the offical cause of death.
Article, page A14.


Doctor Loses Suit by Woman Over Measles in a Pregnancy
A Boston woman was awarded $1.3 million in a medical malpractice suit when a Suffolk County jury found on Tuesday that her doctor had failed to do sufficient tests to detect rubella while she was pregnant and tell her that she might choose to abort the fetus.
The woman, Pamela Hicks, had tested positive for exposure to rubella, or German measles, in November 1984.
In late December when she was about 20 weeks pregnant she hospitalized for a week at Brigham and Women's Hospital when she became severely ill with vomiting, nausea and a temperature of 102 degrees.
The baby's heartbeat was also highly elevated.


Comtrex Systems Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Inonga Lokonga l'Ome; Zairian Official, 52
Inonga Lokonga l'Ome, the Foreign Minster of Zaire, died in a Johannesburg hospital last Thursday after suffering a stroke in Kinshasa, the Zairian capital, a South African Government spokesman said.
He was 52 years old.
Mr.
Inonga, a lawyer, served as Ambassador to Morocco and Belgium and delegate to the United Nations in a government career that began in 1965.
He was first appointed Foreign Minister in 1972, and was named to the post again this spring.


Hartmarx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Quotation of the Day
"It's not borderline. He was not poisoned." -- Dr.
George Nichols, after an examination of President Zachary Taylor's remains.  [ A14:5. ]


Accounts
*
Procter &amp; Gamble Company, Cincinnnati, to Burrell Advertising Inc., Chicago, for advertising aimed at black consumers for Tide detergent.
Burrell, which creates ads aimed at black consumers for P.&amp;G.'s Crest and Crisco brands, has worked on Tide projects.
Billings were not disclosed.


Computer Failure Disrupts Phones for 6 Hours in Washington Area
A computer malfunction disrupted local telephone service for more than six hours today for millions of customers in the capital as well as Maryland, Virginia and parts of West Virginia.
By early evening, service had been restored to about 90 percent of the six million customers of the Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company, a subsidiary of the Bell Atlantic Corporation, who were left without their vital link of communication at home, at businesses and at Government offices in the nation's capital.
Company officials expected full restoration of service by the end of the night.


U.S. Uses Photos to Argue Iraq Hides Nuclear Material
The Bush Administration showed reconnaissance photographs to the United Nations Security Council today to back up its assertion that Iraq is trying to conceal equipment used for making nuclear explosives.
At a private briefing this morning, American intelligence officials showed the 15-member Council classified photographs of uranium-enrichment machinery being moved around on trucks or buried to evade detection by United Nations inspectors.


Youth Portrayed as Vicious Mugger Is Arrested on Assault Charge
After two days of a series in The New York Post about a 19-year-old who says he mugs up to 30 people a week, the Police Commissioner is furious and a Brooklyn youth is under arrest.
The Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, announced last night that Benjamin Rodriguez of 523 Knickerbocker Avenue in the Bushwick section had been indicted and arrested shortly after 7:30 P.M.
Patrick B. Clark, a spokesman for Mr.
Hynes, said Mr.
Rodriguez was the mugger who called himself Benji in The Post's series.


Lloyd's of London Posts First Loss in 21 Years
Citing a string of costly disasters and depressed insurance rates, the Lloyd's of London insurance market today announced a record pretax loss of $:509.7 million, or $983.7 million, for 1988, its first loss in 21 years.
David Coleridge, the chairman of Lloyd's, also predicted that Lloyd's would report losses for 1989 and 1990.
Some analysts have predicted that these losses would total as much as $2.46 billion. (The time lag in earnings reports is needed for claims to be filed and settled.)


Cabletron Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Jazz Festival; Some Friends Pay Tribute to Sarah Vaughan
When Sarah Vaughan, who possessed the most splendidly endowed voice in all of jazz, died in April last year, the loss was compounded by the fact that at age 66 she was still near the peak of her vocal powers.
That her death was felt keenly within the jazz community was powerfuly evidenced by the JVC Jazz Festival's Tuesday evening tribute at Carnegie Hall, the site of many memorable Vaughan concerts at previous festivals.
"Friends of Sassy: A Tribute to the Divine Sarah Vaughan" brought together Joe Williams, Dizzy Gillespie, Roberta Flack, the Shirley Horn Trio, Billy Eckstine and Florence Quivar, along with a number of instrumentalists associated with the singer.
Bill Cosby served as an avuncular master of ceremonies for the event, which was a benefit for WBGO-FM and the Sarah Vaughan Jazz Festival in Newark.


Times Square Journal; Crusader Amid Despair Says Farewell to Flock
On a drizzly, chill summer night, Glenn Backes walks the streets of Times Square with a bag of condoms slung over his shoulder.
He is paid to hunt for teen-age prostitutes.
He walks up to "the cage," a clear plastic enclosure around a set of escalators at the Port Authority Bus Terminal.
Hustlers stand there with a studied casualness, waiting for work.


U.S. Issues Are Narrowly Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were mired in a narrow trading range for the third straight session yesterday, as the Government sold $9.25 billion of new five-year notes.
The new securities were sold at an average yield of 7.96 percent, a bit higher than what market participants had expected and well above the 7.69 percent average yield at the last five-year note sale in May.


ALBANY OFFICIALS WEIGH BORROWING FOR NEW YORK CITY
As New York City's budget stalemate worsened yesterday, state officials weighed with renewed urgency proposals for long-term recovery that could avert some of the pain and spread the rest over several years.
The goal would be to let the city borrow to cover deficits -- which is strictly forbidden now -- without the stigma of invoking the authority of the State Financial Control Board, whose binding powers over the city's budget largely lapsed after the city recovered from its fiscal crisis of the mid-1970's.


Sununu Curbing Travels to Mend An Image of Arrogance, Aides Say
John H. Sununu is curtailing his travel plans for a while as part of a campaign aimed at shedding the image of an arrogant chief of staff more concerned about his perquisites than about the best interests of his boss, associates of Mr.
Sununu and White House advisers said today.
Those who have talked to Mr.
Sununu in recent days said the chief of staff was shaken by the lack of a rousing public endorsement from the President.
Even Mr.
Bush's defense of his aide last week was equivocal, mixing annoyance at what the President called "the piling on" by critics with an acknowledgement that there was an appearance of impropriety in Mr.
Sununu's travels.


World's Oil Output Rises
World oil output last year rose to an 11-year high despite the loss of oil from Kuwait and Iraq, but consumption dropped for the first time in 13 years, the British Petroleum Company said today.
Oil producers pumped 64.9 million barrels a day, an increase of 1.4 percent from the previous year, the company said in its annual Statistical Review of World Energy.


HEI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Hartmarx Trims Losses
The Hartmarx Corporation, one of the nation's largest clothing manufacturers and retailers, yesterday reported a loss of $5.9 million in the second quarter ended May 31, compared with a loss of $55.1 million in the comparable period last year.
The 1990 period included an after-tax restructuring charge of $51 million.
Sales fell nearly 3.5 percent, to $293.3 million, from $303.9 million in the 1990 period.
The Chicago-based company's shares were unchanged at $10.125 yesterday on the Big Board.


Cableshare reports earnings for Year to March 31


Books of The Times; New Monster of the Deep (This One Wants a Hug)
Beast By Peter Benchley 350 pages.
Random House. $21.
The Sensationist By Charles Palliser 153 pages.
Ballantine Books. $15.
Just when you thought it was safe to go back in the water, Peter Benchley has written another thriller about a set of jaws looming up out of the deep.
Yet astonishingly, "Beast" is most satisfying to read.
It is vivid and exciting, the perfect scratch for the summer-beach-reading itch.


Somerset Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Editorial Notebook; Columbus Was Not Eichmann
Christopher Columbus is fair game for revisionist debunking as the New World girds for the 500th anniversary of its supposed European discovery.
Once extolled as a superb seaman by Samuel Eliot Morison, Columbus has shrunk to an incompetent bumbler in Kirkpatrick Sale's readable putdown, "The Discovery of Paradise" -- a paradise, the author argues, that Europeans trashed.
Going further, other protesters hand up the equivalent of a Nuremberg indictment.
What happened after 1492, thunders the National Council of Churches, was "an invasion and colonization with legalized occupation, genocide, economic exploitation and a deep level of institutional racism and moral decadence." This is partly true, but by the same selective reckoning Jefferson was a Virginia elitist and slave-owning plutocrat.


California Nears Budget Deadline $14 Billion Short
The nation's largest state is staggering toward the start of the new fiscal year Monday with an enormous budget shortage and growing signs that an elaborate compromise worked out by Gov.
Pete Wilson may be starting to unravel.
An air of deepening crisis descended over the state capitol today as the Governor, a moderate Republican, closeted himself with leaders of the Democratic-controlled Senate and Assembly over the $14.3 billion shortage, which is by far the largest gap between spending and expected revenues ever faced by any state.
The shortage is 30 percent of the state's general fund, which is the primary source for most essential services.


Lowrance Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Hornets Make Johnson No. 1 Pick in the Draft
Larry Johnson will be the richest.
Kenny Anderson, the happiest.
Billy Owens, the most disappointed.
As expected, they were the first three players selected last night in the National Basketball Association draft at Madison Square Garden.
However, not in the order many had expected.


House Democrats Reach Accord on Transport Bill
House Democrats said today that they had agreed on a wide-ranging transportation proposal that would cost $30.5 billion more than a package the Senate approved last week.
Representatives Robert A. Roe, chairman of the Public Works Committee, and Norman Y. Mineta, chairman of the subcommittee on transportation, said their bill would cost $153.5 billion over five years.
The Senate bill would cost $123 billion.


American Biodynamics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Theater; All About Marriage, With Shavian Dash and Wit
To wed or not to wed, that is the question facing most of the Bridge north family in "Getting Married," Shaw's still timely if loquacious disquisition on the institution, not to mention the superstition, of marriage.
In a new production at Circle in the Square, the first major New York revival of the play in 40 years, the director Stephen Porter and his mostly able cast humorously expound a litany of farcical heresies concerning matrimony in the first half of the evening before becoming bogged down in what Shaw himself admitted was "nothing but talk, talk, talk, talk, talk."


IAF Biochem International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


First-Quarter G.N.P. Plunged by 2.8%
The economy contracted at a sharp 2.8 percent annual rate in the first three months of the year, while corporate profits posted their biggest decline since the spring of 1989, the Commerce Department said today.
The first-quarter decline in the gross national product followed a 1.6 percent drop in the fourth quarter of 1990, thus meeting the traditional definition of a recession as two consecutive quarters of declining G.N.P.


CHRONICLE
A letter from the father of LEA SALONGA, the Tony Award-winning female lead of "Miss Saigon," prompted her to organize a concert to benefit victims of the volcanic eruption in the Philippines, where she was born.
Members of the "Miss Saigon" cast will be joined by Filipino-American singers in a concert of pop and Filipino music Sunday at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street.


The Poorest Americans: II; Beyond Income, They Need Family Support
Income assistance: That's what rings out loudest in the final report just issued by the National Commission on Children.
To relieve the poverty that afflicts one of every five children, the commission calls for a $1,000-a-year tax credit.
Though flawed by the commission's failure to deal with its cost, the proposal can be remedied.
And in any case, the commission advances two imaginative proposals to relieve the burden on poor children, the poorest Americans.
These initiatives are both intended to enlarge family support, with a new form of insurance and with the rediscovery of an old, effective way of providing services.


League Heads Speak Out Against Sports Lotteries
Declaring their concern about the integrity of their games, three commissioners of major professional sports leagues teamed up today to lobby for legislation to halt the expansion of state-sponsored sports lotteries.
Paul Tagliabue, commissioner of the National Football League; Fay Vincent, the baseball commissioner, and David Stern, commissioner of the National Basketball Association, testified in favor of House and Senate bills that would prohibit states from establishing any legalized gambling, including lotteries, that would be based on professional or amateur sports events.


Stor Furnishings International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Geneva Steel reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


L'Oreal Official Dies After Quitting in Controversy
The chairman of the American marketing arm of L'Oreal, the French cosmetics giant, died Wednesday, hours after announcing that he had resigned amid a controversy over his pro-Nazi activities during World War II.
Associates of the executive, Jacques Correze, announced his death early today.


Oppenheimer Multi-Government Trust reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Frenchtex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Walesa Vetoes Election Law, But Won't Oust Legislature
President Lech Walesa vetoed an election law today for a second time, but backed away from his threat to dissolve the lower house of Parliament.
He had threatened on Sunday to dissolve the legislature, which is dominated by holdover Communists from the previous Government, but apparently he decided he did not have clear constitutional power to do so.


New Finding Moves Up Epoch of Neanderthals
For the first time, scientists have firmly established that Neanderthals lived in Western Europe as recently as 36,000 years ago, several thousand years after the first modern humans are believed to have appeared there.
The finding lends support to the view that anatomically modern people did not evolve from Neanderthals but rather coexisted with and eventually supplanted them through superior intellect and culture.


New Criticism for Heileman
The Surgeon General has added her voice to growing opposition to a plan by the G. Heileman Brewing Company to market a potent new malt liquor that critics say is aimed at blacks.
The Surgeon General, Antonia Novello, has said she objects to advertisements for the beverage, Power Master malt liquor, Ms.
Novello's spokeswoman, Mary Jane Fingland, said today.


Interstate Bakeries Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 1


Stake in Husky Is Up for Sale
The Nova Corporation confirmed today that it wants to sell its 43 percent share in Husky Oil Ltd., one of Canada's largest oil and gas companies.
The company's announcement was the first time Nova had confirmed it was looking to divest itself of its interest in Husky, Husky's assets total $3.7 billion.


Union Chief's Defeat Tied to Anger at Cuomo
The president of the second largest union of state workers was voted out on Tuesday in an election that appeared to reflect deep anger with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's approach to New York's fiscal problems.
The vote of the Public Employees Federation, which was tallied on Tuesday night, was the second election this month in which a union leader seemed to be held accountable for his organization's endorsement of Governor Cuomo in last year's gubernatorial campaign.


Sunset for the Old-Style Pool, On Boulevard or in Backyard
ANYBODY out there remember Joe Gillis?
I was the two-bit movie writer who got shot by the great Norma Desmond in "Sunset Boulevard." I ended up floating face down in her swimming pool.
Well, I'm still there.
Just a movie writer with a couple of "B" pictures to his credit staring at the bottom of a pool.
Maybe you'd like to hear what's happened to pools since that night more than 40 years ago when Mrs.
Gillis's little boy made his splash.
If so, you've come to the right party.


Seagram and DDB Seeking Warmer Image for Chivas
THE maker of Chivas Regal, having put the Scotch firmly on a pedestal, now wants to give consumers a "ladder" to get to it.
Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons is introducing a dramatically different global advertising campaign for Chivas, meant to reshape the image of the super-premium Scotch.
The goal is to convince consumers that Chivas is as friendly as a neighborhood bartender, yet still preserve its long-running prestige pitch.


Young Fathers Talk Diapers and Teething
Sitting in a circle of folding chairs in the basement of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, the four young men look like a group that would rather be outside playing basketball.
Their conversation, about the merits of the Los Angeles Lakers and the Chicago Bulls, is what might be overheard on any subway.
What makes the young men different is what they talk about next: diapers.


Housing Earmarked for the Poor Is Enriching Big Investors Instead
A Federal program of housing for the poor is turning into profits for big real estate investors, led by one of America's business giants, the General Electric Company.
General Electric is about to become the biggest buyer under a Federal program in which nearly 500 apartment complexes taken over from failed savings and loan institutions are being sold by the Resolution Trust Corporation at discount prices to investors who agree to set aside 35 percent of the units for low-income families.


Politician Charged in Theft
The former president of the Young Democrats of Rockland County was arrested today and accused of stealing money from the club, the Rockland County District Attorney, Kenneth Gribetz, said.
The suspect, Robb Knie, 22, of Spring Valley, was charged with petty larceny and filing a false statement with the Board of Elections.
Mr.
Gribetz said that Mr.
Knie, as president of the Young Democrats from January 1989 through March 1991, wrote or cashed several bad checks.


Ali Facing a Judgment
Former heavyweight boxing champion MUHAMMAD ALI has been ordered to pay a Zionsville, Ind., sports promoter $12,907 for failing to sign photographs and posters.
The judgment against Ali was issued Tuesday by Boone Superior Judge ORA A. KINCAID.


More Testing Won't Improve Math Skills
To the Editor:
As a person whose job it is to promote effective strategies for teaching and learning mathematics, I read with some dismay Education Secretary Lamar Alexander's comments on the latest National Assessment of Education Progress in mathematics (front page, June 7).


Hitachi Camcorder
Hitachi Ltd. said it would introduce the thinnest 8-millimeter-format video camcorder on the market, the VE-E25, in Japan on July 5, with a monthly sales target of 20,000 units.
The camcorder is 59 millimeters thick, compared with the current thinnest model, which is 69 millimeters thick and also made by Hitachi.
The Japanese retail price will be 165,000 yen, or about $1,200.
Hitachi plans to export the camcorder to the United States in September and to Europe a month later.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Arvin Industries, Columbus, Ind., a maker of automobile and metal products, appointed Byron O. Pond president and chief operating officer. *
Biomechanics Corp. of America, Deer Park, L.I., a labor consulting concern, named David A. Deutsch president and chief operating officer.


Red Sox Boosterism Serves as Gasoline For Smoldering Yanks
The Yankees were minding their own business tonight, conducting their pregame infield rituals, when Mike Greenwell's face suddenly appeared on the massive scoreboard beyond center field.
And then he said it, something about how the Boston Red Sox should be blowing out the Yankees, something that seemed innocuous at the time but had the same effect as tacking up an opponent's remarks on a bulletin board.


Bush to Release Military Aid to Salvador
The Bush Administration has decided to release up to $21 million in previously frozen military aid to El Salvador to help its army acquire vital spare parts and medicines at a time when the guerrillas are preparing to step up the fighting, State Department officials say.
The decision reflects growing concerns that the rebels of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front will soon deploy advanced SA-16 antiaircraft missiles against the Salvadoran Air Force to gain advantages at the United Nations-sponsored peace talks, which have been stalled at least temporarily.
Senior officials say the missiles probably come from Cuba, an assertion that Havana has denied.


Two Priests Are Robbed in Front of Rectory
Two priests, one of whom was beaten on the head with a gun, were robbed of $85 by two men last night in front of the rectory of Our Lady of Lourdes in Harlem, the police said.
The priests were about to enter the rectory at 472 West 142d Street at 11:15 P.M. when the two gunmen came up behind them and demanded money, said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman.


Soviet Reformers Scramble for Unity
With the growing possibility of elections for a new national parliament next year, the many scattered foes of the Communists have begun trying to shape a coherent opposition to challenge the party for control of the Kremlin.
The most potentially significant effort has been a series of negotiations to merge breakaway Communists with leading opposition movements in major republics to form a powerful national opposition party.


Schwartz Brothers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Homeless Move From Coliseum Under Pressure
As time ran out for an encampment of the homeless in Columbus Circle last night, the handful who remained were outnumbered by television vans, protesters, police officers, social workers and curious passers-by.
At 1:30 A.M. today, more police officers, dressed in riot gear, arrived aboard buses and took up positions near the Coliseum and 2 Columbus Circle.
Fewer than a dozen homeless people remained, still debating their next move.


Wealth and Charity Built on a $17 Million Fraud
On the walls of their 20-room mansion hung a drawing by Rubens.
On the bookshelves were first editions of William Butler Yeats.
On the music stand was a score with Richard Wagner's signature.
The bed once belonged to Emperor Maximilian of Mexico.
And out in the garage were snazzy, mint-condition collector's dream cars: a 1954 MG convertible, a 1957 Ford Thunderbird and a 1974 Rolls-Royce.
The two men made a splash on the Philadelphia social scene not only by playing host to socially correct soirees, but also by donating large sums to hard-pressed cultural institutions in the city.


INSIDE
New Baltic Tensions
Soviet troops raided Lithuania's telephone center, reviving the war of nerves over the Baltic republic's independence drive.
Page A8.
U.S.
Accuses Iraq at U.N.


Nantucket Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


French Suspect Top Libyans In Pan Am Blast, Report Says
Some French investigators are now convinced that senior Libyan officials, including the brother-in-law of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, planned the 1988 bombing of a Pan American World Airways jet that left 270 people dead, a French magazine reported today.
The news weekly L'Express reports in its latest issue that French judicial officials may soon charge Colonel Qaddafi's brother-in-law, Abdullah Senoussi, and Libya's Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs, Moussa Khoussa, with complicity in terrorist acts.


Dycom Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Pepsico View Of Write-Off
Pepsico Inc. said yesterday that a fourth-quarter charge resulting from a review of its Frito-Lay snack-food operation was possible, but that the company remained confident that it would achieve its earnings estimates of $1.55 to $1.60 a share for the year.
"A fourth-quarter charge is a possibility, not more than that," said Kenneth Ross, a Pepsico spokesman.
"Any discussion of numbers is very premature." He was commenting on published reports that quoted an analyst as saying that Pepsico might take a fourth-quarter charge of $50 million, or 5 cents a share, because of a revamping of Frito-Lay.


Blooming Surprise: Crocuses for Fall
EVEN before summer arrived officially, nursery catalogues offering spring bulbs began arriving in my mailbox.
Smith &amp; Hawken, Wayside Gardens, White Flower Farm and several other companies have already tempted me to add more daffodils and tulips to my garden for next year.
They have also urged that I order early, to avoid disappointment.
I will procrastinate until September, for I have never been disappointed.
This daffodil or that tulip my heart was set on has never been sold out.
The supply of Dutch bulbs seems to match, and probably exceed, the demand.


Tubby's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Shorewood Packaging Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


Puroflow Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Harold's Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


Skylink America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Convictions Overturned for 7 in I.R.A. Blasts
A British appeals court overturned today the 1976 convictions of five members of a family of Irish Londoners, a Northern Ireland man and a friend who had served long prison sentences for supposedly operating a bomb factory for the Irish Republican Army.
The ruling marks the third time in less than two years that a British appeals court has overturned the convictions of groups that were supposedly involved in the I.R.A.'s bombing campaign in Britain in the 1970's that generated outrage in Britain and a backlash against the Irish.


Price Co. reports earnings for 12wks to June 9


Washington at Work; Jackson May Not Be Running But He's Still a Front-Runner
The Presidential campaign looms ever closer over the horizon.
Racial politics are in the air.
A dominant Democratic candidate has yet to emerge.
All this leads to one thing: the Rev.
Jesse Jackson is back.
Or at least he wants to be.


Continental Homes Holding reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bridge
Most of us have at some time ventured a sporting double, heard a loud redouble from the opposition, and wished that it were legal to undouble.
This rare option was exercised effectively in the final of the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams in Atlantic City in March, and the bidding shown is an exact record of the proceedings.
Sitting East for the team that eventually won the title was Ed Manfield, a newly arrived resident of Philadelphia.
After an artificial auction by North-South he doubled six hearts under a slight misapprehension.


Review/Opera; The Bolshoi in a New 'Yevgeny Onegin'
What could be more enticing than the prospect of a new production of "Yevgeny Onegin," the most "Russian" of operas, by the Bolshoi Opera?
For an "Onegin" lover, nothing.
But what, to be quick about it, could be more disappointing than Tuesday evening's reality at the Metropolitan Opera House: a Bolshoi production that failed, first and last, to convey the intimate atmosphere and emotional power of Tchaikovsky's most nearly perfect work of art?
The Bolshoi premiere, the first such event ever to occur outside the Soviet Union, had its fleetingly effective moments but consistently failed to cast the peculiar "Onegin" spell.
Not everything went wrong, of course.
Boris Pokrovsky, who directed, is a veteran interpreter of "Onegin" -- it was his production, then 30 years old, that the Bolshoi brought to New York on its visit in 1975.
The dark ritual of the duel scene went off with chilling simplicity and the proper sense of inexorable mindlessness.
The carousers at Tatyana's birthday party actually appeared to be having a good time, their dancing expertly choreographed to look spontaneous and unballetic, a nice contrast to the final act's lavishly formal polonaise.


Trade Deficit In France Rises
France's seasonally adjusted trade deficit rose to 2.02 billion francs, or about $330.3 million, last month, from a revised 1.88 billion francs, or $307.4 million, in April, Government data showed.
The April deficit was revised from 2.07 billion francs, or $338.4 million.


Two Indicted In Moran Case
Two top executives of the defunct brokerage J. T. Moran &amp; Company were indicted yesterday on criminal charges of defrauding investors and other securities firms of millions of dollars.
John T. Moran, the former chairman and chief executive of the Wall Street firm, and Roy Sartorius, its senior vice president, were charged in separate indictments in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co., New York, renewed a two-year contract with Circle K Corp., Phoenix, to provide long-distance services to the public phones at Circle K convenience stores in 31 states. *
BSN Corp., Dallas, a sporting goods company, is considering buying 1.15 million shares of Sport Supply Group to gain majority ownership of the company.


CHC Helicopter reports earnings for Year to April 30


Critic's Notebook; They're Off! May The Best Host Win
The King of the Night is departing; long live the King of the Night.
But who will really inherit Johnny Carson's 30-year-old mantle of success?
Jay Leno, the clean-cut fellow next door who will actually take over NBC 's "Tonight" show in May?
David Letterman, the offbeat prince of snide who keeps his own NBC late-night show but is pouting about not getting the Carson slot?
The competition has already begun, with names like Dennis Miller and Ron Reagan being bandied about.
There is, however, one contender who has earned special consideration: Arsenio Hall.


Rowe Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to June 2


Honda Faults A U.S. Audit Of Its Imports
Senior executives of the Honda Motor Company have met with top Treasury officials to express concern about the status of a Government audit suggesting that the company may owe millions of dollars in duties on cars imported into the United States from Canada, lawyers for the auto maker said today.
Donald Harrison, a lawyer for Honda, said the company wanted to make clear to American officials that it was strongly committed to the American market.
In addition, he said, Honda protested the disclosure of details of the audit, being conducted by the United States Customs Service.


State Shuts Down North Hempstead Landfill
The State Department of Environmental Conservation today permanently shut down the North Hempstead landfill, the last operating landfill in Nassau County.
In announcing the decision, the state Environmental Commisioner, Thomas C. Jorling, said that the town had failed to resolve problems at the landfill, including poor drainage that had filled the air with a rotten odor and left gallons of liquid runoff collecting at the bottom.


Arno W. Mueller; Cable TV Executive, 64
Arno W. Mueller, a former executive of Storer Communications who was a pioneer in cable television, died Sunday of complications from pneumonia.
He was 64 years old.
Mr.
Mueller became president of Storer Cable Communications Division in 1979.
The division had 1.5 million subscribers by the time he left the company in 1983.
He became a consultant.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 27


Time to Withdraw From the Philippines
To the Editor:
Who could not be moved by reports and photos in your pages of the human suffering and extensive property losses caused by the eruptions of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippine Islands?
But Mount Pinatubo has presented the opportunity to close once and for all the foreign military bases in the Philippines.


Verdict In: 12th President Was Not Assassinated
Ending months of speculation about the death of Zachary Taylor, state and county medical officials said today that the 12th President of the United States died of natural causes almost 141 years ago.
Taylor's death was caused by any of "a myriad of natural diseases which could have produced the symptoms of gastroenteritis," said George R. Nichols 2d, the State Chief Medical Examiner, adding that because of severe decomposition of the body, a precise cause of death could not be determined.


Juno Lighting Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


D. A. Blaisdell, 68, Machine Tool Leader
Durwood Alton Blaisdell, president of the U.S.
Baird Corporation, machine-tool builders of Stratford, Conn., died on Monday at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford.
He was 68 years old and lived in Orange, Conn., and Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He died of heart attack, his daughter said.


SPORTS PEOPLE: PRO BASKETBALL;
The contract for Miami Heat center RONY SEIKALY is a nine-year deal for about $31 million, putting him ahead of such stars as MICHAEL JORDAN and PATRICK EWING in average annual salary, published reports said yesterday.
Seikaly's contract averages $3.4 million a year, The Miami Herald said.
The Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel put the average at $3.53 million. (AP)


Night High School Isn't New to New York City
To the Editor:
Your June 7 article on the Manhattan Comprehensive Night High School describes it as "the nation's first full-time night high school." In 1928, I graduated from Morris Evening High School in the Bronx after having spent four years attending classes five nights a week from 7 to 11 P.M.
Other than no gym or musical-instrument classes, the curriculum was the same in the evening as in the daytime.


Asmara Journal; Pupil of G.I.'s Does Well, as a Rebel
For Sephat Ephrem, the wiry 40-year-old chief of staff of the Eritrean guerrillas who defeated the Ethiopian Army, sitting in the headquarters of his enemy is a sentimental homecoming.
Mr.
Sephat was a youthful visitor at the headquarters in the 1960's when what are now shabby buildings and overgrown gardens served as an American communications base, before the leadership of the Ethiopian Army moved in.
Indeed, his science teachers were Americans assigned to his school from the headquarters, called Kagnew Station.


Armstrong Trial
Armstrong World Industries said a Federal judge in Newark had ordered a new trial in a suit brought against it by Industry Network Systems, a defunct company that was based in Paramus, N.J.
Last week, the judge dismissed a $238 million jury award in the case against the interior furnishings manufacturer.
Industry Network contended that Armstrong had forced it out of the business of producing videotapes for retailers who sell floor coverings.


Roland Van Zandt, 72, Writer And Historian of the Catskills
Roland Van Zandt, an author and historian who was concerned with the preservation of the Catskills, died on Monday at the Benedictine Hospital in Kingston, N.Y.
He was 72 years old and lived in Shandaken, N.Y.
He died of cancer, said Deborah Allen, co-publisher of the Black Dome Press.


Democrats Challenge College Accrediting Policy
Education Secretary Lamar Alexander clashed with Democrats on a House subcommittee today over whether he had the legal authority to withhold recognition of a regional accrediting association for colleges and universities because of its emphasis on cultural diversity.
Several Democrats said Mr.
Alexander had no authority to defer the reauthorization of the Middle States Association and called the action a White House attack on civil rights.
But Republican members of the commitee praised the Secretary's action as an effort to discourage "quotas."


Intermetrics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Fearing Protest, Union Drops Speech by the Labor Secretary
The Communications Workers of America, holding its annual convention in San Francisco, canceled a speech that Labor Secretary Lynn Martin was to give today because the Bush Administration opposed a bill that would bar employers from hiring permanent workers to replace strikers.
Mrs.
Martin learned of the union's action on Tuesday night, after she had flown to San Francisco to address the gathering.


Change in Eligibility
The Presidents Commission of the National Collegiate Athletic Association approved recommendations yesterday that would raise academic standards for freshman eligibility if approved by N.C.A.A. schools.
The 44 presidents voted in Kansas City, Mo., to require that entering freshmen must have a 2.5 grade-point average on a scale of 4.0 in college preparatory courses to be eligible to play.
The current rule, known as Proposition 48, requires a 2.0. average.


How to Read the Black Migration to the North; Evidence From the 30's
To the Editor:
Mitchell Duneier raises some very important questions as a sociologist in "Black Migrants Have Done Better" (Op-Ed, June 11), questions that have interested, troubled and fascinated not only sociologists, but also the public and the press for more than 60 years.


BRIEFS
Debt *
CIT Group Holdings, New York, issued 8 3/4 percent noncallable notes due in 1997 priced at 99.95, to yield 8.761 percent, according to Goldman, Sachs.


Irving Cohen; Boxing Manager, 87
Irving Cohen, who was a boxing manager and promoter for 35 years and handled the career of the onetime middleweight champion Rocky Graziano, died Tuesday night at Scottsdale Memorial Hospital in Arizona.
He was 87 years old.
Mr.
Cohen had been taken to the hospital on Saturday after he suffered a heart attack.
Before he retired in 1965, Mr.
Cohen spent four years as a promoter at St.
Nicholas Arena in Manhattan and Sunnyside Gardens in Queens.


For Somebody's Home
A vertical liquor cabinet, a chair of fur and barbed wire, and a coat tree made of electrical conduit are among 27 pieces from 26 designers in "Interior Objects 1991," an exhibition at Gallery 91 in Manhattan.
Most of the pieces are home accessories whose functions are not necessarily obvious.
What they have in common is their unconventionality.
The Eternal Blues Bar is made along the lines of a grandfather clock.
"The idea was to use space vertically, which is the only space we have in an urban environment," said Laurence Mackler of Manhattan, who designed and built the cabinet-clock.


Democracy a la Carte
To the Editor:
In "Victory for Democracy" (letter, June 9), John J. Conley defends the Supreme Court's decision in Rust v.
Sullivan by arguing for the right of taxpayers not to pay for programs that offend their moral convictions.
I like this idea, and I'd like to take it further.
For example, it offends me that I'm forced to kick in for military aid to the Government of El Salvador and for Richard M. Nixon's pension.
If the Internal Revenue Service will let me deduct proportionally for these budget items and the much longer list that I'll have ready by next April 15, I'll donate the money I save to a family-planning project that rejects Federal funding.
STEVE BOONE Point Pleasant Beach, N.J., June 13, 1991


FSI International reports earnings for Qtr to May 25


Yes, New York City Plans Sidewalk Toilets
It took a lawsuit, horse trading and months of meetings devoted to the delicate politics of public toilets, but finally there is a ray of hope.
By next spring, New Yorkers may have six new places to go to the bathroom.
City officials said Mayor David N. Dinkins had given his blessing to an experiment to test six self-cleaning European toilet kiosks on sidewalks around the city.
The goal is to install the toilets in heavy-traffic areas, the officials said, but no final decision has been made on sites for them.


Imperial Chemical
Imperial Chemical Industries, the British chemical conglomerate, said it had agreed to sell its soda ash operations in Britain and Kenya to a consortium for $:90 million, or about $146.8 million.
The buyer is an investor group led by Penrice Ltd. of Australia, which bought I.C.I.'s soda ash operations in that country in 1989.
About 1,200 employees in Britain and 650 in Kenya will transfer to the new company, I.C.I. said.
The deal is expected to close by the end of the summer.


Corrections
Tables yesterday and on June 18 outlining proposed cuts in New York's municipal work force referred incompletely to the employee totals shown for each department.
They were from the beginning of the 1991 fiscal year.
The table yesterday also described the City Council's proposed cuts incompletely.
They were in addition to the cuts proposed by Mayor David N. Dinkins, not in lieu of them.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
NCNB is negotiating to acquire C&amp;S/Sovran Financial, a large Southeastern banking company, in a deal that could become the largest merger in national banking history.  [ Page A1. ]


The Pressure Is On for U.S. Team in Ryder Cup
Both the Masters and the United States Open have crowned memorable champions, and the coming British Open and P.G.A.
Championship promise more defining moments.
But this year, the summit of the golf season will occur at the 29th Ryder Cup.
The last three editions of the biennial matches between 12-man teams from the United States and Europe have successively topped each other as the biggest in the history of an event that began in 1927.
Before that, the competition had been considered a mismatch, with the United States having lost only three times.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


Stein Roe's Chairman Adds Position of Chief
As the first chief executive in the 59-year history of Stein Roe &amp; Farnham Inc., Timothy A. Schlindwein plans to lead the investment management firm into new areas by building on the company's traditional strengths.
Mr.
Schlindwein, 43 years old, the chairman of the Chicago-based firm, this week added the chief executive's title.
He said yesterday that Stein Roe's parent, the Liberty Financial Companies, had made the management change to streamline the decision-making process.


Sununu Used U.S. Guard Service On New York Trips, Records Show
For more than 18 months, John H. Sununu has used workers who guard Federal office buildings in New York to drive and escort him on business, political and personal errands in the New York and New Jersey area, according to Government officials and documents.
The White House said the assistance to Mr.
Sununu, the White House chief of staff, was routine and had been authorized, and had been made available to other senior officials.


Pickens Sells Japan Shares
T.
Boone Pickens has formally ended his quixotic mission of opening corporate Japan to American corporate raiders by selling his shares in the Koito Manufacturing Company.
Mr.
Pickens, the Texas oilman, acquired 26.4 percent of Koito, an automobile lighting manufacturer affiliated with the Toyota Motor Company, in 1989.
He then waged a futile battle to gain several seats on the board.


Lilly Industrial Coatings reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CHRONICLE
MARLIN FITZWATER, PRESIDENT BUSH's press secretary, is still fuming over Time's cover story in its Jan. 7 issue, "The Two George Bushes." It showed a picture of Mr.
Bush with two faces -- the good-guy, up-beat side and a darker side.
The pictures were taken by GREGORY HEISLER, a freelancer whose pictures frequently appear in leading newspapers and magazines.
And so, when The Los Angeles Times recently asked the White House if Mr.
Heisler could have clearance to photograph Mr.
Bush for a Sunday magazine cover story, Mr.
Fitzwater said no.
"On the Time cover, I felt Mr. Heisler lied to me, and I don't trust him," said Mr.
Fitzwater, who declined to be more specific.
Is Mr.
Heisler banned forever?
"We'll see, in the future," Mr.
Fitzwater replied.


U.S. Sues LTV
The Federal Government sued the LTV Steel Corporation, saying the company's coke ovens in Pittsburgh emitted more pollutants than allowed under state and Federal standards.
The Justice Department suit in Federal District Court seeks to order LTV, based in Cleveland, to close the plant until pollution is reduced and fines of $25,000 a day for about 1,000 violations since 1986.
A company spokesman said LTV had not reviewed the suit and could not comment on it.


CHRONICLE
Has DONALD TRUMP traded Marla for Carla?
Reports in New York Newsday that Mr.
Trump is seeing a lot of CARLA BRUNI and less of MARLA MAPLES were denied yesterday.
"He's seeing a lot of women," said an assistant to Mr.
Trump who did not want to be named.
"Until now, he's been pretty involved with Marla, but it's too soon to settle down with one woman, particularly since he's focusing on his financial difficulties of the past year."


Public &amp; Private; Trim Fat at the Top
There is a management style you might call bottom up.
It suggests that when a company wants to build a better mousetrap, the first place to look for proposals is not in the office of the vice president for strategic planning.
It is on the factory floor, where the men and women who build mousetraps can testify to what works, where a 25-year veteran can say, "We always thought that if you wound the little metal thing around just one more time, you'd have the sucker perfected."
There's very little evidence that the City of New York ever used the bottom-up technique when it was planning its latest budget, a budget that promises to leave thousands of people without jobs and hundreds of thousands without services.


Grain and Soybeans Mixed; Livestock Prices End Lower
Grain and soybean futures prices finished mixed yesterday after an active trading session on the Chicago Board of Trade.
Prices were supported by decreased expections of weekend rain but were weakened by profit taking.
On other commodities markets, meat and livestock futures were lower.


Federalism, Despoiled
Because his lawyers filed a piece of paper one day late in a Virginia court, the Supreme Court holds that Roger Coleman, a death row inmate, is not entitled to challenge the fairness of his murder trial in Federal court.
This bizarre conclusion, a 6-to-3 majority contends, is required by "the respect that Federal courts owe the states and the states' procedural rules."
That's a cramped distortion of federalism's scheme of justice under the Constitution.
In the name of states' rights, the Court has produced a terrible injustice.


G-R-I Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Jazz Festival; Blanchard and Trumpet
The young trumpeter Terence Blanchard opened his show at the Equitable Center on Tuesday night with a still, chilly version of "Motherless Child." Mr.
Blanchard etched the painful melody alone until, suddenly, the band joined in, moving from elongated straight-ahead swing to rumbling Latin sections.
The tenor saxophonist of the group, Sam Newsome, improvised a ruminating solo and the band jumped into the next piece, a ballad.


Anthony, a New Point Man, To Join Knicks' Backcourt
The Knicks felt fortunate to draft Greg Anthony last night.
Anthony felt fortunate to be coming to New York.
But the person who may be most affected by Anthony's arrival is Mark Jackson, whose future in New York has never looked more tenuous.
Anthony became the Knicks' first-round draft choice last night, and the 12th pick over all, much to the delight of the crowd at Madison Square Garden.
A 6-foot-2-inch point guard, Anthony was the floor leader for the Nevada-Las Vegas team that won the national championship in 1990 and that reached the Final Four this year and lost in the semifinals to Duke.
He comes to the Knicks with strong credentials: he is an outstanding defender who loves to pass, who loves to lead, and who knows how to win.


U.S. to Cut Chile's Debt In Plan to Foster Trade
Chile will become the first country to reduce its debt to the United States Government under a year-old Bush Administration plan to stimulate Latin American trade and investment.
Treasury officials said President Bush would officiate at a White House ceremony Thursday at which the Treasury Secretary, Nicholas F. Brady, and Chile's Finance Minister, Alejandro Foxley, will sign an accord writing off $16 million in obligations Chile incurred in buying American food with Federal financing under the Public Law 480 food export program.


Home Video
Anyone who has tried to rent a hot new movie on a Friday night knows the situation: copies at the video store run out fast.
"Stores never have any left, and the reason is that they can't afford to buy enough rental copies at the full wholesale price," said Steve Roberts, a spokesman for Rank Video Services , a large tape duplicator in Torrance, Calif.
Retailers normally pay about $65 a cassette, but Rank has begun testing a new kind of tape designed to cut that price by more than half.
If the idea catches on, it should help dealers stock more copies and ease shortages.


Corning Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to June 16


How to Read the Black Migration to the North
To the Editor:
I think it's significant that Mitchell Duneier's "Black Migrants Have Done Better" (Op-Ed, June 11), criticizing my book "The Promised Land," never actually quotes from the book.
That's because Mr.
Duneier's real objection is to an article I wrote five years ago, and his search for offending material in the book leads him into the shadowy realm of impressions and implications.


TransTechnology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rite Aid Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


On the Last Day of School, a Fifth Grader Says Thanks


Don't Forget Cubans In U.S.-Spanish War
To the Editor:
As the author of several books and scholarly articles on the history of Cuba and its relations with the United States, I applaud "U.S. Belligerence Colors Cuban Attitude" by Prof.
Rebecca Scott (letter, June 11).
I regret that she did not criticize the use of the name Spanish-American War for the war that "ended Spain's control over the island."


TriCare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Coke Is Seeking To Return to India
The Coca-Cola Company, which left India in 1977, wants to resume business in the country, industry officials said.
They said Coke was preparing a proposal for a venture with Britannia Industries of India, a cookie and bread maker partly owned by the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation.
Coca-Cola left India rather than accept the Government's demands that it give up 60 percent of its Indian subsidiary and reveal the secret recipe for its cola soft drink.
India's new Government, however, is encouraging investment by multinational companies.
Coke's rival, Pepsico Inc., which had a short-lived Indian operation in the 1950's, returned in a three-way venture in 1989.


Integrated Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Probation and Fine for Top Boesky Trader
Ivan F. Boesky's former top trader, who had testified against Michael R. Milken, the developer of the "junk bond" market, was sentenced today to five years' probation after pleading guilty to securities fraud.
The trader, Michael Davidoff, 47 years old, was also fined $50,000 and ordered to perform 300 hours of community service.
He had pleaded guilty to one count of securities fraud and had cooperated with the Government by testifying against Mr.
Milken, the former head of Drexel Burnham Lambert's junk bond office, and John Mulheren, the former head of Jamie Securities.


Ryan to Miss a Start
NOLAN RYAN will skip his scheduled start today against Oakland, but will pitch Tuesday night against the Athletics in Arlington, Tex.


Rochester Community Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Construction Contracts Off
Construction contracting fell 5 percent in May after a large gain in April, according to the F. W. Dodge division of McGraw-Hill Inc.
But the Dodge index, which projects future expenditures for construction work, showed that May's contracting remained above the depressed rate of the first quarter.
"The recent improvement in contracting for new construction means higher levels of spending and employment for work in progress in the months ahead," said George Christie, chief economist for F. W. Dodge.


Qume Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Francis J. Prael; Sugar Broker, 76
Francis J. Prael, founder and president of Lewis &amp; Company, a sugar brokerage company in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at Calais Hospital in Calais, Me., where he was vacationing.
He was 76 years old and lived in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
He founded Lewis &amp; Company in 1947 and remained with it until his death.
From 1977 to 1984 he was also president and chief executive officer of the Phildesco Company, a Manhattan importer of coconut products.


A.M.A. Approves AIDS Testing For Doctors and Health Workers
The American Medical Association today formally approved the voluntary testing of physicians and health-care workers for the AIDS virus and proposed easing informed-consent procedures so that more patients could be tested for the virus.
The measures were among a package of resolutions adopted by the association at its annual meeting here to set forth the responsibilities of physicians and patients in the transmission of AIDS.


Oppenheimer Multi-Sector Income Trust reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Baton Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Snag Seen With I.B.M. And Apple
Talks between Apple Computer and I.B.M. about creating a far-reaching technology alliance have bogged down over a number of thorny issues, people involved in the talks said yesterday.
As late as midday Tuesday, executives at both companies had been saying a joint news announcement would be held in San Francisco on Thursday.
"It's not cooked, so we're not ready to take it out of the oven," one participant said yesterday.
No timetable has been set for continuing the discussions, he said.


Council Threatens to Pass Budget With Deeper Cuts
Disagreement on $476 million brought budget talks between Mayor David N. Dinkins and the New York City Council to a virtual standstill yesterday, as the Council flatly refused to raise that amount in property taxes and threatened to pass its own $29 billion budget with deeper cuts instead.
Five days before the start of the new fiscal year, Mr.
Dinkins, who has already proposed $1.5 billion in cuts to help close a $3.5 billion deficit, would not accept the Council's calls for about $465 million more.
The Council, struggling to hold down the Mayor's demands for $776 million in higher property taxes, has also refused to budge.


Soviet Troops Raid Lithuanian Complex
Armed Soviet troops raided Lithuania's telephone center and cut off communications with the outside world for several hours today, stepping up the war of nerves over the republic's drive for independence.
The soldiers said the raid was justified because they found a prohibited firearm on the premises.


Grafton Group reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Northeast Utilities reports earnings for 12mos to May 31


MTC Electronic Technologies Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Howe Hangs On for Save
From Steve Howe's point of view, he was one bad pitch from a much-too-quick end of an evening of work.
He had entered the game with the Yankees leading the Red Sox, 5-1, in the bottom of the seventh inning.
Suddenly, Boston had runners at second and third with no one out, and the fans at Fenway Park, who had seen far greater leads destroyed by the left-field wall, sensed a comeback.


Dollar Has Broad Decline; Gold Rises in New York
The dollar declined yesterday amid speculation that interest rates would rise in Germany.
The Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, is expected to raise rates in hopes of cooling inflation, analysts said.
Gold rose $1.30 on the Commodity Exchange in New York, closing at $365.90 an ounce.
Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $366.00, up $1.75.


Essay; Sununu Blames the Jews
I like to think I'm not hypersensitive; give a pop, take a pop, such is the nature of political conflict.
But John Sununu's descent into the gutter of bigotry in seeking to impugn the motives of his critics should not go unremarked.
The Wall Street Journal last Friday ran an unsourced item on its front page: "Israel supporters quietly campaign against him  [ Sununu ] , spreading their complaints about his ties to Arab-American groups." I wondered who was selling that story.


Events: Crafts Festival, Art and Lots of Tours
Four-Day Festival
Lincoln Center Plazas, Columbus Avenue at 64th Street; (212) 677-4627.
Handmade jewelry, porcelain, clothing and other items will be on sale Saturday and Sunday, and July 6 and 7.
Hours: noon to 9 P.M.
Free.
A Restoration in Progress


Students Lift Scores in Test On Reading
Mirroring their striking rebound in mathematics, New York City public-school students lifted their performance on the annual reading test, surpassing the national average for the first time in three years, according to test figures released yesterday.
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez contended that the reading scores, coupled with the 4.9 percentage point increase in mathematics test scores announced last week and improvements in attendance and the school dropout rate, demonstrated that his one-and-a-half-year-old administration has begun to turn the long-troubled city school system around.


Indiana Financial Investors reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pacific National Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


KRG Management reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Apogee Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


FCMI Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Indians Win With 9 in the First As Belle Returns With a Bang
In his first game back with Cleveland after a stint in the minors, Albert Belle had a two-run double and a run-scoring single in a nine-run first inning tonight as the Indians routed the Baltimore Orioles, 10-4.
Belle, who was sent to Class AAA Colorado Springs on June 6 after he failed to run out a double-play grounder, drove in the Indians' first two runs with a double off the left-field fence and capped the big inning with a run-scoring single.


Southern Starr Broadcasting Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Who Shot Huey Long?
A team of experts undertaking a new investigation of the 1935 assassination of Senator Huey P. Long will exhume the remains of the young doctor long believed to have fired the fatal shot, a researcher says.
James E. Starrs, a forensic scientist at George Washington University in Washington, said the team would travel to Baton Rouge in October to dig up the remains of Dr.
Carl A. Weiss.


Egypt and P.L.O. Seem to Stiffen Opposition to Israel's Peace Terms
As American-sponsored Middle East peace efforts seem to falter, Egypt and the Palestine Liberation Organization appeared today to have stiffened their opposition to Israel's terms for a peace conference.
Such a meeting now seems increasingly unlikely in the face of mutually exclusive demands by Arabs and Israelis.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-13
Tension in two Yugoslav republics mounted as the army failed to dislodge Slovenian militias claiming independence from the federation.
In Croatia, Serbs stormed a Croation police station, killing three.
Page A1
U.S. voices regret on Yugoslav crisis A10


Sammy Price, Pre-Be-Bop
One of the best things about hearing pre-be-bop jazz is that it demands an interactive relationship with an audience.
Sammy Price, the 82-year-old pianist who played at Weill Recital Hall as part of the JVC Jazz Festival on Monday night, spent a good portion of the show joking with a Sahara-dry wit, talking with the audience and taking requests.
When asked what he thought about electronic keyboards and young musicians, he said: "I think young people have a right to do what they want. The only problem is that I'm asleep when they're doing it!"


Canal Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Levine, Huntley Cuts A Third of Its Staff
Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, New York, yesterday dismissed 40 employees, a third of its staff.
Those let go all had worked on the Subaru of America account, which was lost last week to Wieden &amp; Kennedy.
"This has been coming for a long time," said Ed Vick, president and chief executive.
"Everyone knew that the odds were against us."


Pop in Review
Donald Brown Quartet  Bradley's 70 University Place Manhattan Through Sunday
If any proof were needed about the fertility of the current jazz renaissance, it could be found at a show at Bradley's on Tuesday night.
A young quartet led by the pianist Donald Brown, including Donald Harrison on tenor and alto saxophones, Ira Coleman on bass and Yoron Israel on drums, burned through standards and blues without the benefit of arrangements.
The group, called together after several of the originally booked musicians had to fulfill other obligations, was working without rehearsal, and it put out an immense amount of music.
It was a tribute to the idea of a common jazz vocabulary and to the power of improvisation.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.80
5.90
8.32
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.75
5.58
7.78
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.76
7.63
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.20
8.18
8.53
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.50
8.50
8.47
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.55
9.55
9.63
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.24
7.24
7.53
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Yields Leveling for Money Market Funds
Yields of money market funds appear to be "flattening out," Walter S. Frank, an economist for IBC/Donoghue's Money Market Report, said yesterday.
The report monitors most of the big funds, both taxable and tax-exempt.
"With the economy showing obvious signs of recovery -- but of a moderate kind -- we expect over the next four to six weeks to see a continued stability in yields," Mr.
Frank said.
"We don't expect any action by the Federal Reserve."


Scimed Life Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Danielson Federal reports earnings for Year to March 31


Stocks Decline in Japan
Japanese stock prices fell again today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues dropped 223.35 points, or 0.94 percent, to close at 23,543.03.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei lost 141.04 points.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
WAINSCOTING is wood paneling used to cover the lower portions of walls from the floor level usually to a height of about three feet.
Making wainscoting from scratch is time-consuming and often requires expert skill, so many home centers carry kits with precut wainscoting that provide professional-looking results quickly and easily.
Wainscoting is sturdier and less susceptible to staining than paint or wallpaper; therefore, it better withstands rubbing by furniture and is easier to clean.
But wainscoting has an esthetic value as well.
It can add elegance to a den, charm to a kitchen or dining room, and contrast to painted or papered walls above it.
Installing wainscoting in a room with a high ceiling will make it seem lower.


Beeba's Creations Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


HARMONY ELUDING ROBB AND WILDER
It has been a week since Senator Charles S. Robb and Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia publicly declared a truce in their feud over whether Mr.
Robb eavesdropped on the Governor and whether the Governor ordered a police investigation of the Senator.
Yet the war of words goes on between the longtime Democratic rivals, with seemingly contradictory statements from both men increasingly at issue.
More and more, Mr.
Robb seems on the defensive, though the two Virginians have both suffered political damage, especially to their hopes for gaining national office.


U.S. VOICES REGRET ON YUGOSLAV CRISIS
The Bush Administration expressed regret today that Croatia and Slovenia had announced moves toward secession from Yugoslavia and declared that the United States would ignore those "unilateral steps" in future dealings with the country.
In statements by Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, and Margaret D. Tutwiler, the State Department spokeswoman, the Administration said it believed there were "still opportunities for compromise" among the contesting forces in Yugoslavia.


Highlander International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


New Jersey Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The Georgia Power Company of Atlanta has arranged a $51.3 million pollution control revenue bond issue through the Development Authorities of Bartow and Putnam Counties.
J.
P.
Morgan Securities Inc. is the lead underwriter for the bonds, which will be offered at par and bear a 7.25 percent annual interest rate.


Big Berlin Site Is Sold to Sony
The Sony Corporation of Japan today bought a 7.5-acre site on Potsdamerplatz, the historic square that will be transformed from a cold war wasteland into Berlin's bustling center.
Officially, the price was a secret.
But political-opposition leaders said it was $56 million, which they said was too low.


Testimony By Clifford
Clark Clifford, a former Defense Secretary, testified today before a Federal grand jury here that is investigating a foreign bank's large stake in First American Bankshares Inc.
Mr.
Clifford is the chairman of the company.
Mr.
Clifford has said that he did not know of the hidden stock ownership by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, based in Luxembourg, and that he had acted in good faith when he told a Federal official that the bank was not involved with First American.


Pennington's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


A Marked Change in Style For Nomura's Leadership
Hideo Sakamaki is scheduled to become the Nomura Securities Company's president and chief executive at the firm's annual meeting on Thursday.
But this quiet man was in many ways the least likely choice to succeed Yoshihisa Tabuchi as head of the scandal-plagued brokerage, the world's largest securities house.
In a company full of men with quick, sharp tongues, the 56-year-old Mr.
Sakamaki is thoughtful and soft spoken.


U.S.-Soviet Mars Flight Is Proposed to Cut Costs
A study by Stanford University and Soviet scientists made public today contends that an international effort could put people on Mars sooner and for much less money than previously estimated.
The six-month design study concluded that the United States and the Soviet Union, working together or with other international partners, could establish a base on Mars within 21 years by using technology now available.


Spinal Injury Victims Helped By New Drug, Study Reports
A drug made from a natural compound in the brain can help victims of crippling spinal cord injuries regain some mobility and may allow the patients' dying nerves to begin sprouting healthy new circuits, a study has found.
In a trial of patients who received the drug within several days of their injury, half recovered a substantial amount of their lost muscle strength and mobility.
By comparison, only one in 14 patients not treated with the drug recovered spontaneously to any measurable degree.


Swiss Favor Purchase Of McDonnell Fighters
The Swiss Government said yesterday that it would recommend the purchase of 34 jet fighters built by a subsidiary of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.
The Government's Federal Council said it would submit a request to the Parliament for the jets, F/A-18 Hornets, next year.


Escagenetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Global Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Opposition to Time Warner Offering
Union officials at Time Warner's magazine group are expressing strong resentment over the company's proposed rights offering because of its expected effect on members' retirement plans.
Key Martin, unit chairman for the Newspaper Guild at Time Warner Inc., said that he and his colleagues were "angry because this rights proposal erodes the value of our deferred wages in our retirement plans." He was referring to a 401-K retirement savings plan and the Time Warner profit-sharing plan, an employee stock ownership plan.


Wieden &amp; Kennedy Wins 4th Client in East
Wieden &amp; Kennedy, the Portland, Ore., agency that is rapidly making a name for itself on the East Coast, yesterday picked up its fourth client based in the East.
The new client is Morgans Hotel Group Inc., New York.
The account, to create television commercials for the trendy Paramount, Royalton, Morgans and Barbizon hotels in Manhattan, has billings estimated at $1 million to $2 million.


Tyson Looking Svelte
DON KING was jubilant as his fighter stepped off the scale.
"MIKE TYSON," he announced.
"Two hundred and sixteen pounds." Tyson, wearing only black jockey briefs, looked fit and contoured as he weighed in today for his fight Friday night against DONOVAN (RAZOR) RUDDOCK at the Mirage.


Intermark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pretoria Bars Blacks at White School
A plan for 300 black schoolchildren studying in squalid and overcrowded conditions to move into an empty school once used by whites a half-dozen miles away was foiled today by policemen using armored cars and trucks.
In a pre-emptive operation, the police mounted roadblocks in Alexandra, a poor black township surrounded by affluent white suburbs in northern Johannesburg, and intercepted five rented buses before they could pick up the pupils at their current school for the trip to the new one.


Renewed Trade Benefits for China Run Into a Roadblock in Congress
President Bush's push to renew trade privileges for China is in serious trouble in Congress, with approval almost certain to be tied to conditions China vehemently opposes.
The hostility in Congress leaves the Administration in a quandary, lawmakers and Administration officials said.
The most likely course is for the President to veto the bill from Congress and make a series of concessions to key senators to insure that the veto is not overridden.
Even supporters of the Administration acknowledge that if the concessions are made, a successful override of a Presidential veto would be very difficult.


Lawyer Accused of Cover-Up in Election Case
One of New York City's leading election lawyers was indicted yesterday on charges that he conspired with city election officials to cover up an election law violation by one of his clients, a successful judicial candidate.
The lawyer, Robert Allan Muir Jr., is one of the handful of lawyers routinely hired to navigate candidates through the state's labyrinthine election laws.
The highly technical felony charge is likely to fuel criticism that the city's Board of Election, which monitors local campaigns, is too cozy with lawyers aligned with powerful political organizations.


2 Southern Banks Discuss Merger To Form the 2d Biggest in the U.S.
The NCNB Corporation, a fast-growing banking powerhouse from the Southeast, is negotiating to acquire another large Southeastern banking company in what would be the largest merger in American banking history, setting the stage for a decade of consolidation in the troubled industry.
Directors of the C&amp;S/Sovran Financial Corporation, which itself is the product of a merger last year, could decide as soon as today to accept NCNB's offer to combine and become the nation's second-largest banking organization.
Its operations would stretch from the coastal cities of Baltimore and Miami to the oilfields of West Texas, and it would have assets of $116 billion.
Bigger Than BankAmerica
It would surpass the BankAmerica Corporation, which had $111.9 billion in assets as of March 31.
Only Citicorp, with assets of $216.9 billion, would be larger in the United States.


YUGOSLAVIA FAILS TO OUST MILITIAS
Units of the Yugoslav Army failed on Wednesday to dislodge Slovenian militias that were occupying key border posts to back up the republic's assertion that it was now independent of the Yugoslav federation.
At the same time, tension rose in the neighboring republic of Croatia, which also declared independence on Tuesday from Yugoslavia, after ethnic Serbs stormed a Croatian police station in the town of Glina, about 50 miles south of Zagreb.
A Croatian policeman and two civilians were reportedly killed Wednesday and six people wounded in the gun battle.


Hilton Cleared to Operate A Casino in Atlantic City
The hotelier Barron Hilton, denied a license to operate a casino in Atlantic City in 1985 because of connections to a reputed organized-crime figure, received a green light from casino regulators today to return to the city.
The decision prompted speculation that Mr.
Hilton would try to win back the financially tottering Castle Casino, which he lost to Donald J. Trump six years ago.


Jew, 16, Stabbed in Hebron
An Arab man stabbed and seriously wounded a Jewish youth today as the teen-ager was heading to a bicycle shop in the occupied West Bank, the Israeli Army said.
It imposed a curfew on the 80,000 Palestinian residents of Hebron after the attack.


Accounting Rules Study
In an effort to make the balance sheets of the nation's financial institutions more relevant, a leading accounting standards group agreed yesterday to consider ways to tighten the rules governing how financial institutions and others value the securities they hold for investment purposes.
Under current rules, companies can value many of the debt securities held at their original cost, even when more current information about the worth of the investments is available.
Financial institutions, in particular, have been criticized for using the rules to avoid reducing their reported capital when their investment portfolios have fallen in value.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Stride Rite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/City Ballet; Yvonne Borree Stars In 'Mother Goose'
Things got off to an odd start in Tuesday night's performance by the New York City Ballet at the New York State Theater.
The curtain rose on Barbara Bush, it seemed, her nose buried in a book she was silently reading to bodies sprawled artfully about her -- all too old, one would have thought, for bedtime stories.
Was this a special literacy project for dancers?
It was, in fact, Jerome Robbins's "Mother Goose," and the reader was Nancy Lassalle, a longtime supporter of the company.
But that sense of imbalance was typical of the ballet, which bounces lightly but insubstantially between charm and coyness, delicacy and slightness.
Created for City Ballet's 1975 Ravel Festival, the piece presents fairy tales in brief as the dreams of the Sleeping Beauty.
Part of the fun is identifying borrowed set and costume elements from other ballets in the repertory -- among them "The Nutcracker," "Watermill" and "Firebird."


An Oasis in the Concrete Jungle


Jesse Robert Solomon; Dentist, 83
Dr.
Jesse Robert Solomon, a dentist, died on Monday at the State University of New York Health Science Center in Brooklyn.
He was 83 years old and lived in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
He died of bone cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Computer Programmer Charged in Sabotage Plot
A disgruntled computer programmer has been arrested on charges that he planted a destructive program in a plot to wipe out vital data on a rocket project and then get hired back as a high-priced consultant to repair the damage.
The 31-year-old suspect, Michael John Lauffenburger, was arrested by Federal agents on Tuesday, a month after a co-worker at the General Dynamics Corporation here had stumbled on the rogue program and alerted the authorities.
Soon after the program was discovered, it was erased before it could cause any damage.
Before quitting his job on May 29, Mr.
Lauffenburger worked for General Dynamics on the Government's billion-dollar Atlas missile program.
The Atlas was developed three decades ago as an intercontinental ballistic missile for the Air Force, but has been used as a booster rocket for space shots.
Information on Contracts
The rogue program would have destroyed information on contracts and disrupted the company's ability to report to the Government on the project, said Mitchell Dembin, an assistant United States attorney who is overseeing the case.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The State of Iowa's $330 million offering of tax and revenue anticipation notes with a 5.40 percent coupon was priced yesterday at 100.331, to yield 5 percent.
The lead underwriter, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, said the securities, designated 1991 A, would be awarded today.
The notes will mature on June 30, 1992, with interest payable at maturity.


Club Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Quantronix Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Algeria's Army Raises Toll in Clashes to 7
The army said today that the death toll rose to seven civilians in the worst clashes between security forces and Muslim fundamentalists since a state of emergency was declared early this month.
The military command said 34 people were wounded in more than 24 hours of violence that began after the police were confronted Monday by fundamentalists furious over the removal of Islamic insignias from public buildings.
The wounded included three soldiers and a policeman.


Penobscot Shoe Co. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Quality Systems Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Market Place; Chemical Sector Takes Its Lumps
IN the mid-1980's, producers of specialty chemicals were seeing some of their best days ever, and many analysts and executives declared the industry virtually recession-proof.
They said the need for specialty-chemical products -- like adhesives, dyes and finishes -- would remain fairly constant despite the cycles that affect the rest of the economy.
But the last few quarters have gone a long way toward demonstrating that when specialty-chemical customers -- auto makers, steel producers, tire companies and other industrial concerns -- feel the pinch, their suppliers are not immune.


Kuwait Lifts Collaborators' Death Sentences
Kuwait's Prime Minister ordered today that all death sentences imposed on people convicted of collaborating with Iraq should be commuted to life terms in prison, the official news agency said.
The decision on martial-law courts' death sentences appears to reflect Kuwait's growing sensitivity to criticism from abroad that the nation's postwar policies in general, and the trials in particular, have not lived up to the expectations of nations in the American-led alliance that fought to free the emirate from Iraqi occupation.
Martial law courts have sentenced 29 people to death in the last five weeks, despite rising protests from foreign governments and human rights groups who said that the defendants had not received fair trials and that the penalties in many cases were out of proportion to the alleged crimes.


Saving a New England 'Grande Dame'
The Mount Washington Hotel, the majestic 89-year-old structure that was the site of the Bretton Woods international monetary conference in 1944 and once a summer playground for the Vanderbilts, Astors and Rockefellers, was auctioned by banking regulators today and sold for $3.15 million to a group of local New Hampshire investors.
They pledged to preserve the historic hotel while preparing it for the next century.
"This is not a bell tolling for the grande dame of the White Mountains," said Wayne Mock, the auctioneer, as he opened the bidding on the venerable 250-room hotel and resort that has had a history of ups and downs and was rescued from bankruptcy today and the clutches of the New England banking crisis.


Court Battle Opens on Bridgeport Bankruptcy Plea
The legal battle over Bridgeport's plea for bankruptcy protection opened in Federal court here today, with the city arguing that the basic laws that enable a municipality to conduct business also allow it to resort to bankruptcy.
Connecticut's Attorney General, Richard Blumenthal, argued that states must specifically authorize cities and towns to seek bankruptcy protection and that Connecticut had not done so.


A Burnisher of Golden Provence
In 1986, the English writer Peter Mayle decided to abandon the gray dampness of London for the golden yellow sunshine of Provence.
Mr.
Mayle thought the tranquillity and relative isolation of a 200-year-old stone farmhouse in the South of France, north of Aix and east of Avignon, would provide the perfect atmosphere for creating a novel.
Fortunately for him, he was wrong.
"We got involved in redoing the house, and the workers kept coming in and out," the 52-year-old Mr.
Mayle says.
"Every time I sat in one room and tried to work on the novel the builder would come in and say, 'We're knocking a hole in that wall, so you'll have to go somewhere else.' "


Sports of The Times; No Window In Shriver's New Digs
PAM SHRIVER can tell by the wallpaper how her career is going.
Stripes.
Plaids.
Flowers.
Remnants.
Such is the eclectic decor of the Ladies Locker Room No. 2, where the middle-of-the-pack players are relegated.
At Wimbledon, you always know your place.
Ever since 1979, Shriver had dressed in the top women's locker room, known as the Members' Room, but then she made the mistake of approaching the age of 29, with a computer ranking edging up toward triple digits.


5 Rescuers Held in Death Of a Caller
Three volunteer ambulance rescuers have been charged with aggravated manslaughter in an attack on a mentally retarded homeless man who may have irritated them with too many calls.
The prosecutor said the three pummeled the victim as if he was "a punching bag" in the back of their ambulance and on a pier.
The man was later found drowned.
Two other members of the Perth Amboy First Aid Squad, one of them a county sheriff's officer, were charged with trying to cover up the death of the man, Efrain (Frankie) Rodriguez, whose body was found on June 13 in the Arthur Kill, between New Jersey and Staten Island.


Cipsco Inc. reports earnings for 12mos to May 31


William S. Masland; Manufacturer, 70
William S. Masland, former chief executive of C. H. Masland &amp; Sons, a manufacturer of automotive products, died Thursday at the Hershey Medical Center in Hershey, Pa.
He was 70 years old and lived in Carlisle, Pa.
The cause of death was not immediately available.


Failure Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Family Dollar Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Univar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


House Votes to Oppose Ban on Abortion Counseling
The House today passed legislation that would bar the Bush Administration from enforcing a regulation prohibiting federally financed family-planning clinics from giving patients advice about abortion.
The provision was never brought to a separate vote because anti-abortion lawmakers feared they would be beaten badly today.
They preferred to wait for a chance to sustain the veto that President Bush has threatened over any effort to weaken the regulation.


Dow Up 2.90 but Second-Tier Stocks Slip
Stock prices were mixed yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average and other blue-chip indexes edging higher but second-tier issues, which are normally favored by individual investors, not doing as well.
Helped by aggressive computerized buying programs, the Dow added 2.90 points, at 2,913.01.


Carnival Cruise Lines reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Senate Supports New Curbs on Rights of Inmates
The Senate voted to impose new restrictions on prisoners' rights today, approving an amendment to a comprehensive anticrime bill that would limit the number of times an inmate can demand Federal review of a conviction in state court.
The Senate also approved a measure sponsored by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, that would allow the Federal Government to prosecute and impose the death penalty for murders committed with guns taken across state lines.


Vet Street Peddlers Deserve a Chance
To the Editor:
The Civil War-era law permitting disabled veterans the right to peddle goods on any street, to which you refer in "Fairness on Fifth Avenue" (editorial, June 18), is both just and wise in its acknowledgment of the hard reality at the end of the parade.


Keith Group of Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Physician Testifies He Provided Steroids
A suburban Harrisburg physician testified in his Federal trial in Harrisburg, Pa., yesterday that he provided anabolic steroids to professional wrestlers, including HULK HOGAN.
Dr.
GEORGE T. ZAHORIAN 3d, the defendant, also acknowledged that the drugs were provided to enhance their performances, not for medical treatment.
But he said he was unaware that providing steroids for nonmedical purposes became illegal in November 1988, and he said he carefully monitored the physical conditions of the wrestlers as a ringside doctor.


Otra Securities Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fuller (H.B.) Co. (O) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Michael Heidelberger Dies at 103; A Leader in Modern Immunology
Michael Heidelberger, an award-winning pathologist known as the father of modern immunology, died on Tuesday at Tisch Hospital, New York University Medical Center.
He was 103 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a stroke, a spokesman for the family said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in the Company News columns of Business Day in some copies yesterday about asset sales by Minorco misstated the location of the Inspiration Resources Corporation.
It is New York.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR millions of children, the beginning of summer does not mean a respite from the school bell.
According to the United States Department of Education, about 4.5 million children will spend some time this summer attending classes at public elementary or secondary schools.
Millions more will attend private summer schools.
Many of these students will spend their days reviewing the mathematics or history they were supposed to have mastered over the winter.
Others are charging ahead in special courses on astronomy, Chinese or other topics that are not offered during the regular school year.


A One-Two Punch on Basepaths for Expos
There is no nickname attached to them just yet.
No one has gotten silly and called them the Turf Twins, the Exponents of Crime or the Marquises des Steals.
They are quite thankful for this.


Cedar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Overhaul Of Bailout Is Sought
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said today that he had asked the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to step aside as the day-to-day manager of the savings and loan bailout in favor of a "strong chief executive officer" still to be named.
The announcement came at a bitter, and at times emotional, hearing before the Senate Banking Committee.
The hearing was marked by Democratic accusations that the Bush Administration, for political reasons, repeatedly and deliberately concealed the magnitude of both the banking and savings and loan crises.


Sage Drilling Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gillett Holdings in Filing For Bankruptcy Protection
Gillett Holdings Inc., the owner of the Vail and Beaver Creek ski resorts in Colorado, said on Tuesday that it had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from creditors.
Several of the creditors of the financially troubled company, which also owns meatpacking and broadcasting businesses, had filed a lawsuit in February to force the company into Chapter 11 proceedings.


Clean Harbors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Passenger Dies in Pennsylvania Bus Crash


Telesat Satellite
Arianespace, a European consortium, said it had signed a contract with Telesat Mobile Inc. of Canada to launch its MSAT 1 mobile telecommunications satellite.
Telesat estimated the contract at $120 million (Canadian), or about $105 million (American).
MSAT 1 will provide 3,200 channels for mobile telephone and radio communications over North America.
MSAT 1, built by Spar Aerospace Ltd. of Canada and the Hughes Aircraft Company of Los Angeles, will be launched from French Guyana in 1994.


American Science &amp; Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reporter's Notebook; In Hartford Tax Talks, Calm Reigns
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. has repeatedly warned Connecticut lawmakers that if they fail to pass a budget by Sunday at midnight, when the next fiscal year begins, much of the state government will come to a grinding halt.
Sometimes he clasps his hands in front of him when he says it, as though in prayer.
Other times he hitches up his pants, in an apparent gesture of assertive bluster.
But even Mr.
Weicker's theatrics seem unable to break the calm -- verging on paralysis -- that has settled over the Capitol.
The special legislative session that many had expected would be filled with shouted debates, angry demonstrations and passionate public protests about Mr.
Weicker's proposed income tax has produced nothing of the kind.


Fanatic Dieters May Shed Years Along With Pounds
Yo-yo dieting, the cycles of weight loss and weight gain endured by millions of Americans, including many who are not overweight, can have serious and even fatal health consequences, a new study has shown.
The results, being published today in The New England Journal of Medicine, reveal that repeated changes in weight, irrespective of a person's initial weight, are linked to an increased death rate over all and to as much as twice the chance of dying of heart disease.


Strawberry Bows Out
DARRYL STRAWBERRY, on the disabled list with a sore shoulder, said he will skip the All-Star Game on July 9 in Toronto even if he is well enough to play.
A seven-time All-Star, Strawberry is the leading vote-getter among National League outfielders.


Vietnam Hero Honored 23 Years Late
It has taken more than 23 years, but on Thursday the Army will award the Silver Star to the widow of an Army captain who was killed in Vietnam while risking enemy mortar fire to save his badly outnumbered troops.
The awarding of the medal of valor, one of the service's highest honors, will bring an end to Brenda Reed's emotional campaign of perseverance and devotion to her husband, Capt.
James Eddie Reed.
For the past three years the Army has resisted awarding the medal because no one recommended the honor immediately after Captain Reed's death, as is customary.
An oversight by Captain Reed's field commander delayed the process until 1988.


More Rain, but a Few Manage to Dodge the Drops
Wimbledon's resident villain, the weather, struck again today, delivering an afternoon of cloudbursts that further scrambled a schedule already paralyzed by a rare opening-day washout on Monday.
The soggy grass courts were transformed into a tent city, jilted spectators wore umbrellas like armor, and by 6 o'clock this evening, tournament referee Alan Mills, a man plagued by "a wet headache" for the last three days, declared this one another virtual disaster.


It Wasn't a Masterpiece, but Viola Manages to Hold Off Expos
The statistics for Frank Viola weren't elegant.
There were 10 hits, 3 walks and a wild pitch in 7 innings of effort.
Behind the garish figures, though, was art.
Not great art, not high art, but what is often a pitcher's most satisfying work: the art of survival.
On the ropes early and cut up for doubles and singles both hard and soft throughout, Viola outlasted the Montreal Expos by outfoxing them when he absolutely had to as the Mets pounded out a 7-4 triumph at Shea Stadium last night.


Corrections
An article and a chart yesterday about the Teach for America program to recruit and place new public school teachers included erroneous figures in some editions for first-year dropouts from the program in three of the six regions shown.
In New York, 22 of 175 quit; in Los Angeles 21 of 215 quit and in North Carolina, 2 of 29 quit.


Pop in Review
George Clinton  The Palladium
George Clinton must be getting tired of rap hits built on riffs he wrote for Parliament-Funkadelic in the 1970's.
At the Palladium on Tuesday night, he arrived on stage during the marathon, nonstop three-and-a-half-hour set by the P-Funk All-Stars with a rap insulting young rappers: "Your boasting is bogus, silly poses." When he repeated the rap as an encore, other vocalists dropped phrases from De La Soul and Gerardo, two P-Funk borrowers.
"I got rhythm and rhymes," Mr.
Clinton chanted, but that was selling himself short.


Nets Take a Dare and Go for Stylish Anderson
The New Jersey Nets ended the suspense and speculation and made the more daring choice tonight by taking Kenny Anderson, the Queens native who handles the ball as if it were attached to a string, with the second pick in the National Basketball Association draft.
Anderson grew up in Rego Park, played high school ball at Archbishop Molloy and now must simply traverse the Hudson River to continue building the legend that grew out of the New York playgrounds.


Tailor-Made Fly Rods
Ed Fody  (516) 352-7716
Owning a custom fly rod is like having a suit specially made by a tailor, said Ed Fody of Stewart Manor, L.I, who builds split bamboo fishing rods by hand.
"You can really adapt a bamboo rod to a person's needs," he said.


U.N.L.V.'s Trifecta: Three Go in Round 1
Jerry Tarkanian flashed a knowing smile when Larry Johnson was the first player chosen last night in the National Basketball Association draft.
When Stacey Augmon was chosen ninth by Atlanta, Tarkanian clapped his hands, threw a clenched fist and smiled as the two players hugged at the foot of a wooden podium.


Utility Officer Resigns
The General Public Utilities Corporation said yesterday that Susan S. Schepman, its vice president of communications, had resigned on Friday.
Her resignation came three weeks after Standley H. Hoch, the utility's chairman, resigned after an investigation into his relationship with Ms.
Schepman.
The resignations came after an anonymous letter, sent in April, disclosed their relationship.
In a one-sentence memorandum, G.P.U., based in Parsippany, N.J., said Ms.
Schepman "chose to resign." Ms.
Schepman could not be reached for comment.


Margot Tomes, 73, A Book Illustrator
Margot Tomes, an artist and illustrator of children's books, died on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of pancreatic cancer, a family friend said.


Lincoln Center Returns Out of Doors for August
Lincoln Center's 21st annual Out of Doors festival -- described by officials as imperiled by cutbacks in government financing but rescued by private support -- will take place Aug. 1 through Aug. 26, with nearly 100 free events including performances by Pilobolus, Odetta, Max Roach and the Laura Dean Dancers and Musicians.
Scheduled all around Lincoln Center's plazas and Damrosch Park, the events will range from a blues, gospel and folk weekend to jazz and chamber music, clowns and puppets.


House Panel Approves Wider Bank Ownership
The House Banking Committee agreed today to permit industrial companies like retail chains and even automobile manufacturers to own banks.
This gave a tentative lift to the Bush Administration's plan to overhaul the nation's banking system.
But the overall measure that would also let commercial banks operate across state lines, merge with investment banks and in some cases sell insurance, would have to clear many further hurdles before it could become law.


District Attorney Starts Inquiry on Clio Awards
The Manhattan District Attorney's office has started an investigation into the financially troubled Clio Awards Inc. after its 1991 awards ceremonies were disrupted and canceled.
"We're taking a look at the situation to see whether a full-scale criminal investigation is warranted," Colleen Roche, a spokeswoman for the District Attorney's office, said yesterday.
The preliminary inquiry, first reported on Tuesday in The Daily News, is being handled by the District Attorney's fraud division.


Corrections
An obituary on June 10 about the pianist Claudio Arrau misstated the date of his death.
It was June 8, not June 9.


Clinical Data reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Bid to Buy Votes? No, Just Free Speech
A campaign promise that landed a fledgling state legislator in legal trouble was protected by his right to free speech, a judge ruled today in dismissing a misdemeanor charge of election-law violation.
The freshman lawmaker, State Representative Martin Hohulin, 27 years old, had promised during his campaign last year that if the voters put him in office, he would donate part of his $22,863 legislative pay to establish college scholarships in his district.


U. of Utah Selects First Non-Mormon Chief
The University of Utah has selected the first non-Mormon president in its 141-year history, Arthur K. Smith, now the provost at the University of South Carolina and a former vice president of the State University of New York at Binghamton.
The Utah Board of Regents announced today that Dr.
Smith, 53 years old, would become the university's 12th president, succeeding Chase N. Peterson, who announced one year ago that he would retire at the end of the 1990-91 academic year.


Flow International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A.T.&amp; T. Planning New Mobile Phone
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company has asked Federal regulators for permission to test a system of personal mobile phones that could be used at home and on the street.
It said that by using radio channels for which it already holds licenses and now uses for maintenance tests, the system could help relieve crowding on the cellular and regular mobile radio frequencies.
If approved by the Federal Communications Commission, the network could allow customers to use the same phone and number wherever they go within a metropolitan area.
If initial tests are successful, A.T.&amp; T. said it would test the service in Boston, Atlanta and Los Angeles.


MCA Shifts Executives At Its TV Program Unit
MCA Inc. yesterday made several changes in the management of its television programming operations.
Tom Thayer, who had been heading an MCA unit that produced shows for cable television, was promoted to president of Universal Television, the MCA unit that produces network television programs.
He replaces Kerry McCluggage.


3Com Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


When Remodelers Are Archeologists
ROCKY FOLEY was demolishing an interior plaster wall at his 1776 home in South Deerfield, Mass., when a smooth white shape amid the rubble caught his attention.
Dusting it off, he realized it was a horse's skull.
Mr.
Foley recalled, "My first thought was, 'Please, God, don't let me find the horse's rider next.' "
Not until the following day did he have enough courage to pick up the skull, and when he did, he found a note rolled up inside.
The paper named the house's occupants in the 1840's: a militia colonel, his wife and their six children.
"Finding that message from the past really inspired us to push ahead with the work on the house, which has been really slow going," said Mr.
Foley, a respiratory therapist.
"And when we're all done, we're going to follow the colonel's lead. In the last wall we work on, we'll seal in copies of old deeds to the house, a diary of what we did to the house and, of course, the skull."
As restoration of old houses has become practically de rigeur in the past 15 years, many renovators, like Mr.
Foley, have stumbled upon time capsules.
These pockets of memorabilia range from hatpins inadvertently incorporated into plaster walls by heedless craftsmen to carefully planted photographs meant to show subsequent owners what their predecessors looked like.
Finding them is now inspiring this generation to leave its own record.
"There's a natural human urge to be remembered, to leave legible evidence," said Clem Labine, publisher of Traditional Building, a trade magazine about restoration.
"So often we hear of examples being uncovered and of fresh ones being made."
In Janice Poteracki's circa-1909 home in Clarks Green, Pa., six turn-of-the-century negatives were discovered.
Most of the four-inch-square sheets of glass depict smiling little girls with swept-back hair and pouty babies in bonnets, posing in front of her house and the one next door.
"I had one of the photos printed and framed, and I look at the little girl so often I feel I know her," said Ms.
Poteracki, who works for a local catering company.
She discovered the pictures in a crumbling cardboard box in the basement and under a loose attic floorboard.
"There's a woman we know of who's in her nineties and grew up in the neighborhood," Ms.
Poteracki said.
"We're going to show her what we found; maybe she'll remember those children."
Ms.
Poteracki can't understand why former owners never found the negatives.
"Why didn't anyone see them?" she said.
"And why were they left there in the first place? I have so much fun wondering, I could never live in a new house."
Cole Powers knows a little too much about a past resident of his circa-1910 house in Griswold, Iowa.
Behind a baseboard there lay that resident's suicide note, written to his parents when he was an angry teen-ager in the 1930's.
"In the note he asks to be laid out in the living room until he was buried, so everybody could see his body," said Mr.
Powers, a car repairman.
"If he'd gone through with it, boy, the house would be pretty creepy."
The resident did not carry out his threat; instead he lived to inherit the house.
A few years after he wrote the letter, he stashed three full beer bottles in the attic.
Mr.
Powers found them while poking around up there.
For his part, Mr.
Powers has established far cheerier time capsules: inside walls he renovated, he and his wife, Brenda, left recent newspapers and their signatures.
Dale Niewoehner of Rugby, N.D., has been leaving time capsules since he was a child.
"Every time we fix the steps or the sidewalk, we'd seal in jars with photos, letters, a note giving our name and the date," said Mr.
Niewoehner, a funeral director.
"And every time I put in a new wall or floor in my house, I leave newspapers inside, and catalogues and TV Guides."
He also leaves time capsules when he travels by ship.
"We went to England on the QE2 recently, and halfway over we dropped plastic bottles overboard with our calling cards inside, some stamps, an emblem of the town of Rugby and a note saying to please write to us if you find this," Mr.
Niewoehner said.
"We haven't heard back yet."
Adair Mulligan creates time capsules to honor past inhabitants of her circa-1800 house in Gilford, N.H., and to educate her three young children.
While renovating the house, she found dozens of artifacts, including 19th-century coins, a child's pocket watch, porcelain shards, a fragment of a metal toy pistol and an ivory-handled riding crop.
In a shoe box inside the wall of a small wing she added to the house, she and her children placed modern-day counterparts of those found objects: recently minted pennies, a plastic digital watch, a plastic cup, a squirt gun and a car key.
She also included a long letter in the box, giving information on the house's history.
"We put in what we wish people had left for us," she said.
"It gives the children a good sense of the passage of time."
Richard Alleman's time capsule gives him goose bumps.
After 15 years in a tiny studio in Greenwich Village in New York, Mr.
Alleman, the travel editor at Vogue, was ready to move out.
In a last-ditch effort to improve his quarters, he remodeled.
One thing he wanted to remove was a mantelpiece over the fireplace that he found intrusive.
When the carpenter lifted away the wood, a late 19th-century photograph of a young man and an equally old calling card were there.
When Mr.
Alleman returned home and saw the treasures, he said, "I had the strangest feeling, as if I had made the right decision in staying in the apartment."
The card is from the long-vanished Staden hair goods shop at 283 Sixth Avenue, not far from Mr.
Alleman's home.
The man in the photo, possibly an employee of the store, bears a startling resemblance to Mr.
Alleman.
Both men are tall and lanky, with round faces, wide-set eyes, straight hair smoothed across their foreheads, and fine noses.
"Maybe it's a Shirley MacLaine story," Mr. Alleman said.
Then with a straight face he added, "I'll never know if those things were put there intentionally, but I'd like to think that they were."


Japan Airlines
Japan Airlines said it would upgrade its computer reservations and ticketing system to enable it to link up with American and European systems.
The airline said it would invest 7.8 billion yen, or about $56.4 million, in the upgrading, which includes installing additional processing operations and increasing the number of terminals that can be connected to the main computer to 64,000, from 40,000.


Trustee Will Run Monarch
A Federal Bankruptcy Court judge has approved the appointment of a trustee to run the Monarch Capital Corporation.
The move on Tuesday came a day after Monarch's president, Roger T. Servison, resigned.
He had taken over the company in the fall.


Champion Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to May 31


Fire Nears Pipeline, but Threat Seen as Nil
About 750 firefighters battled dozens of lightning-caused wildfires in interior Alaska today, including one that was burning near the Trans-Alaska Pipeline.
The largest of the fires had grown to 11,850 acres and was about one mile from the pipeline at a point 65 miles north of Fairbanks, said Sue Mitchell, a spokeswoman for the Alaska Interagency Fire Center.


Marv Owen, 85, Dies; Tiger Infielder in 30's
Marv Owen, who was the third baseman for the 1935 World Series champion Detroit Tigers, died on Saturday at a nursing home.
Mr.
Owen, who was 85 years old, had been suffering from Alzheimer's disease.
Mr.
Owen had a lifetime batting average of .275 in a nine-year career.
He set one record that still stands: 31 consecutive trips to the plate without a hit in World Series play.


F.C.C. Report Sees Gloom for Broadcast TV
Owning a television station has long been tantamount to owning a money machine, but it may not be so for long, according to an analysis of the industry by the Federal Communications Commission.
In a pessimistic assessment to be released Thursday, the commission prdicts that the rapid expansion of cable television and other pay-TV services will leave over-the-air broadcasting a smaller and far less profitable business by the year 2000.


Nendels Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pop in Review
The Divinyls
The Ritz
Some rock bands shouldn't be taken at their word.
One is the Divinyls, the Australian group that performed last Thursday at the Ritz.
Their mildly salacious hit "I Touch Myself," along with most of the songs on their fifth album, "Divinyls" (Virgin), presents the singer Christina Amphlett as a woman in thrall to her fickle lover.
And on stage, she was dressed as a sexpot, wearing a skater's skirt that was short enough to show the garters holding up her black stockings; she announced she was "here for your personal service." But as she stalked around on her high heels, her voice and her body language insisted she was nobody's boy toy.


On Stage, and Off
Two Jujamcyn Projects at Sarasota
Let's hear it for Jujamcyn Theaters, the only Broadway theater owner that actively develops its own shows instead of buying them pre-made.
As with "The Secret Garden" and "I Hate Hamlet," Jujamcyn will produce two projects this summer in Saratoga, N.Y., in association with the Albany-based Capital Repertory Company.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.63
5.73
8.32
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.55
5.75
7.75
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.73
7.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.17
8.20
8.47
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.50
8.50
8.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.52
9.55
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.24
7.24
7.51
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Quantum Charge
The Quantum Chemical Corporation said it would take a $24 million after-tax charge in the second quarter because it had closed three production units.
Quantum said its U.S.I. division would close the plants because of overcapacity in ethylene and polyethylene.
The company said it would permanently close its ethylene operation in Tuscola, Ill., and temporarily shut the polyethylene plant in Tuscola and in Port Arthur, Tex.
Quantum said it would also permanently close two reactors at Port Arthur.


Abroad at Home; The Court We Elected
The Supreme Court has an inherently anomalous role in the American polity.
We expect it to articulate eternal values: justice, freedom, rights.
But we do not want it to be utterly out of touch with the movement of belief in our democracy.
The Framers of the Constitution dealt with the dilemma by giving the justices life tenure but making their appointments political.
The President nominates, and the Senate confirms.
That way the Court is shaped, over time, by our democratic institutions.


Layoffs for 800 At Electric Boat
Electric Boat said today that it would lay off more than 800 employees as part of a reorganization.
The announcement comes just two months after the military contractor, the largest division of the General Dynamics Corporation, was awarded the second contract for the Government's Seawolf submarine.


Kashmir Rebels Kill Israeli Tourist, Marking New Phase in Conflict
An attack early today by Muslim militants on a houseboat occupied by Israeli tourists in Kashmir left one Israeli dead and one missing and presumably captured, Indian and Israeli officials said.
The death of the Israeli marked a new phase in the worsening conflict in predominantly Muslim Kashmir, where Indian troops and paramilitary police are seeking to quell an armed independence movement.
Indian officials said it was the first time that a foreign tourist had been killed by the separatists in Kashmir's resort capital, Srinagar.
Since the independence movement erupted anew two years ago, however, about 2,900 civilians and combatants have died.


Review/Film; Two Nuns Bring Prestige And Fame to Their Convent
Directed in a composed, painterly style, Miguel Picazo's "Extramuros" is as staid as a film about the Spanish Inquisition can be.
It concerns the clandestine activities of two nuns, Sister Angela (Mercedes Sampietro) and Sister Ana (Carmen Maura), who run the risk of grave punishment for their activities.
Most conspicuously, the two contrive to fake stigmata on the hands of Sister Angela, whose newly found public recognition brings her convent great, unexpected fame.
More privately, they also embark on a love affair that is presented as a series of tremulous, stagy clinches fraught with noble passion.
The film's gentility in depicting this attraction is modulated by the placid sincerity of Miss Sampietro, and the always larger-than-life emotions of Miss Maura, who can bring desperate intensity to any role.


Ameron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Lufthansa Orders 10 Boeing Aircraft
The Lufthansa Group has ordered 10 extended-range 767 jetliners in a deal valued at $1.15 billion, the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group said.
Lufthansa, Boeing's largest foreign customer, also agreed to take three 767-300ER's that had been ordered by another company, Boeing said.


Green Named Coach Of Edmonton Oilers
The Edmonton Oilers named TED GREEN as their new head coach yesterday, a move that shouldn't cause even a ripple of discontent among the players.
Green, who stepped into a job held for two seasons by JOHN MUCKLER, is the fourth head coach in the National Hockey League team's 12-year history.
But he is a familiar face, having spent nine of the last 10 seasons as an assistant or co-coach in Edmonton during a period during in which the Oilers won the Stanley Cup five times and gained recognition as a dynasty.


Germans in Warning on Yugoslav Economy
German government and business leaders warned today that political upheaval in Yugoslavia could seriously disrupt the country's economy and hinder its ability to deal with the outside world.
Germany has a long history of trade and political interests in the Balkans and is Yugoslavia's main trading partner.
About half of German investments there are in Croatia and Slovenia, the two republics whose declarations of independence on Tuesday set off the current crisis.


Pop/Jazz; A Tribute to Dexter Gordon In Music, Film and Dance
Dexter Gordon was a big man who did things in a big way.
The man who almost single-handedly brought the tenor saxophone into the modern jazz era stood 6 feet 5 inches tall and had a way of making his presence felt.
He didn't so much enter a room as take it over.
On the bandstand he was invariably the center of attention.
When he played, it was with tremendous authority and a big, booming sound.
Gordon, who died last year at the age of 67, is being remembered tonight at Avery Fisher Hall.
Appropriately, the people involved in tonight's tribute, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, plan to celebrate his memory on a grand scale.


Art in Review
Peter McClennan and Elena Sisto  Germans Van Eck  420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  Manhattan  Through Wednesday
This pleasant season's-end exhibition presents small drawings by Elena Sisto and photographs by Peter McClennan.
Ms.
Sisto's drawings have the presence of paintings; their surfaces are concentrated monochromes that seem boiled down from larger works.
Their pale colors cover images lifted from cartoons and comic books.
The scenes behind the colors are hard to read, filled as they are with intimations of violence, hilarity and personal strife.
Looking at them is a little like hearing a fight in the next apartment.
The mind struggles to pin down the narrative, but can't.
Two things remain: the essential mysteriousness of other people's lives and the seductiveness of paint.


Leonard Schlosser, 66, Paper Industry Leader
Leonard B. Schlosser, a leader in the paper industry and an avid collector of manuscripts and artifacts on papermaking, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 66 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of lung cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Deliberations Begin in Mail-Bombing Trial
A jury today began deliberating the case of Walter Leroy Moody Jr., accused of sending mail bombs that killed a judge and a civil rights lawyer.
Mr.
Moody, 57 years old, of Rex, Ga., is charged in a 71-count indictment with the mail-bomb killings of a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, Robert Vance of Mountain Brook, Ala., and a civil rights lawyer, Robert E. Robinson of Savannah, Ga.


Priced Right: Many Minds Think Freely
AT the time, who wouldn't have believed it?
The best things in life, according to the hit song from the 1927 Broadway musical "Good News," are free.
Among the freebies listed in the lyric: the moon, the stars, flowers in spring and robins that sing.
Far be it from me to dispel the magic of moonlight on a summer night or to tell a chirping bird to knock it off already, but the facts must be faced: more than 60 far less innocent years later, the news isn't particularly good, and a ticket to a Broadway musical can cost 100 clams, give or take a fin.
Still, there are those kind-spirited souls -- New York Times reporters and critics included -- who find joy and pleasure around town at virtually no cost at all.
Some have even agreed to spill the beans.
That, at least, is good news.


Cannes Film Festival Considers a New Time
The organizers of the Cannes International Film Festival have decided to consider changing the time it is held from early May to late winter or late summer so that it will coincide with the release of major winter or summer movies.
They have confirmed, however, that the 1992 festival will follow tradition and take place in May.


The Supreme Court; Justices Uphold Limits by Courts On Lawyers' Comments in Cases
The Supreme Court today upheld the limits that most states impose on public comments that lawyers can make about pending cases.
At the same time, the Court said that to meet constitutional standards, such rules by the states must put lawyers on fair notice about exactly which types of comments are prohibited.


Will Anderson Start? Nets Say Wait a Minute, or Two
There will not be a changing of the point guard for the Nets just yet.
Though Kenny Anderson landed in New Jersey and is often treated as if he were wearing Superman's cape, instead of a basketball jersey, the organization is insisting he will not be in the starting five.
Yeah, right.


BLOW TO LIBERALS
Justice Thurgood Marshall, a living hero of the civil rights movement and one of the last liberal voices on the Supreme Court, announced his retirement today after 24 years that ended in mounting anger and discouragement as he watched the ascendancy of a conservative-dominated bench.
The 82-year-old Justice, the only black to have served on the Supreme Court, said his resignation would take effect when a successor was confirmed by the Senate.
It gives President Bush his second appointment to the Court and will leave it with only one member, Justice Byron R. White, who was named by a Democratic President.
Pressure for a Black Nominee
The selection of Justice Marshall's successor will not affect the Court's philosophy as fundamentally as did the appointment of Justice David H. Souter last year, which further tipped the balance away from the old liberal majority and filled the vacancy created by the retirement of the intellectual leader of that coalition, Justice William J. Brennan Jr.


Lonrho Allowed To Pursue Fight
The British conglomerate Lonrho P.L.C. can proceed with a court battle against the Fayed brothers of Egypt over their 1985 takeover of the London department store Harrods, the House of Lords ruled.
The Lords decided that Lonrho's accusations -- wrongful business interference and conspiracy -- against the Fayeds and their adviser, the investment bank Kleinwort Benson Group, must be answered in court.


Market Place; Chasing Yields In Mutual Funds
FRUSTRATED with money market yields, investors continued this month to seek out slightly riskier, higher-yielding bond funds and more conservative stock funds, investment managers said this week.
Two big winners appear to be those funds that specialize in either Federal agency obligations or long-term Treasury securities.
Those funds are considered good values because they are only slightly riskier than money market funds and yet offer yields that are two to three percentage points higher.


Critic's Choice/Opera; The Bolshoi at the Met
A week ago it seemed to recommend itself: Moscow's Bolshoi Opera performing a two-week run of Russian operas at the Metropolitan Opera House, including the premiere of new production of Tchaikovsky's "Yevgeny Onegin." Initial reports about that production from those who have already seen it are mostly discouraging.
Still, this critic's ardor to hear again the distinctive style and incisive timbres of Russian performers in Russian music has cooled only slightly.
Individual singers in the mostly starless rotating casts aside, there are few sounds so bracing as that of a Russian chorus and orchestra in full cry.


Lake Erie Journal; A Dive to Solve a Treasure Mystery
For many who live along this stretch of Lake Erie's south shore, local history and folklore are bound up with the treacherous waters of the Great Lakes, which for generations have turned gleaming ships into fabled hulks, some of them still undiscovered on the lake bottom.
So when a Los Angeles salvage company announced this week that it had discovered the largely intact remains of the 19th-century sidewheeler Atlantic, this maritime community quite naturally took an interest.
And when the salvagers said they believed the Atlantic was a floating casino that went down with tens of millions of dollars aboard, residents here were genuinely fascinated.


BASEBALL: Mets Clean Up at Home and Yanks Sweep Away; Red Sox Fall At Fenway
There was a temptation to soak in the sweep and forget everything else about their season, but the Yankees did not do that tonight.
As they packed for the second leg of their six-game trip, the thing they talked about most was carrying the streak forward.


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
The Polish Government took another big step toward establishing a capitalist economy.
It said that it planned to transfer a fourth of all state industry into private hands within six months and to give a stake to every adult citizen.  [ Page A1. ]


Pretoria Accepts Atom-Arms Ban And Agrees to Plant Inspections
The South African Government announced today that it was ready to forgo the possession of nuclear weapons and would sign the treaty limiting the spread of nuclear arms, to which most other nations adhere.
In another move likely to improve South Africa's image abroad, the Government also said unused schools where whites had studied would be opened up to other races instead of being closed as they were in the past.
The move came a day after the authorities had denied black children permission to move into an empty school formerly used by whites.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with a New York City Ballet review misidentified the dancer in "Mother Goose." She was Simone Schumacher, not Yvonne Borree.


General Mills Profit Up 21%
General Mills Inc. said today that strong performances by its consumer foods and restaurant divisions helped earnings rise 21 percent in the fiscal fourth quarter.
The company said it earned $90.9 million, or 55 cents a share, up from $75.3 million, or 46 cents a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Sales rose 7 percent, to $1.83 billion from $1.71 billion.


Sounds Around Town
Los Lobos in the Park
Los Lobos, Central Park Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, midpark at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 360-2777.
This acclaimed rock band from East Los Angeles will give a rare acoustic performance on Sunday afternoon.
The program will concentrate on Mexican folkloric material, with many of the songs taken from the group's Spanish-language album "La Pistola y el Corazon." Show time is 3 P.M. on Sunday, and the concert is free.
Charles and Belle


Reviews/Film; A Boy Confronts His Jewish Heritage as a Hero of Hitler Youth
Running on tracks that pre-date Hitler's rise to power, the trolley car still passes through the Lodz ghetto, so its windows have been whitewashed to shield the eyes of Aryan riders from unwelcome sights.
But a member of Hitler Youth surreptitiously creates a peephole, and through it he glimpses a terrible vision: the abject, suffering figure of his own mother.
The woman he sees -- he thinks she is his mother, though he cannot be positive -- moves slowly through a landscape of utter misery.
Her son, a Jew who has managed to pass himself off as a Nazi hero, can do nothing to alter her fate.


Anxious Town Might Say Yes to a Nuclear Waste Dump
The offer to any rural community in upstate New York: $4.2 million in benefits that would include a new town park, trust funds for the library and the Fire Department, road improvements and a scholarship fund for local youths headed to college.
The catch: the town has to agree to be the home to a dump for low-level radioactive waste.


The Price Is Right: Many Minds Think Freely; Bank to Bank to Bank
Although New York City's bridges are in great disrepair, they are still among the world's most spectacular structures, and what better time than summer to stroll or bike across them?
Although some bridges are closed to pedestrians because of construction, walkways on the Brooklyn, Queensboro and George Washington Bridges remain open, offering breathtaking vistas of the city and the East and Hudson Rivers, and at no charge.


Silo's Account Is Awarded To Unit of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi
SILO INC., the country's second-largest consumer electronics and home-appliance chain, yesterday handed Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising North America its estimated $75 million account.
It has previously handled almost all its advertising in-house.
The unexpected announcement gives Saatchi an account that will be "well up there, one of our top 10," a delighted Edward L. Wax, the agency's president and chief executive, said in a telephone interview.
If the billings estimate by industry executives is accurate, Silo's spending would equal what a retailer like the J. C. Penney Company spends annually on national advertising.


Films Have a Place As a Teaching Tool
To the Editor:
The showing of an R-rated horror film, "Child's Play 2," at a public school assembly in Brooklyn (news article, June 6) has implications beyond the screening itself and the resultant outrage.


Official Could Face Charges Over Beer And Youth's Death
A Monmouth County official who knew beer was being served to minors at a party in his home could face charges in the subsequent death of a teen-ager who may have become drunk at the party, a prosecutor says.
The youth, Scott A. Magenheimer, 16 years old, died of head injuries early Monday, about 24 hours after he left the party at the Shrewsbury home of David P. Donnelly, an assistant deputy public defender.
The party was given for Mr.
Donnelly's son Brian, 18, who was captain of the football team at Red Bank Regional High School.
Mr.
Magenheimer was a center on the team.


Oil Production At 5-Year Low
Domestic oil production in 1990 declined to the lowest point in five years, according to an oil and gas survey released today.
Production declined for the fifth straight year, falling 5 percent, to two billion barrels, said the 1991 Arthur Andersen Oil &amp; Gas Reserve Disclosures survey.
Spending for oil and gas exploration and development outside the United States reached a high of $20.9 billion last year, the survey said.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 28


About Real Estate; Prices Halved, 13 Co-ops Sell in Hour in Manhattan
Backed into a corner by a huge surplus and slow sales, builders, bankers, sponsors and other holders of unsold co-op and condominium apartments in Manhattan reluctantly embraced auctions a few months ago.
Since then, the gavel has fallen on apartments of every type in buildings new and old.
Now a Manhattan brokerage has put a new wrinkle in the business of bulk sales.
On Wednesday the Corcoran Group held a one-day fixed-price sale of 13 co-ops in four buildings.
In little more than an hour all 13 had been sold, putting more than $1.1 million minus the brokerage commission into the pockets of the MacArthur Associates, owners of the units.


The Supreme Court; Excerpts From Opinions on Evidence About Murder Victims
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in Payne v.
Tennessee, holding that the Constitution permits evidence about the victim and the impact of the victim's death to be introduced in the sentencing phase of a capital murder trial.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist's opinion was joined by Justices Byron R. White, Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin Scalia, Anthony M. Kennedy and David H. Souter.
Justices Thurgood Marshall and John Paul Stevens filed dissenting opinions that were each joined by Justice Harry A. Blackmun.
FROM THE OPINION  By Chief Justice Rehnquist
In this case we reconsider our holdings in Booth v.
Maryland, (1987), and South Carolina v.
Gathers, (1989), that the Eighth Amendment bars the admission of victim impact evidence during the penalty phase of a capital trial.


Jerelyn Brofman, Therapist, Weds
Dr.
Jerelyn Joy Brofman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Brofman of Flushing, Queens, was married last evening to Dr.
Martin David Aronauer, the son of Beatrice Masin of Bronxville, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Max Aronauer.
Rabbi Joel Goor performed the ceremony at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
The bride, 46 years old, is a clinical psychologist in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Queens College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree and a doctorate in psychology from Fordham University.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of the credit department at Diners Club in New York.


Impasse Seen in Push for Civil Rights Compromise
Senator John C. Danforth, the Missouri Republican who has been seeking a compromise on civil rights legislation, said today that the White House had refused to budge on a crucial issue and that there was no point in conducting further negotiations now.
Mr.
Danforth then introduced a new set of civil rights bills, modified to meet at least 23 White House objections to the first package he and eight other Republicans had offered.
He said he thought they should be considered by the Senate in hearings, in writing the legislation and on the floor.


No Money? No Matter. It's Free.
Performances
"UNDERWATER DANCES," choreographed by Carol Nolte, to be performed by the Dance Collective in the empty outdoor pool at the Asser Levy Recreation Center, 23d Street and the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, Manhattan, today at 7 P.M.
If it rains, the performance will move indoors.
Information: (212) 627-4275.


Review/Film; Lieutenant Drebin Whiffs the Smell of Fear (and Lobster)
The summer is saved.
Lieut.
Frank Drebin is back and Leslie Nielsen is again playing him in David Zucker's delirious new comedy, "The Naked Gun 2 1/2: The Smell of Fear," solemnly described as "more than a sequel."


Sununu Calls Top U.S. Jews To Dispel 'Misperceptions'
John H. Sununu said today that he was "not blaming anybody but myself" for the uproar over his travel, and he called leaders of major American Jewish groups in an effort to dispel "misperceptions" that he held them responsible for some of his troubles.
Earlir today President Bush's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said the suggestion that Mr.
Sununu, a Lebanese American, had blamed pro-Israel groups for his problems was not "a real issue."


Zonic Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


The Spoken Word
LECTURE AND WALKING TOUR, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"House of Heritage," a lecture and slide presentation on the history of the museum and the surrounding area, Sunday at 2 P.M.
Admission: $12 ($11 for the elderly; $6 for students).
Information: (212) 431-0233.


LIBYA DENIES LINK TO AIRLINE BLASTS
Libya today denied reports by French, German, American and British news organizations over the last few days asserting that it was responsible for the bombing of two civilian airliners that killed a total of 441 people in 1988 and 1989.
The British Broadcasting Corporation said today that the British Goverment has received evidence from the Central Intelligence Agency linking Libyan intelligence operatives to the explosives that were used to blow up both planes.


Traffic Alert
East Village Visiting Neighbors Street Fair: Fourth Avenue will be closed tomorrow from Fifth Street to Astor Place from 10 A.M to 7 P.M.


BRIEFS
*
American Telephone and Telegraph Co.., New York, said its Universal Card Services Corp. unit would reduce the variable interest rate on its A.T.&amp; T. Universal card to 17.4 percent, from 17.9 percent, as of July 1.
It affects customers who signed up March 26 or earlier. *
Guy F. Atkinson Co., San Francisco, a construction, manufacturing and industrial equipment company, said its Guy F. Atkinson Construction Co. unit has received a $40.3 million contract for construction of a new power station in Quincy, Calif.


Stuart (D.A.) Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Baltic Arena: Roadside Border Post
As fast as the night raiders slash and burn the roadside customs posts here and across the new Lithuania, the republic rebuilds them to compound their value as symbols of independence.
Today, a day after troops ostensibly loyal to Moscow turned from nighttime custom-post raids to a two-hour gunpoint occupation of the republic's phone center in broad daylight, Lithuanians at this crossing point on the Byelorussian border, on the road to Minsk, discussed the causes and effects of the soldiers' new tactics.


Weekly U.S. Jobless Claims Down by 17,000 in Mid-June
The number of Americans filing new unemployment claims declined in the second week of June, the Labor Department reported today, supporting hopes the nation's jobs market is on the upswing.
For the week ended June 15, some 431,000 Americans filed new claims for unemployment, 17,000 fewer than the previous week's 448,000.


Amid Clashing Emotions, Judge Dismisses Charges Against Officers in Suspect's Death


Remic Is Backed By Freddie Mac
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, know as Freddie Mac, the Prudential Home Mortgage Company and Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company yesterday priced an $85.5 million real estate mortgage investment conduit, or Remic.


Art in Review
Gregoire Muller
Jason McCoy Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through July 12


Alpha Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


Books of The Times; Jean Rhys and the Story Of Her Own Sad Stories
Jean Rhys Life and Work By Carole Angier Illustrated. 762 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $35.
"She was crying now because she remembered that her life had been a long succession of humiliations and mistakes and pains and ridiculous efforts. Everybody's life was like that. At the same time, in a miraculous manner, some essence of her was shooting upwards like a flame. She was great. She was a defiant flame shooting upwards not to plead but to threaten. Then the flame sank down again, useless, having reached nothing."


More Signs of Waning Recession in May Consumer Data
Consumers apparently had the wallet and the will to spend their way out of recession last month, a Government report issued yesterday said.
The Commerce Department report showing that consumer spending surged 1.1 percent in May prompted the President's chief economic adviser, Michael J. Boskin, to declare again, less equivocally than he had in the past, that the recession was over.


Dr. Henry Ross, 89, Eisenhower's Chief Of Health in War
Dr.
Henry Ross, a New York surgeon who was chief of the public health section of Gen.
Dwight D. Eisenhower's command in Europe in World War II, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 89 years old.
Dr. Ross died of complications from bowel cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


An 'It Ain't Over . . .' Update: Pirates Stun Cubs With 4 in 9th
Heath Slocumb's two-out wild pitch scored Barry Bonds with the winning run and completed Pittsburgh's four-run ninth-inning comeback as the Pirates -- shut out for eight innings by rookie Frank Castillo -- rallied to beat Chicago, 4-3, tonight.
The come-from-behind victory was Pittsburgh's third in its final at-bat against the Cubs this season.
The Pirates scored six runs in the bottom of the 11th to beat the Cubs, 13-12, on April 21.
Two nights before that, Andre Dawson hit a grand slam in the top of the ninth, but the Pirates scored two in the bottom of the ninth to win, 5-4.


World Bank Pact Seen On Private-Sector Policy
Executive directors of the World Bank have reached a tentative agreement in a bitter dispute over whether the international lending agency should do more to help the private sector in the developing world, Administration and World Bank officials said today.
The 22 directors will vote on the agreement at a 10 A.M. meeting Friday, the officials said.
A vote in favor would resolve, for now, a rancorous division between the United States and most other countries over whether an increase in World Bank lending to private businesses would better help the three billion people living in the world's poor countries than bank lending to state-run projects.
Essentially Revives U.S.
Proposal
The agreement essentially revives a United States-backed proposal that the bank's board refused to endorse at a bitter meeting on June 20.
That plan called for modest changes in the management structure to make bank officials more aware of private-sector considerations.
The United States has insisted on the changes as its price for contributing $250 million of a $1 billion rise in the capital of the bank's private-sector lending arm.


Alzado Talks
LYLE ALZADO, the former All-Pro defensive end, says his inoperable brain cancer was caused by steroids he took while trying to make a comeback in the National Football League last year.
"I'm half the man I was, and not everything works," Alzado said in an interview on "First Person with Maria Shriver," which will appear on NBC-TV on Saturday.


Four Brokers Disciplined
The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that it had disciplined four brokers for covering their customers' trading losses.
The brokers disciplined by the exchange worked at Shearson Lehman Hutton (now known as Shearson Lehman Brothers), Dean Witter Reynolds, A. G. Edwards &amp; Sons and Thomson McKinnon Securities.


The Supreme Court; High Court Ruling Comforts Family Torn by 2 Murders
Mary Zvolanek sat on her carport swing in this Memphis suburb today, recalling the violence that took the lives of her daughter and granddaughter four years ago today and taking some comfort from a Supreme Court ruling that upheld the way a Tennessee jury sentenced the killer to death.
In a 6-to-3 ruling, the Court reversed two of its recent rulings and declared that juries choosing life or death for convicted murderers may consider the victim's character and the suffering of the victim's relatives.


Dow Advances by 21.92 to Close at 2,934.93
The stock market scored its broadest advance of the month yesterday, but while the advancing issues included many blue chips and second-tier issues, trading was moderate.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 21.92 points, at 2,934.93.
Birinyi Associates, which tracks program trading, said a big selling operation and three major buying programs added 18.34 to the Dow.


HIGH COURT WIDENS EVIDENCE ALLOWED IN CAPITAL CASES
The Supreme Court ended its 1990-91 term today by overruling two of its own recent decisions that had prevented prosecutors in death penalty cases from introducing evidence about the murder victim's character and the effect of the crime on the victim's family.
The ruling applies to the sentencing phase of a murder trial, once a jury has found a defendant guilty.


Quotation of the Day
"Power, not reason, is the new currency of this Court's decision-making." -- Justice Thurgood Marshall.  [ A1:4. ]


Profit Reported By Campeau
The Campeau Corporation, the Canadian developer, said yesterday that it had a net profit of $52.5 million (American) in the first quarter of the year, against a net loss of $82.3 million in the period a year ago.
The Toronto-based company said it was not including the results of its American retail subsidiaries, Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation, as it did in the 1990 period.


Richard Mardus, Press Agent, 87
Richard Mardus, a public relations specialist and a founder of the American Publicists Guild, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center in Richmond, S.I.
He was 87 years old and had moved to Staten Island in December after living in Manhattan for more than 40 years.
He died of cardiac arrest, his niece, Alice Wolfson, said.


At Age 75, a Lawyer Is Given Chief's Post
At an age when many people are 10 years into retirement, Julian O. von Kalinowski refuses to slow down.
Two weeks ago, the 75-year-old Los Angeles lawyer became chief executive of Litigation Sciences Inc., a 12-year-old firm at the forefront of the booming trial-consulting industry.
"When you reach retirement age, you begin to miss certain things," Mr. von Kalinowski said in a telephone interview.
"I'm not the kind of person who can play golf all day or sit around and read books."


Food Lion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


The Supreme Court; Mandatory Life Term Is Upheld in Drug Cases
The Supreme Court ruled today that the Constitution permitted imposition of a mandatory sentence of life in prison without parole for nonviolent first offenses, including possession of 1.5 pounds or more of cocaine.
The 5-to-4 decision suggested that such a severe penalty might be unconstitutional for some crimes, but the Court stopped well short of specifying where it would draw the line beyond which a sentence would be "cruel and unusual punishment," in violation of the Eighth Amendment.


Franco Shows Expos His Stuff
John Franco's bad back still requires its concessions.
There are the 45 minutes of exercises he must put in every afternoon.
There is the fact that, in the interest of comfort, he will pitch from the stretch all the time.
But judging from his last two days of work, the concessions enforced by his bothersome back end the moment the baseball is released.
For once the baseball has been let go, the only ill effects have been those suffered by the men with the bats in their hands.


A Slave's Great-Grandson Who Used Law to Lead the Rights Revolution
In his last several years on the Supreme Court, Thurgood Marshall could only watch as the ideological ground shifted inexorably away, leaving him isolated on most of the issues that imbue people with passion.
Still, friends and scholars say, he seemed determined to cling to his seat even if his vote had increasingly little effect on the outcome of death penalty, abortion and civil rights cases.
He was intent to serve both as a strong opposition voice and to outlast the Republican hold on the White House that has been responsible for the ideological sea change on the Court.


Japanese Stocks Decline
Japanese stocks closed lower today after slumping in late afternoon trading.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues ended the week at 23,290.96, down 252.07 points, or about 1.1 percent.
For the week, the index fell 791.30 points, or about 3.3 percent.


Orenda Forest reports earnings for Year to March 31


Face-Off Across a Road's White Line
Just outside the airport in Slovenia's capital, Ljubljana, a barricade of five tourist buses backed by some Slovenian troops faced off this morning against two dented Yugoslav Army tanks and a pair of armored vehicles.
The tanks had torn through a series of barricades just up the road, ripping the front ends off several trucks.


Anna Paisner Is Dead; Retired Executive, 91
Anna Paisner, a retired businesswoman who was active in charitable affairs, died on Wednesday at Parkway General Hospital in North Miami Beach.
She was 91 years old and lived in North Miami Beach.
She died of congestive heart failure, a grandson, Daniel, said.


Lockheed Project With Grumman
The Grumman Corporation and the Lockheed Corporation said they would market an airborne early warning system that could monitor 148,000 square miles of ocean surface.
The companies said the system would use the abilities of Grumman's E-2C Hawkeye on board a C-130 Hercules or a P-3 Orion vessel.


Three's A Crowd At Knick Guard Spot
The morning after being drafted by the Knicks, Greg Anthony sat in his Manhattan hotel room and comtemplated his future.
Meanwhile, the Knicks' front office contemplated its next step now that Anthony plays a role in their future.
Anthony is the Knicks' first player acquisition since Ernie Grunfeld became player personnel director in March, and since Pat Riley became coach in May.
Both Riley and Grunfeld like Anthony's skills and feel that they reflect what the team is looking for in its rebuilding plan.


Art in Review
Hanno Ahrens
Frumkin/Adams Gallery  50 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Wednesday


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 551 money market mutual funds decreased by $6.2 billion, to $454.29 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 199 institutional funds decreased by $4.39 billion, to $126.76 billion.
The assets of the 260 general-purpose funds were down by $456.6 million, to $178.43 billion.
The 92 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.35 billion, to $149.10 billion, the institute said.


Reporter's Notebook; 2 Months as a Star Witness at Mafia Bid-Rigging Trial
On May 6 a Mafia associate stepped up to the witness stand and began testifying in a racketeering trial about rigging bids in the window-installation industry.
Yesterday he was still on the stand, with no end to his testimony in sight.
The witness, Peter Savino, has provided the bulk of the evidence against all nine defendants in the trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
His testimony has been punctuated by the playing of 50 hours of conversations that he secretly taped as an informer for the Government.


Hamilton Group reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Mobil Settles On Hefty Bags
The Mobil Chemical Company has settled a lawsuit filed by six states accusing it of making misleading and deceptive claims of degradability on the packages of Hefty trash bags, New York Attorney General Robert Abrams said yesterday.
Without admitting or denying guilt, Mobil Chemical, a subsidiary of the Mobil Corporation, the nation's second-largest oil company, agreed to pay a total of $150,000, or $25,000 to each state, Mr.
Abrams said.


International Multifoods reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Biomet reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Allied Picks Chief and Wall St. Approves
It was a humbling finale to a see-saw relationship.
Edward L. Hennessy Jr. said yesterday that he would step down on Monday as chief executive of Allied-Signal Inc., and Wall Street responded with embarrassing enthusiasm, delaying the opening of Allied's shares with a flood of buy orders.
Mr.
Hennessy, 63 years old, decided to leave earlier than expected to persuade Lawrence A. Bossidy, vice chairman of the General Electric Company, to succeed him.
The transition plans were reported in yesterday's Wall Street Journal and confirmed by Mr.
Hennessy before the opening of the New York Stock Exchange.
Allied shares ended the day at $33.125, up $3.75.


On My Mind; Israel Says Yes
In the summer of 1990, the U.S. was moving, unaware, toward war in the Middle East.
Neither the American Government nor the American people realized what Saddam Hussein was doing -- and what he would do.
Without understanding and clarity of mind, no American steps could be taken to warn Saddam Hussein off before he invaded Kuwait, convinced he could get away with it.


Chevron Settles Part Of Pension Lawsuit
The Chevron Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to pay a partial settlement of almost $250 million to 19,000 current and retired employees in a class-action suit over disputed pension plans.
The suit was filed in 1986 by about 40,000 members and beneficiaries of the Gulf Oil Corporation's pension plan.
A dispute arose over who was entitled to surpluses of more than $700 million in the overfinanced Gulf pension plan after Chevron acquired Gulf for $13 billion in 1984.


Morrison Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


The Price Is Right: Many Minds Think Freely; Waterborne Royalty
She glides down the Hudson every 10 days or so at this time of year.
New Yorkers, too smooth to stare when Robert Redford walks by, sometimes lose all control and wave.


Our Towns
Juanita Williams got really annoyed with her 15-month-old daughter the other day.
Once again, Donisha was crawling into the kitchen cupboards while Ms.
Williams tried to cook dinner.
Once again, Donisha was knocking over piles of plates and making a mess.
Once again, the infant disregarded her mother's orders to stop.
But this time something else happened.
This time Ms.
Williams didn't get angry and yell.
She didn't shake the baby.
She didn't carry her into the empty bedroom and deposit her brusquely to cry alone in a crib with an audience of unresponsive stuffed animals.


Outweek, Gay and Lesbian Magazine, Ceases Publication
Outweek, the New York-based gay and lesbian magazine, ceased publication this week as a result of infighting among its principals and because it could not pay its bills, officials of the magazine said yesterday.
A notice signed by Kendall Morrison, president and co-founder of the magazine and its majority shareholder, was tacked to the locked office door yesterday telling staff members that the magazine was closed but expressing the hope that it would publish again soon.


A New Ad Format In This Sunday's Paper
Seventeen newspapers are introducing an advertising format on Sunday that uses a half-page of newsprint attached to a full-page ad to create a gatefold effect.
The format, dubbed a "gateway," is being bought by Paramount Pictures to promote a preview of one of its top summer releases, "Regarding Henry."


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Ford Capital B.V.'s $300 million issue of 9 1/2 percent notes was priced to yield 9.52 percent, according to the underwriter, First Boston, who also said that the noncallable issue was rated A2 by Moody's Investors Service and A by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Manor Care reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Mycogen Obtains E.P.A. Approval
The Mycogen Corporation, an agricultural biotechnology company based in San Diego, said it had received the first approval ever from the Environmental Protection Agency for a new class of genetically engineered microbial pesticides.
Mycogen's two pesticide products, MVP and M-Trak, encapsulate proteins that are produced by naturally occurring bacteria and are toxic to insects.


FOR CHILDREN
What a paradise Central Park can seem!
Especially this summer, when the recession threatens New York City's cultural institutions.
In the last few years, the park has developed free children's programs from hat-making workshops to a wake-up aviary tour.
These activities -- especially the ones conducted by the Urban Park Rangers, whose numbers were recently depleted by layoffs -- are likely to suffer.
But some of the park's more interesting spots are used for workshops and adventurous pursuits, some of them sponsored by the Central Park Conservancy and others by the Department of Parks and Recreation, that will be offered this weekend and should be in place for the summer.
Call the Parks Department at (800) 834-3832 to check on any last-minute changes.
In any case, there's always the Sheep Meadow, if all that's wanted is some splendor in the grass.


Soviet Rightists See a Nation Run Amok
In their closed-session speeches to the Soviet Parliament last week, the chiefs of the K.G.B., the military and the police portrayed a Soviet Union ravaged by a disintegrating army, internal strife and foreign intrigues, according to excerpts published today by a Soviet newspaper.
Among the claims made by the hard-line security chiefs, Defense Minister Dmitri T. Yazov reported that the military was short of 353,000 conscripts because the republics had made it "practically impossible" to draft soldiers, said the paper, Sovetskaya Rossiya, in a report with further information on the session last week in which hard-liners criticized the current Soviet leadership.


Review/Film; Childhood Nightmare, With a Touch Of Alice
Philip Ridley's "Reflecting Skin" is a nightmare of childhood in which everything feared is made manifest.
The time is the 1950's and the place the rural American Northwest.
Seth Dove is almost 9 years old.
When first seen, he and two young friends are playing a trick on Dolphin Blue, the strange young widow who lives alone in a house on the prairie.
They catch a frog, inflate its stomach by blowing through a reed and, when Dolphin sees it on the road, fire at the frog with a slingshot so that it explodes in her face.


U.S. on Secession: Maybe
The Bush Administration expressed strong concern today about violent clashes involving independence movements in both the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia.
But Administration spokesmen made sharp distinctions between the situation in the Soviet republic of Lithuania on the one hand, where it criticized the Soviet Government, and Yugoslavia on the other hand, where it criticized the declarations of secession by the republics of Croatia and Slovenia.


Senate Overrides Cuomo on Death Penalty
The State Senate voted today to override Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's latest veto of legislation to restore the death penalty in New York State.
But the Assembly sponsor of the legislation, Vincent Graber, said he would not bring up the override effort in his house because the Assembly is least two votes short of the number required.


Yugoslav Army Uses Force in Breakaway Republic; Europe Presses for Debate
Having failed to persuade Slovenia and Croatia to remain part of Yugoslavia, the European Community is expected to call on the 35-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe to hold an emergency debate on the crisis in the Balkans.
Consultations have begun with a view to issuing a joint statement when the 12 European Community leaders hold a twice-yearly meeting in Luxembourg on Friday.
The 13th vote needed is expected to come from Austria, which is not a member of the community.


Wheatley TXT Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


America West Airlines Files For Chapter 11 Bankruptcy
America West Airlines Inc. filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from its creditors today, joining three other airlines that have fallen on hard times since the Persian Gulf war.
The filing in Federal Bankruptcy Court followed months of extreme financial difficulty for the debt-ridden, expansion-minded carrier.


In a Fourth of July Mood for Excess
ON July 4, 1776, the Declaration of Independence was approved by a vote of the Continental Congress, with New York abstaining.
Maybe too many New Yorkers felt an unseemly chumminess with their colonial masters, though a nicer thought is that they were too cosmopolitan even for the first Fourth.
But Gotham -- as distinct from all those All-American burgs upstate -- hasn't exactly risen to the big moment since.
Too busy making money or something.
The shining exception was a Manhattan deli's 60-pound Statue of Liberty made entirely of chopped liver in honor of the statue's 100th birthday five years ago.


Documentary Films At the Public Theater
Films about a Midwestern town, two black South African writers and Cajun cooking are part of the 1991 Documentary Festival this weekend at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, Manhattan.
The festival, co-sponsored by the Museum of Modern Art, features 14 films and videos from the United States, Canada, Great Britain, Australia and France.
Today's features, at 6 P.M., are "Yum, Yum, Yum," an American film about Cajun cooking, by Les Blank and Maureen Gosling, and "Songololo: Voices of Change," a portrait of Gcina Mholpe and Mzwakhe Mbuli, the South African writers, by Marianne Kaplan.


Ruling Threatens Albany Deferred-Salaries Plan
In a decision that ultimately could add more than $140 million to the state's budget problems, New York's highest court ruled today that the state's practice of deferring salary payments to its workers violates its collective bargaining agreements.
The 6-to-0 ruling today by the State Court of Appeals did not invalidate the so-called lag payroll plans passed by the Legislature last year.
But in sending the issue back to a Federal appeals court for a ruling on the constitutionality of the lag payroll, the Court of Appeals significantly strengthened the cases against the state, said legal experts and union leaders.


Report on Foreign Aid
The United States surpassed Japan as the world's leader in foreign economic aid in 1990, partly because the yen fell in value, the Foreign Ministry said Wednesday.
Japan had passed the United States as the world's largest aid donor in 1989, when it provided $8.97 billion, compared with $7.7 billion from the United States.
The ministry, quoting preliminary statistics compiled by the Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, said Japan disbursed $9.24 billion in official development assistance in 1990.
The amount was behind the United States' estimated $10 billion and ahead of third-place France's $6.5 billion, it said.


Economic Scene; Soft Landing, Soft Recovery?
IS the recession over?
Has the recovery begun?
At least to the nation's most influential economic prophet, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, these are not two sides of the same question but two separate questions.
During his Congressional testimony last week, Mr.
Greenspan answered the first question by saying that although the data might be revised up or down, "it's very difficult to get around the data of the last several weeks, which are strongly suggestive that the bottom is somewhere in the second quarter." Michael J. Boskin, chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, took the same position yesterday.


New York Courts Don't Deserve Racism Label
To the Editor:
As vice chairman of the New York State Judicial Commission on the Minorities, I wish to comment on "Courts of Shame" (editorial, June 14), which discusses the commission report on conditions in our state's lower courts.
The characterization of our judicial system as "infested with racism" by the chairman of the commission in a press release intended to summarize the commission's findings is an unwarranted exaggeration with far-reaching effects beyond the confines of the report.


Plateau Reached at 8,000 Cases In Yearly Reports of Lyme Disease
Reports of Lyme disease, the widely publicized tick-borne ailment, appear to have leveled off in the United States at about 8,000 cases a year, Federal health officials said today.
But researchers said that with the vagaries in reporting of the relatively new disease, it was hard to tell if its spread had actually stopped.


General Mills reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


2 Choruses to Sing
The New York City Gay Men's Chorus and the Denver Women's Chorus are to perform John David Earnest's "Jubilation" and Libby Larsen's "Everyone Sang" at 8 P.M. today and tomorrow at Alice Tully Hall.
The choruses are also to perform separately.
Gary Miller is to conduct the New York City Gay Men's Chorus in the world premiere of Ms.
Larsen's "Night of the Full Moon" and in works by Bernstein, Scott Henderson, Dean X. Johnson, Gregg Smith, Christine Lavin and William Finn.
Debbie Kenyon is to conduct the Denver Women's Chorus in works by Margie Adam, Holly Near, Janis B. Kindred and Shirley McRae.
Tickets are $10 to $50.
Information: (212) 874-6770.


McHaffie, in Front, Puts Struggles Behind
Deborah McHaffie, who has struggled for much of her six years as a professional golfer, shot a career-best round of 66 today to lead a low-scoring first day at the Mazda L.P.G.A.
Championship.
The 33-year-old McHaffie, who had never before led a Ladies' Professional Golf Association tournament, was a shot better than Colleen Walker, Barbara Mucha and Deb Richard, and two better than Meg Mallon, Nina Foust and Pat Bradley.


Phone Booths On Wheels, And Calls Are Illegal
The cars, their smoked-glass windows shut tight to the afternoon sun, line up two or three in a row along the busy streets of Elmhurst, Queens.
The customers, a pastiche of this most variously immigrant of New York neighborhoods, stand at the curb in long lines, waiting to climb into the cars.
The wait is long; the lines move in precisely timed 20-minute intervals.
The customers are phoning home -- some for love, and some about drugs.


The Price Is Right: Many Minds Think Freely; Bicycles Only
I am not a bicycling enthusiast.
The yellow paint on my 10-speed is fading, and the wheel spokes are rusted.
I shun the true biker's skin-tight spandex pants and hunched-over intensity.
Nevertheless, I am hooked on Sunday biking, thanks to the Westchester County Parks Department.


Salomon Names Head Of European Banking
As an investment banker in the United States, William H. Strong was an adviser to Sir James Goldsmith, the British-French financier, and Lord Hanson and Lord White, leaders of Hanson P.L.C. of Britain.
Now, Mr.
Strong, who is 39 years old, is hoping that his association with these Europeans will help him shine as the London-based head of European investment banking at Salomon Brothers, a job he will assume Sept. 1.
At least in mergers and acquisitions, Salomon seems to need a man with good contacts in Europe.
Last year, Salomon was an adviser on only 15 cross-border deals involving the acquisition of European companies.
The total value of the deals -- $2 billion -- ranked an unimpressive 19th, far behind Goldman, Sachs, which was No. 1, and sixth-ranked Morgan Stanley. according to Acquisitions Monthly, a British magazine.


Libel Case Ruling Will Haunt Publishing World
To the Editor:
While I can understand the relief expressed by many in the publishing world at the Supreme Court's decision in Masson v.
The New Yorker Magazine Inc. ("Misquotations Measured," editorial, June 21 ), I disagree with the optimism.


Tough Year To Be New In Albany
Susan V. John could have picked an easier year to become a member of the New York State Assembly.
The 33-year-old Democrat from Rochester gave up a partner-track position in a law firm last fall to run in the 131st Assembly District, prevailing in a close and rancorous contest over a seven-term incumbent.


D'Arcy Masius Wins Domino Sugar Account
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, won the $5 million Domino sugar account yesterday with a proposal to establish a stronger brand identity.
The Amstar Sugar Corporation of New York, which markets the Domino line of grocery products, selected the agency over five other New York finalists: Bozell Inc.; Geer, DuBois; Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor; Ally &amp; Gargano, and Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg.
Lintas New York had handled the account since 1977.


The Fourth: It's a Mood That Lasts Year Round
Here is a sampling of Fourth of July events planned around New York City: Sunday
INDEPENDENCE DAY CELEBRATION, Flatbush Reformed Church, Church Avenue, between Flatbush Avenue and East 21st Street, in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn; sponsored by the Flatbush Historical Society.
Entertainment, food, 12:30 P.M.
Admission: $5 (those under 12, free).
Reservations: (718) 856-3700.


A Senior P.L.O. Aide Wounded in Lebanon
A senior aide in the Palestine Liberation Organization was seriously wounded and four of his bodyguards killed Wednesday night in the latest of a spate of attacks on guerrilla leaders in southern Lebanon, security officials said today.
Unidentified gunmen ambushed Maj.
Amin Kayed as he and his escorts were driving outside the Palestinian base at Mieh Mieh near the port of Sidon, 25 miles south of Beirut, the officials said.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD Fast Time for Morceli Noureddine Morceli of Algeria, helped by excellent pacemaking from Ray Brown of the United States, clocked the fastest time of the year in the 1,500 meters at the World Games meet in Helsinki yesterday.
Starting his kick on the backstretch, Morceli won in 3 minutes 31.00 seconds for a new national record.
The world record of 3:29.46 was set by Said Aouita of Morocco six years ago.
Khalid Skah of Morocco also produced an outstanding kick to win the 5,000 meters in 13:17.72 for another 1991 world best.
In the women's 3,000 meters, PattiSue Plumer took the lead at the start of last lap and held off a fellow American, Shelly Steely, to win in 8:51.10.
Other American winners included Dunn Devlon, who took the 200 meters in 20.52 seconds; Mark Everett, who captured the 400 in 44.59, and Scott Huffman, who cleared 18 feet 4 1/2 inches in the pole vault. (AP)


Debate on Gun Control Stalls Crime Legislation
Opponents of gun control suffered a major defeat early today when the Senate turned back their effort to eliminate the seven-day waiting period for handgun purchases from a comprehensive anti-crime bill.
In voting 54 to 44 to defeat a measure sponsored by Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska, the Senate dealt the National Rifle Association another setback in its campaign to turn aside new controls on gun purchase and ownership.


Tapie Is Selling Stake in Donnay
Bernard Tapie, the French business executive, has agreed to sell his 58 percent stake in the Belgian tennis racquet maker, Donnay International S.A., to the Walloon regional government in Belgium, Donnay said.
The Walloon government, in Belgium's French-speaking southern part, will pay 600 million Belgian francs, or $16.2 million.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


Elizabeth Sorel Dies; Ex-Fashion Model, 89
Elizabeth Sorel, a former fashion model, died Monday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs. Sorel died of complications from leukemia, said her daughter, Claudette.


NCNB Plan For Merger Advances
The directors of the C&amp;S/Sovran Financial Corporation are discovering that two years and one false step make all the difference in the turbulent banking industry.
In 1989, Bennett A. Brown, then the chairman of the Citizens and Southern Corporation, would not even meet with Hugh L. McColl Jr., the aggressive chairman of the NCNB Corporation, who had started a hostile takeover bid for Citizens and Southern.
Instead, Mr.
Brown, a courtly Georgia banker, not too politely told Mr.
McColl to mind his own bank.


Baker Says Iraq Arms Issue Warrants Serious Response
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d accused Iraq today of an "extraordinarily serious" attempt to hide some of its remaining nuclear-weapons materials from international control and told reporters to "stay tuned" to see what the United States does about it.
Administration and military officials say there have been discussions in recent days of possible military options for dealing with Iraqi bomb-making components that survived the Persian Gulf war and that Iraq appears to be trying to save from destruction.


Jets and Top Pick Agree
The Jets announced yesterday that they had reached agreement on a contract with their top draft choice, quarterback Browning Nagle from the University of Louisville.
Terms were not disclosed.
"I'm really excited," said Nagle, whose agent, Leigh Steinberg, worked out the contract with Steve Gutman, the Jets' president.
"Leigh Steinberg, myself and the Jets all wanted the same thing and that was to get this done before camp. That was our primary goal at the start of negotiations. I've been working hard and I'll continue to do so throughout training camp. I'm happy and ready to get the season started."


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Archer Communications Inc., Calgary, Alberta, a sound enhancement technology company, named Robert B. Pfannkuch president and chief executive. *
Bell Canada, Montreal, a subsidiary of BCE Inc., appointed Jean C. Monty chairman and chief executive and Robert Kearney president and chief operating officer.


On-Line Software International reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


KUWAIT JAIL TERMS RATIFIED BY PRINCE
The Kuwaiti Government's gesture of mercy on Wednesday toward 29 people sentenced to death for collaborating with Iraq offered no solace to scores of other defendants who had received lesser penalties from the martial-law courts and now find their sentences officially ratified.
On Wednesday, the last day of martial law, Crown Prince Saad al-Abdullah al-Salem, the Kuwaiti Prime Minister, commuted all the death sentences to life terms in jail.
He acted under pressure from several Western governments that had led the war to free Kuwait from occupation by Iraq.


Unico American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


People
*
Ed Wolper has been promoted to executive vice president and group creative director at Scali, McCabe, Sloves Inc., New York, from senior vice president and associate creative director.


Russians Voted Once Before, in 1917
To the Editor:
In "Russian Revolution" (editorial, June 14), you make a serious historical error by stating that Boris Yeltsin "won the first competitive election in Russia's thousand-year history." On Nov. 25, 1917, after the Bolshevik coup and with Communist consent, free nationwide elections in Russia were held to elect deputies to a Constituent Assembly.


Vivra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Shark Bites Florida Surfer, 15
A 15-year-old surfer paddling to shore to flee a shark Wednesday did not quite make it to safety: He was bitten on the hand about 20 feet from shore.
Fifteen stitches were required to close the wound on the hand of Joe Bosque, who had headed to shore with two friends after seeing the shark off Jacksonville Beach.
The two friends returned to surfing a few hours later.


Wegener Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Cardiology Professor At Stanford Facing Harassment Charges
Stanford University has filed sexual harassment charges against a cardiologist at the university's medical school, based on complaints made by two female medical students.
The university president, Donald Kennedy, said Wednesday he had filed administrative harassment charges and professional misconduct charges against Dr.
Mark Perlroth.


The Price Is Right: Many Minds Think Freely; Voices in the Air
An old woman is walking arm in arm with an old man.
She is angry.
"Can't you just hang loose?" she asks.
"Can't you just relax?" His answer, if there is one, is lost in the spring breeze.


INSIDE
Hanoi Seeks Economic Aid
Hanoi's new Communist leader used his first news conference to plead for international help to end Vietnam's long years of poverty.
Page A7.


Yanks Say, Sign Here. What Do You Mean, No?
More than three weeks since the Yankees made Brien Taylor the top selection in baseball's amateur draft and a week after the organization hoped the pitcher's professional career would begin, contract negotiations have come to a temporary halt over a costly precedent established a year ago.
That precedent, the ability of the Oakland Athletics to convince Todd Van Poppel to sign for a reported $1.2 million rather than pitch for the University of Texas, has led the Taylor family to ask for a contract well beyond what the Yankees considered an overwhelming offer.


Bank Fund Outlook Is Bleaker
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said today that the fund that protects bank deposits would need to borrow more than previously expected this year because it is short of cash.
L.
William Seidman, chairman of the F.D.I.C., said in his latest estimate that the liquidity problem meant the fund would have to borrow at least $4 billion more in 1991 than the $14.5 billion estimated in January and that it was likely to become insolvent some time in 1992.


Bank Vault Keeper Held in $16.3 Million Theft
The infamous bank robber Willie Sutton supposedly said he robbed banks because "that's where the money is." John DiGiovanni knew where the vault was.
He was its manager.
Law-enforcement officials say that Mr.
DiGiovanni, 31 years old, stole $16.3 million in Treasury bonds while he was in charge of the underground vault at the Bank of New York branch at One Wall Street.
He handed them over to a friend who needed to settle some gambling debts, the officials said.


Albany Must Think Again on Hunting Laws
To the Editor:
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has signed into law a bill allowing the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation to permit hunters to kill unlimited numbers of deer, despite efforts by the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and other animal protection organizations to defeat the legislation for its potential to cause unnecessary pain, suffering and death to thousands of deer, and for its questionable wildlife management principles.


Boston Bank Halts Payout
Battered by lingering real estate losses, the Bank of Boston Corporation said today that it would skip a dividend payment for the first time in decades and projected that it would lose money in the current quarter.
The bank said it expected to report a loss in the second quarter that would be less than the $89 million loss in the first quarter.


Mattel Calls Debt
Mattel Inc., the toy company based in El Segundo, Calif., will redeem the remainder of its 14 3/4 percent subordinated sinking fund debentures.
John W. Amerman, the chairman and chief executive, said redemption of the debentures and some preferred stock would produce an extraordinary charge of $5.1 million against second-quarter earnings, but would reduce net interest expenses in the second half by $4 million.


Tumult Erupts as Court Clears 4 Officers
Amid a thunderous eruption of clashing emotions, a judge yesterday granted a request by the new Queens District Attorney and threw out all charges against four New York City police officers in the death of a car-theft suspect.
The judge also granted the prosecutor's motion to reduce the murder charge against a fifth officer, who is accused of choking the suspect, to manslaughter and criminally negligent homicide.


CHRONICLE
A power cluster throbbed in the overheated room: RUPERT MURDOCH of the publishing empire; LEONARD LAUDER of the cosmetics empire; CALVIN KLEIN of the clothing empire; LEONARD N. STERN of the dog food empire; MELVIN JACOBS of the Saks Fifth Avenue empire, and lots of smaller kings and queens who head entities in fashion, publishing and finance.
They swirled around Le Cirque's L'Orangerie on Wednesday night at the second anniversary party for Mirabella, Mr.
Murdoch's magazine.
He founded it by harnessing the fashion eye of GRACE MIRABELLA, who had been unceremoniously dumped as editor of Vogue.
She in turn hired away from Vogue AMY GROSS, who made Mirabella into something to read as well as look at.
It still is not something to profit from; it lost $15.7 million in the fiscal year ending June 1990.


Wheat, Corn and Soybeans Off After Weather Report
Wheat futures prices plunged to five-month lows, and corn and soybean prices also fell sharply yesterday in an active session on the Chicago Board of Trade as weather conditions indicated a possible bountiful fall harvest.
On other commodities markets, energy futures climbed; precious metals contracts advanced, and meat and livestock futures rose.


Janet Leinwand Weds
Janet Leslie Leinwand, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
David Leinwand of White Plains, was married last evening at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y., to Andrew Paul Bein, the son of Joan Leibowitz of Yonkers and the late Walter Bein.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky officiated.
Mrs.
Bein, 23 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and last month received a master's degree in special education from Columbia University.
She was until recenlty a special-education teacher at the Churchill School in New York.
The bridegroom, 25, is a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received an M.B.A. degree from Stanford University.
He is a summer intern at Newsweek magazine in New York.


Sounds Around Town
Flanagan's Pianism
Tommy Flanagan, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, Manhattan, (212) 255-4037.
Tommy Flanagan is one of jazz's best pianists, a rhythmically miraculous improviser.
He also knows just about any tune ever written, and his specialty is compositions from the jazz tradition, whether by Bud Powell, Thad Jones or Thelonious Monk.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 9:30 and 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is no third show on Sunday night.
The cover charge is $15, and there is a $7.50 minimum.
Question of Semantics


Waterford by Another Price; Will It Sell More Sweetly?
Perched on a linen tablecloth, next to expensive china and gleaming silver, Waterford Crystal has long been a symbol of the life of the well to do.
But Waterford is about to step out of character and introduce a more moderate line of glassware aimed at a less well-heeled audience.
In August, it will bring out nine patterns of stemware priced from $29 to $37.50 a glass, and 40 other gift items that, for Waterford, are moderately priced.
Waterford's traditional prices range from $50 to more than $100 a glass.


Canton Journal; The Pastor's Good for a Sermon, Even in Prison
The floors creak, the stools sway, and a peasant mother soothes a baby tired from the two-hour trek they have taken to this dilapidated house-church.
But the congregation sits rapt as the Rev.
Lin Xiangao bellows out his sermon on Elijah.
This cramped two-story tenement is Pastor Lin's home as well as an illegal church.
Every week, 700 to 1,000 Chinese workers, peasants and students file through a narrow lane and climb the steep and dark stairway to join one of a dozen services or prayer meetings.


Excalibur Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


6-Player Deal Sends Candiotti to Jays
The Cleveland Indians, convinced they could no longer afford Tom Candiotti, traded the knuckleball pitcher to the Toronto Blue Jays today as part of a six-player deal.
The 33-year-old Candiotti, who can become a free agent after the season, was seeking a four-year contract.
The Indians were unwilling to offer more than three years.
His salary this season is $2.5 million.


Farm Cuts Fought in Europe
Agriculture ministers of the European Community voiced strong reservations today about a proposal to overhaul the 12-nation group's costly farm-support programs, which eat up two-thirds of its budget.
The ministers said they feared that the plan, still under consideration by the community's Executive Commission, would unfairly divert money from the largest farmers to less-competitive ones.


Lansford Improving
CARNEY LANSFORD, injured on New Year's Eve in a snowmobile accident that doctors feared would end his career, could be back with the Oakland Athletics by Aug. 1, the team said yesterday.
"Until a few weeks ago, even the guys on the team didn't expect me to come back and play," Lansford, 34, said.
"But after a period of time I noticed players watching me run in the outfield. And they'd make comments like, 'You are going to be back this year, aren't you?' And I said, 'I told you. I'm coming back -- this year.' "


13 Are Charged In Bond Theft
A former vault manager at the Bank of New York's office on Wall Street was accused yesterday of stealing $16.3 million worth of Treasury bonds.
Court papers said the bank employee, John DiGiovanni, 31 years old, was charged with stealing the bonds from a vault at the urging of an associate who needed money to pay gambling debts.


Corrections
An article in Weekend last Friday about picnicking in Central Park misidentified a restaurant that has picnic menus.
It is Amsterdam's Bar and Rotisserie.


Sports of The Times; Nets, Knicks Make Points And Rivalry
THE red-white-and-blue stage stretched across the length of Madison Square Garden, the biggest in the history of the arena.
You kept waiting for Bruce Springsteen or Whitney Houston to appear.
But this was really a college graduation stage for basketball players with the highest marks on the National Basketball Association sneaker aptitude tests.
Behind a blue curtain, each of the dozen players expected to be chosen early was listening for two words: his own name.
The butterflies in Kenny Anderson's stomach kept him walking as he heard the "Ken-nee, Ken-nee" chant from most of the 7,000 spectators.
Then he heard the silence as Commissioner David Stern approached the microphone on the stage.


Renewal of Brain Is Found In Disputed Monkey Tests
Research on monkeys at the center of a long animal rights dispute has shown that the brains of adult primates may recover from injury much more fully than previously believed, scientists said today.
The researchers said dormant brain areas in the monkeys had reorganized themselves to attain new functions to a degree 10 times greater than had been thought possible.


Doctor Convicted
A doctor was convicted yesterday by a Federal jury in Harrisburg, Pa., of selling anabolic steroids and controlled substances to four professional wrestlers and a weightlifter.
The jury deliberated for three hours before returning its verdict against GEORGE T. ZAHORIAN 3D.


Steady Rates In Germany
Germany's central bank said today that it would leave its official interest rates unchanged for now, despite recent data showing a rise in inflation.
The announcement came after a regular meeting here of the Bundesbank's policy council.
Financial markets had speculated that the Bundesbank might raise interest rates to curb inflation.
But the German discount rate -- the rate at which the Bundesbank buys short-term securities from banks in the open market -- was held at 6.5 percent.


Triborough Issue
About $348 million in Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority general purpose serial revenue bonds have begun trading, according to the underwriter, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The bond with the nearest maturity, Jan. 1, 1992, carries a coupon of 5.25 percent and was priced at 100.274.
One of the longest bonds, the one that matures Jan. 1, 2020, bears a 7 pecent coupon and was priced at 97.25, to yield 7.229 percent, slightly less than the 7.24 percent average yield of other municipal bonds.


Big vs. Small Fights In Pay-Per-View Duel
As Mike Tyson and Donovan (Razor) Ruddock prepare to renew fistic acquaintances tonight in the Las Vegas heat, their matchup is renewing a raging fracas over whether pay-per-view boxing is anything but a megafight business.
Glowering in one corner is Showtime Event Television and its partner, promoter Don King's KingVision, the pay-per-view providers of Tyson-Ruddock II.
Facing down SET is TVKO, the HBO Sports pay-per-view boxing division.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10
A divided Yugoslavia took to arms as the Yugoslav army used force to take control of several frontier posts from the Slovenian authorities.
Slovenian officials estimated dead and wounded at more than 100 on both sides.
Page A1


Dinkins Goal: To Survive a Fiscal Quagmire
In the greatest challenge of his career, Mayor David N. Dinkins is waiting for a miracle.
Four days before the start of New York City's new fiscal year, his goal in handling its overwhelming fiscal problems has boiled down to a single word: survival.
So grim are the Mayor's prospects that he would count as a victory the adoption of a budget whose painful service cuts he called unbearable just a month ago.
Instead, he is struggling desperately to stave off deeper cuts proposed by the City Council to hold down property taxes.
And in the best case he would lose something.


Parlux Fragrances Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lennar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CHRONICLE
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, ROBERT M. KIMMITT, is expected to be appointed Ambassador to Germany, replacing VERNON A. WALTERS, Administration officials say.
Mr.
Walters announced on Monday that he was stepping down after two years in Germany.
While the White House has not formally announced his replacement, officials said Mr.
Kimmitt is to get the nod.
A close aide of Secretary of State JAMES A. BAKER 3D, Mr.
Kimmitt is the No. 3 official at the State Department, after the Deputy Secretary, LAWRENCE S. EAGLEBURGER.
Mr.
Kimmitt is responsible for supervising all regional bureaus.


Art in Review
Lee Tribe
Victoria Munroe Gallery  130 Prince Street  Manhattan  Through July 26


BASEBALL: Mets Clean Up at Home and Yanks Sweep Away; Cone Finishes Expos at Shea
There have been too many false starts for the Mets this season for three straight triumphs to produce any great truths.
"It's going to take a lot more than three games in a row to get excited," said Dave Magadan, the first baseman for the Mets.
"It's going to take a lot more to prove to ourselves and to the fans that we mean business."


Intersolv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Cellular Telephone reports earnings for Year to March 31


Bad News Pummels French Premier
Barely six weeks after President Francois Mitterrand appointed Edith Cresson to be Prime Minister, the first woman in that post, there are already signs that what looked like an adroit maneuver to inject new life into his 10-year-old administration may have backfired.
Since taking office on May 15, Mrs.
Cresson has been bombarded with unrelenting bad news, including a wave of strikes, violent clashes between the police and immigrants, record unemployment, several scandals and even sniping from colleagues in her own Socialist Party.


Yugoslavs, United or Not, Need to Talk
As the grim news from Yugoslavia attests, politics can't get beyond World War II, when ethnic antagonisms between Serbs and Croats led to mass slaughter.
Past grievances and grudges have a vividness the future seems to lack.
But whether the partners choose to separate or reconcile, they need to talk to each other about their future.
And that's just what they won't do.
Instead, they call on friends and neighbors in America and Europe to take sides.
The friends and neighbors, to their credit, refuse.


Perrier Sales Back
Sales of Perrier mineral water in the United States have recovered 55 to 60 percent of their level of 1989, before traces of benzene were found in the production process, Source Perrier S.A. said.


A New Start for the School Board
Mayor David Dinkins has, commendably, assumed more responsibility for New York City's troubled schools.
His new appointee to the Board of Education, H. Carl McCall, has secured enough votes to become the board's next president.
Mr.
McCall's challenge now is to lead the board to become a more effective force for reform.
Under the city's decentralized school system, the central board sets policy and administers high schools, while 32 community boards run elementary and junior high schools.
The mayor appoints two of the seven central board members and each of the five borough presidents selects one.


Kohlberg, Kravis Planning Cable Venture
Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company and Cablevision Industries Inc. are considering investing $250 million and borrowing another $750 million to buy cable systems, David Testa, Cablevision's vice president, said yesterday.
"Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts had been looking to get into the cable market and our expertise includes management of systems," Mr.
Testa said.
Cablevision, which is based in Liberty, N.Y., would manage the systems that are acquired.


Review/Art; Queens Sculpture Show Raises Timely Issues
"Interrelations and Migration: Contemporary Sculpture From Germany" is my choice for the sleeper of the year in New York City.
It opened at the Queens Museum of Art with no fanfare and none of the aura that can accompany big-name topical shows.
What it has is coherence, intelligence and surprise.
And the issues it does raise, about "world art" and about esthetics and form, are timely and profound enough, even if it does not explore them in the depth they need.
The exhibition exposes New York to a less familiar side of post-World War II German art, one that is far removed from the sculptures and installations of Joseph Beuys, the immensely influential artist-shaman who inspired some of Germany's best postwar expressionist and Conceptual art.
The artists in this show -- Erwin Heerich, Norbert Kricke, Abraham David Christian and Katsuhito Nishikawa -- have strong links, like Beuys, to Dusseldorf, and their work, like Beuys's, has a utopian dimension.


Dollar Closes Mostly Higher But Declines Against Yen
The dollar finished higher yesterday against all major currencies except the Japanese yen.
Gold prices mostly declined.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $366 an ounce, unchanged from Wednesday.
The Republic National Bank said gold slipped 20 cents an ounce, to a late bid of $365.80.


Republic Health Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Dow Drops Della Femina
Some of the most colorful characters in household-product advertising -- Fingerman and the Scrubbing Bubbles -- are on the move as the Dow Brands subsidiary of the Dow Chemical Company consolidates its advertising at two agencies, from three.
Some industry executives estimated the billings involved at $12 million, though others placed them as high as $25 million.
Dow is dropping Della Femina McNamee, New York, from its roster after a 15-year relationship.
Ziploc bags, for which the agency last year created Fingerman (a talking finger used to endorse the product), and Saran Wrap, are shifting to Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Minneapolis, which handles Dow products including the Perma Soft hair-care line.


Miscellany
*
BBDO Chicago, in pursuit of the $19 million Illinois Lottery account, has formed a partnership with Michael Jones &amp; Company, a marketing promotion firm specializing in lotteries.
Mr.
Jones, the company's president, was superintendent of the Illinois Lottery from 1981 to 1985 and has provided consulting services for nine other state lotteries.


CHRONICLE
First came bicoastal, next came bicontinental and now comes bipolitical.
SHEILA TATE, a press secretary for GEORGE BUSH and NANCY REAGAN, and JODY POWELL, a press secretary for JIMMY CARTER, are joining to form Powell Tate, a Washington-based public relations firm.
The new firm, which plans to open Monday, is an off-shoot of Cassidy &amp; Associates, a public relations and lobbying firm.
Powell Tate will take the public relations accounts of corporate and association clients.
The two political veterans will not do political campaigns and hope to live happily ever after.


G.M. Trying to Sell Locomotive Unit
The General Motors Corporation, citing the need to focus on automobiles, said it was looking to sell part of the locomotive division it has owned for 61 years.
It said several parties, which were not identified, were discussing buying the operation that has diesel-electric locomotive assembly plants in the United States and Canada, and a separate unit that builds armored cars for the military.


Ms. Weisenfeld Wed in England
Paulette Weisenfeld, a fashion executive in New York, and Gerard Mizrahi, a banker in New York and London, were married yesterday at Waterton House, the bridegroom's home in Cirencester, Gloucestershire, England.
Rabbi Abraham Levy officiated.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Weisenfeld of Bayside, Queens.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Mizrahi of London.
Mrs.
Mizrahi, 35 years old, is the managing director and chief operating officer in New York at the United States subsidiary of Christian Lacroix Inc., the French fashion house.
She is a Northwestern University graduate.


Future Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


The Price Is Right: Many Minds Think Freely; Spiritual Wanderings
For inspiring music and majestic architecture, spend a weekend in New York's churches, synagogues and mosques.
And it won't cost you anything, except maybe a dollar in the collection plate.


Pittsburgh Sells Revenue Bonds
The Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority sold $248.3 million in water and sewer system serial revenue refunding bonds yesterday through an underwriter group led by Paine Webber Inc.
The tax-exempt issue was rated Aaa by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AAA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Evolution Keeps Going On Around Us
To the Editor:
In "Repair Kit for DNA Saves Cells From Chaos" (Science Times, June 4), you give the last word to a molecular biologist.
"Right now, we're not really evolving," he states.
"But that may change if something like a meteor were to strike the earth." The study of evolution is in a sorry state if scientists think it operates only after the occasional comet or asteroid.


Yugoslav Army Uses Force in Breakaway Republic; Slovenia Reports 100 Wounded or Killed
Yugoslav Army units used force today to take control of several border posts from the Slovenian authorities and deployed tanks and troops around Slovenian airports to keep the republic from putting its independence proclamation into effect.
On Thursday, two days after the republics of Slovenia and Croatia proclaimed their independence, the first skirmishes were reported between national Yugoslav troops and militias loyal to Slovenia.
The Slovenian Defense Minister, Janez Jansa, reported fighting in at least 20 places and estimated that more than 100 people had been killed or wounded.


The Price Is Right: Many Minds Think Freely Watching the Watched; Watching the Watchers; One Man's View
For men, the best free game in New York is who or what might be seen by anyone who takes a walk.
Women, for example.
The women of Manhattan were on the cusp of regaining their storied elegance until a few years ago, when they became enamored of those shoulder pads that some malefactor freely adapted from one of Larry Csonka's old uniforms (or was it one of Joan Crawford's old suits?), the epauletted raincoats apparently inspired by one of General Patton's daydreams and those clunky chains women have insisted on draping around their necks, their waists, and even their handbags.
Not since Paul Muni made that old chain-gang movie has anyone seen such shackles.
Was there nothing between Giorgio Armani and the Gap?


Telephone Technology Questioned After Failures
Striking similarities between nearly simultaneous computer malfunctions that disrupted local telephone service on the East Coast and in Los Angeles on Wednesday have raised questions among communications experts about the reliability of advanced networks that all the Bell telephone companies are now installing.
The problems experienced by both Pacific Bell and the Chesapeake and Potomac Company, which serves Washington, Maryland, Virginia and parts of West Virginia, involved computer programs on advanced call-routing equipment.
The equipment uses the same new technology, one being adopted throughout the communications industry.


The Court's Symbol, and Its Loss
Thurgood Marshall's presence on the Supreme Court both symbolized and extended the achievement of human rights through law and the Constitution.
His retirement, though richly earned and long expected, is nevertheless a hurtful blow to the causes he personified.
The great-grandson of a slave, Justice Marshall put his legal skills at the service of civil rights for a quarter of a century as director of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund.
He then served as a Federal judge, as Solicitor General and finally, for nearly 24 years, as a Justice.
As President Lyndon Johnson said in nominating him in 1967, he had already earned his place in history as the legal champion of equal rights for all Americans.


GZA Environmental Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Congress Hardens View on Trade With China
Congress moved a step closer today toward a confrontation with President Bush over preferential trading status for China, as the Finance Committee sent to the Senate floor a bill imposing conditions that the President has already rejected as unacceptable.
But the committee did not officially recommend the bill because a crucial Democratic Senator, Max S. Baucus of Montana, joined Republicans in supporting the President's position that conditions are unnecessary.


Auctions
Bart Meets Cinderella
Animation art -- especially postwar celluloids of Cinderella, Snoopy and Bart Simpson -- brought remarkable prices in last week's sales of collectibles at Christie's and Sotheby's in New York.
Defying the trend of prices' for art, antiques and collectibles leveling off from their highs in the 1980's, many cartoon images brought sums that were two to five times the presale estimates by the auction houses.


Concord Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to June 2


Fisher-Price Vows To Oppose Bids
The chairman of Fisher-Price Toys, Ronald Jackson, said he would fight any takeover attempts after the company is spun off on Friday.
The company, based in the Buffalo suburb of East Aurora, has been owned by the Quaker Oats Company since 1969.
The food giant decided to spin off the toy maker last year after several years of losses.


TV Weekend; 'Desert Storm,' Four-Part Replay of the Gulf War
"Desert Storm" is made for military buffs.
The four-part account of the war in the Persian Gulf, which begins at 10 P.M. on Sunday and continues through Wednesday on the Arts and Entertainment cable network, is a parade of the smart weapons that crushed Iraq.
It begins with the air war, descends to the ground war and moves on to analyses of allied strategy and tactics and America's military intelligence.


They Lined Up to Sign Petition for the Zoo
To the Editor:
In "We Can't Shut the Zoo" (Op-Ed, June 19), William Conway provides compelling reasons for New York City not to close the Central Park Zoo to narrow the budget gap.
But what is especially noteworthy is the sense of outrage of visitors to Central Park and the zoo at this proposed closing.


The Price Is Right: Many Minds Think Freely; Joys of Humanity
Fun and free are just not synonymous terms in New York -- at least not after a certain age, and not after you open your front door.


New Unrest Is Reported in Miami
Two police officers responding to a gunfight on a street in a racially tense neighborhood shot and wounded a man today, setting off a night of unrest in which about 50 people were arrested, the police said.
Crowds of young blacks took to the streets hurling rocks and bottles.
A police officer was hospitalized after he was struck in the head by a stone, but there were no reports of other injuries.


Nobility Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


McCall Says He Will Push For More Minority Teachers
The prospective president of the New York City Board of Education wants a vigorous effort to hire black and Hispanic teachers and supports a separate high school for black male teen-agers, but he is uneasy about making condoms available to students.
In two interviews in recent days, H. Carl McCall, who has enough votes to be elected board president on July 2, expressed strong opinions on a number of sensitive issues that the board is likely to face.


The Price Is Right: Many Minds Think Freely Watching the Watched; Watching the Watchers; One Man's View ... and One Woman's
Dream on, buddy.
The way men are dressing these days, women -- those lucky enough to escape the Hamptons and spend weekends in the city -- don't get a charge out of returning their gaze.
The truth is that clotheswise, New York men frump out.


High Court Backs Use Of Special Tax Judges
The Supreme Court ruled today that the United States Tax Court may appoint special trial judges to handle a major part of its workload, including complex tax-shelter disputes.
The Court unanimously rejected arguments by a group of investors denied tax deductions in a complicated commodity futures deal.


Courtroom Television Focuses An Unblinking Eye On Defendants, Lawyers, Judges And Jurors.
Norman Dorsen, a past president of the American Civil Liberties Union and a charter member of the Courtroom Television Network's board of commentators, had just finished his first turn as color man.
He was playing John Madden to Fred Graham's Pat Summerall during a trial, taped for showing next week, of six Act-Up members accused of disrupting a 1989 mass at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
On his way out of the station's dark and claustrophobic new studio on East 35th Street, Mr.
Dorsen ran into Steven Brill.
A decade ago Mr.
Brill founded American Lawyer magazine, which revolutionized coverage of the legal profession.
Now he is the prime mover behind cable television's first foray into continuous courtroom coverage.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an opera review of "Yevgeny Onegin" misidentified the man at the left.
He was Oleg Kulko, not Vladimir Redkin.


To Harvard Neighbors, A Once-Venerable Club Is Now Affront to Law
Sheila Cook knows all about the past glory of the Lincoln's Inn Society of Harvard Law School.
Decades ago her uncle, the legendary constitutional scholar Zachariah Chafee Jr., belonged to the club; so did her cousin, John H. Chafee, now a United States Senator from Rhode Island.
But, she says, that was when lawyers, even young ones, behaved themselves like gentlefolk.
Lincoln's Inn, she wrote the Cambridge License Commission last year, has become a "de facto speakeasy." She ought to know; she lives next door.


Doctors of Beating Victim Are Hopeful, but Wary
Alfred Jermaine Ewell was unconscious, not breathing and almost dead, his doctors say, when he was carried into a hospital more than three weeks ago, suffering from massive head and brain injuries after being beaten by a group of white youths in Atlantic Beach, L.I.
His doctors at first gave him little hope of surviving, let alone recovering.
But yesterday, three doctors who have been treating the 17-year-old high school student declared that Mr.
Ewell's recovery has been heartening, saying he would probably be able to leave the hospital for a rehabilitative clinic by the end of the week.


The Final Word on Draft: Trades
Usually, the day after the National Basketball Association draft is one in which general managers, personnel directors and coaching staffs meet to assess what happened the previous night and to say glowing things about their No. 1 selections.
But a survey of many general managers yesterday found them predicting several trades in the days or weeks ahead, including swaps involving some of the first-rounders selected Wednesday night.


Control Borrowing, Contain Pain
Borrowing is a dirty word in New York City, and no wonder.
It evokes the not-so-distant 1960's and 70's, when City Hall thought it could solve every problem by spending borrowed billions -- and brought the city to the edge of ruin.
Even so, as the city faces its new fiscal crisis, people are daring again to use the dirty word.
The economy is so troubled, the huge budget cuts so onerous that under strict conditions, borrowing could help provide a humane and efficient alternative.
But it's too soon.
It is premature to consider deficit financing, at least until the city meets its Monday deadline to adopt a balanced 1992 budget that contains no borrowing.


Photo CD's Due Late Next Year
Philips Electronics N.V. said it and the Eastman Kodak Company expected to make final their standard for photographic compact disks by October and begin offering photo CD players in the second half of next year.
Photo CD's will allow photographs or slide film to be processed for display on a television screen via a compact disk.


'My Dear Mr. President'
Following is the text of Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall's letter to President Bush today announcing his resignation.
My Dear Mr. President:
The strenuous demands of Court work and its related duties required or expected of a Justice appear at this time to be incompatible with my advancing age and medical condition.
I, therefore, retire as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States when my successor is qualified.
Respectfully, THURGOOD MARSHALL


Steinbrenner Yields
GEORGE STEINBRENNER, saying he has turned American Ship Building Company on a course toward profitability, formally stepped down yesterday as chairman and chief executive officer.
"I think I've accomplished all I can do here. I can't take it any more," he told the company's annual stockholder's meeting.
"I'm at the point now I want to enjoy my life."


Review/Theater; Walken as Iago in an 'Othello' in the Park
WHEN a New York Shakespeare Festival presentation is clicking in Central Park, the sun knows just when to set and even the leaves rustle on cue.
Such was the case at the Delacorte Theater during the press opening of "Othello." The sun plopped down just as Christopher Walken, the inexhaustibly snide Iago of the evening, announced his dark intention to lead Othello by the nose into self-destruction.
The trees made their contribution somewhat later, swaying malevolently at the precise moment Iago comes upon the handkerchief that seals his Machiavellian plot.
Only in the final scene, at Desdemona's death bed, did nature fail to oblige the director, Joe Dowling, and his able cast, for the "huge eclipse of sun and moon" that Othello (Raul Julia) expects to greet his murder of his wife did not materialize.
But even this late-hour lapse was, at least, in sync with the production, whose own most severe failing is an inability to sound the deepest tragic notes.


Diner's Journal
The Changing Scene
NEW CHEFS: Le Bernardin, the four-star French seafood restaurant on West 51st Street in Manhattan, has a new chef.
Eric Ripert, 27 years old, comes from Bouley, where he spent nine months.
Before that he worked at Jean-Louis at Watergate in Washington and two restaurants in Paris: Jamin and La Tour d'Argent.
Mr.
Ripert replaces Eberhard Muller, who left to open his own restaurant in California.


Bush Unveils Bust of Himself at the Capitol


Staodyn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Poland to Privatize Industry By Giving Stake to All Adults
The Polish Government took another big step toward establishing a capitalist economy yesterday, announcing that it plans to transfer a fourth of all state industry into private hands within six months and give a stake to every adult citizen.
Under the plan, the Government will transfer majority ownership in 400 state enterprises to a group of stock funds to be created and run by Western investment managers.
All of Poland's 27 million adults will receive vouchers giving them a stake in these "National Wealth Management Funds."


The Price Is Right: Many Minds Think Freely; Exalted Views
For two decades, I lived in Washington, where the law forbids constructing a building higher than the Capitol.
While this contributes significantly to the city's human dimensions, it also makes for lousy views.
Unless you climb the Washington Monument, you can never get up high enough to see anything.
A good view is one that affords you an unobstructed look into the neighbor's garden.
A great view is being able to see over the tops of the trees.
By craning their necks, one couple I knew could take in four blocks of Connecticut Avenue.
They photographed it.


Campeau Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Art in Review
Ann Truitt
Andre Emmerich Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Wednesday
Ann Truitt's sculpture has always seemed to be an instance of Minimalism Lite.
But this exhibition, which includes 16 pieces from the last 30 years, makes an unexpectedly strong case for her achievement.


Corrections
A caption yesterday with a picture by The Associated Press showing the new president of the American Medical Association misidentified him.
He is Dr.
John J. Ring.


Will The Real Tyson Stand Up?
PSYCHO PUP appears suddenly, although predictably, whenever Mike Tyson feels crowded.
Is Psycho Pup the real Mike Tyson?
Is there a real Mike Tyson anymore?
Should we still care?
Later, for theories.
Now, for shards and footprints.
If boxing had shame, Psycho Pup would be an embarrassment.
As it is, Psycho Pup is merely a complication, one that might even offer short-term commercial advantage.
Psycho Pup smells of bloodlust.
At the weigh-in for tonight's rematch with Razor Ruddock, as Don King capered around the scale crowing that Tyson's weight, 216 pounds, not only proved his fighter fit but also negated the news media's current deconstruction, Psycho Pup grabbed the crotch of his black bikini briefs and snarled, "Yeah, I'm out of shape."


German Rate Decision Lifts Bonds
A decision by the German central bank not to raise short-term interest rates helped lift prices in the Treasury securities market yesterday.
Notes and bonds posted modest gains.
Worries that the Bundesbank might raise interest rates to help lower the value of the dollar have lingered among credit market participants, even though a recent meeting of finance ministers from the Group of Seven industrial nations produced no consensus on what, if anything, should be done about the dollar.


Five Sued by the S.E.C.
The Securities and Exchange Commission has filed a suit contending that a financial analyst gave advance word about a pending merger in 1986 to four others who were also named in the suit and were said to have profited by more than $500,000.
The suit, filed Wednesday in Federal court, said that S. Jay Goldinger, the analyst, had disclosed that the Thrifty Corporation would be acquired by Pacific Lighting, now called Pacific Enterprises Inc., and that told Bert R. Cohen, his superior at Cantor, Fitzgerald &amp; Company, an institutional trading firm, and Andrew E. Gerald, Harvey M. Rosen and Ronald A. Weinstein.
He was not accused of profiting personally.
Mr.
Goldinger said he never advised anyone to buy the stock.


Jacques Correze, L'Oreal Official And Nazi Collaborator, Dies at 79
Jacques Correze, who served in prison in France for pro-Nazi activities and later became chairman of the American marketing arm of L'Oreal, the French cosmetics giant, died here Wednesday of pancreatic cancer, a company spokesman said.
He was 79 years old.
Mr.
Correze died hours after announcing that he had resigned as chairman of Cosmair, the L'Oreal affiliate, because of his illness and renewed controversy about his collaboration with the Nazis during World War II.


VIETNAM APPEALS FOR FOREIGN HELP
Vietnam's ruling Communist Party announced today that it had elected a new leader, Do Muoi, a 74-year-old party loyalist who used his first news conference to plead for international help to end Vietnam's long years as a "poor and backward nation."
Mr.
Do Muoi's remarkably blunt request for aid for his tattered nation came as the party replaced more than half of its policy-making group, the Politburo.
The new, younger members, while no less committed to the party's absolute power, appeared to be more likely to support moves toward a free market in Vietnam.


At the Movies
A Documentarian Returns
More than 20 years ago, when Nick Broomfield was studying law, he knew what he liked best.
"What I most enjoyed in law was case history," he said, "learning stories from reality."


With a New Referee, Fighters Can Settle It This Time
The questions were raised by the controversial ending to the March 18 fight between Mike Tyson and Donovan (Razor) Ruddock.
Friday night at the Mirage, the rematch is expected to provide answers as to who is the better fighter.
Tyson and Ruddock will meet in a 12-round match that is being referred to by promoters Don King and Murad Muhammad as a heavyweight elimination match.


Two Decades on the Court: Marshall in His Own Words
Private Property And Free Speech
This case presents the question whether peaceful picketing of a business enterprise located within a shopping center can be enjoined on the ground that it constitutes an unconsented invasion of the property rights of the owners of the land on which the center is situated.


John Jacob Kelberer, 64, Is Dead; Last American to Head Aramco
John Jacob Kelberer, the last American to serve as chairman and chief executive of the Arabian American Oil Company, or Aramco, died Wednesday at his home in Austin, Tex.
He was 64 years old.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said a family spokesman.


City Council Budget Plan Resists Dinkins Cuts
As a bitter fiscal stalemate continued at City Hall, the New York City Council released an alternative city budget yesterday that rolled back $476 million in proposed tax increases and restored some of the biggest cuts proposed by Mayor David N. Dinkins to balance the recession-ravaged city budget.


The Dancer Who Stars In a Bolshoi Opera
Everyone has heard of "Yevgeny Onegin." "The Maid of Orleans" has a familiar ring.
But "Mlada"?
Presented infrequently since its premiere in 1892, the opera -- the second of three offerings by the Bolshoi Opera during its current season at the Metropolitan Opera House -- was considered unsuccessful by many, including its composer and librettist, Rimsky-Korsakov, who described it as "cold -- like ice." The opera, to be performed through Tuesday night, has never been given a fully staged production in the United States.
With a cast of more than 300 and an imaginative but wildly complicated plot, "Mlada" will be seen here in a recent staging by Boris Pokrovsky, the founder and director of the Moscow Chamber Opera and a longtime Bolshoi Opera director.


Lillian Vernon reports earnings for Qtr to May 25


Restaurants
Le Pescadou
The widespread popularity of bistros in New York City, paired with the surging consumption of seafood, made the all-seafood bistro inevitable.
Enter Le Pescadou, a smart-looking little place in SoHo that serves an invariably fresh and diverse catch at reasonable prices.


Agassi Awash (in White); Edberg Survives Monsoons
Like a big gray tide, the rains swept in, and the rains swept out.
Just before they rolled back over Wimbledon like a tidal wave this afternoon, defending champion Stefan Edberg completed his first-round match, defending United States Open champion Pete Sampras finally survived a first-round match on this too-slick turf after two years of flops, and Andre Agassi, girded and girdled all in white, made his long-awaited Centre Court fashion statement.
But other than those three little bright spots, Wimbledon was, for the fourth consecutive day, a misery of mud and monsoons where all but 6 of the 82 scheduled matches wound up in a state of suspended animation.
The tournament has now completed just 52 matches and is in a state of modified emergency, marooned by a weather forecast that isn't expected to deliver a dry day until next week.


Accounts
*
Motorola Codex, Mansfield, Mass., a telecommunications company, to Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners, Boston.
The agency said that the account, previously at Brouillard Communications, New York, has billings between $2 million and $4 million.


New York Courts Don't Deserve Racism Label; False Impression
To the Editor:
Concerning the report of the New York State Judicial Commission on Minorities, I agree that there are indeed "two justice systems at work in the courts of New York State." There is the court system depicted in the pernicious press release allegedly summarizing the commission findings.
There is also the state court system as it actually exists.


Review/Art; 'African-American Abstraction,' an Exploration
Some exhibitions give us the thorough treatment, the satisfying sense that no stone has been left unturned.
Others barely scratch the surface.
Tantalizing in their promise, in the questions they raise, the opinions they unsettle, these shows may simply indicate a new topic, ready for exploration, but in doing so they can have tremendous impact.


American Medical Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Ukrainians Protest New Soviet Treaty and Their Parliament Rejects It


Vincent Checks Swing
Commissioner FAY VINCENT has toned down his concern about PETE ROSE's appearance last week at a minor league team's ceremony honoring a former teammate, MIKE SCHMIDT.
A spokesman for Vincent on Wednesday played down Rose's apparent infraction under terms of his ban from baseball in 1989 for gambling.
Last week, Vincent had said Rose's appearance in Reading, Pa., raised serious questions.


Trios at Caramoor
The Kalichstein-Laredo-Robinson Trio is to perform Mozart's Trio in B flat (K. 502), Brahms's Trio in C (Op. 87) and Dvorak's Trio in E minor (Op. 90) at 5:30 P.M. on Sunday in the Spanish Courtyard at Caramoor, on Girdle Ridge Road in Katonah, N.Y.
The performers are Joseph Kalichstein, pianist; Jaime Laredo, violinist, and Sharon Robinson, cellist.
Tickets are $22.50.
Information: (914) 232-1252.


Arthur Watson, a TV executive Who Led NBC Sports, Dies at 61
Arthur A. Watson, who as the president of NBC Sports brought the 1988 and 1992 Summer Olympics to the network but balked at the high price of retaining major league baseball, died on Thursday night at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 61 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed, at his family's request.


Reporter's Notebook; A Renovation Keeps Alive the Flush 80's
A walk from one end of the State House to the other these days is a bit like a trip from Oz to Kansas.
In a section closed off for renovation, sunlight pours through stained-glass windows into chambers replete with gold-leafed pillarets and silver-plated candelabras.


Expansion by United Seen
United Airlines said today that it would make an announcement on Monday that would have a "dramatic impact on Orlando and Florida." One report said the carrier planned to announce the establishment of a major hub serving the Southeast.
The move by the nation's No. 2 airline, after American Airlines, would put it into direct competition with Delta Air Lines and USAir, the dominant carriers serving Orlando.


RESULTS PLUS
CYCLING  Belgian Holds On to Win Swiss Tour  Luc Roosen of Belgium won the Tour of Switzerland yesterday, holding on to a lead that he took in the second leg of the 10-stage race.
Roosen was clocked in 50 hours 18 minutes 20 seconds for the 1,194-mile race.
Pascal Richard of Switzerland was second, trailing Roosen by 33 seconds, and an American, Andrew Hampsten, was third. (AP)


White House Memo; 2 Personalities, Poles Apart, At Center of Sununu Drama
Picture a pair of wildly mismatched partners in a three-legged race at a picnic, and you will understand the awkward chemistry that now exists at the White House between John H. Sununu, the chief of staff, and C. Boyden Gray, the President's counsel.
Never the closest of colleagues to start with, the tough-guy politician and the patrician lawyer are bound together in one of the most uncomfortable arrangements ever to afflict a pair of White House officials.
On any given day, in the West Wing hall or in their offices, the Mutt-and-Jeff odd couple can be found conferring, the lean 6-foot-7-inch counsel bending like a parenthesis over the pudgy 5-foot-9-inch chief of staff.


Suffolk Votes a Sales-Tax Rise, to 8%
Running out of money and fearful that further downgrading of its bonds was imminent, Suffolk County adopted a $152 million financial plan today that includes a request for a half-cent increase in the county sales tax, to 8 percent.
The plan, proposed by County Executive Patrick G. Halpin, also freezes county property taxes through the end of 1994 and requires an outside audit to certify that future county budgets are balanced before they are adopted.
The county faces a budget deficit estimated at $150 million through the end of 1992.


2d Hole Made by Bullet, Teaneck Lawyer Says
A New Jersey prosecutor disclosed today that a second hole in the jacket of a black teen-ager fatally shot by a white Teaneck police officer was caused by a bullet.
It was unclear at the pre-trial hearing today what bearing the second bullet hole had on the principal issue in the case: whether the slain youth, Phillip C. Pannell, was reaching for a handgun in his jacket pocket, as the Teaneck police contend, or whether he had raised his hands in an apparent gesture of surrender when he was shot in the back by Officer Gary Spath, as some witnesses have said.
The shooting in April 1990 touched off disorders by black youths on the streets of Teaneck that tarnished the integrated community's image of racial harmony.


Miami Police Move to High Alert After Racial Violence in 2 Areas
Miami police were on high alert today after a night of sporadic violence on the streets of the city's two largest black neighborhoods.
The areas, Overtown and Liberty City, were quiet today, but police cruisers remained stationed on many corners in a show of force after a night in which as many as 38 residents were arrested and three officers were hurt.
One officer was taken to Mercy Hospital after being hit in the head by a stone.


Conflict in Yugoslavia; EUROPEANS SEND HIGH--LEVEL TEAM
Scrambling to forestall further worsening of the Yugoslav crisis, the European Community sent a high-level mediation team Friday to Belgrade aimed at bringing the federal Government and the rebel republics of Slovenia and Croatia back to the bargaining table.
After meeting Friday night with Prime Minister Ante Markovic of Yugoslavia in Belgrade and with Presidents Milan Kucan of Slovenia and Franjo Tudjman of Croatia in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia, the mediation team announced early today that all parties had agreed to measures to end the conflict.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about Martha Graham's will referred incompletely to the friends and colleagues she had asked her beneficiary, Ron Protas, to consult on artistic matters.
The list included Halston, the designer, and Ted Michaelson, a past chairman of the Martha Graham Dance Center -- both now dead -- and Alexander E. Racolin and Lee Traub, former chairmen.


Man Convicted of All Charges In Fatal Mail Bombing Wave
A Federal jury today convicted Walter Leroy Moody Jr. of all charges in the deaths of a Federal judge and a civil rights lawyer in a wave of mail bombings in the Southeast.
Mr.
Moody, 57 years old, of Rex, Ga., showed no emotion and said nothing when the verdicts were read.
Edward Tolley, one of Mr.
Moody's lawyers said he planned to appeal.


Quotation of the Day
"I've been toppled from power so many times." -- Godfrey L. Binaisa, former President of Uganda, after being laid off as a New York City lawyer.  [ 26:5. ]


Day-Trippers Chart Waters of the Sound
Sailing is an ideal way to escape the heat and congestion of summer in the city.
Long Island Sound, the inland body of water that stretches from New York to Connecticut, offers a 100-mile stretch of woods, beaches, parks and restaurants, many of which are easily accessible by boat.
The size of sailboat you choose will determine where you can go and how fast.
Like any major body of water, the Sound can be both hospitable and dangerous.
Be sure to take along a chart of the area where you plan to cruise; the waterway maps can be obtained at marine bookstores and chandleries.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 30, 1941


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Millions of prescriptions that American doctors write each year are for treatments that lack the F.D.A.'s approval as safe and effective, physicians and Government scientists say.  [ Page 1. ]  The F.D.A.'s campaign against the promotion of unauthorized treatments is part of an effort to enforce laws restricting advertising and publicity for prescription drugs.  [ 9. ]


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Amoco Chemical Co., Chicago, a subsidiary of Amoco Corp., appointed William T. Harper Jr. executive vice president.
He will also remain president of Amoco Fabrics and Fiber Co., Atlanta, a unit of Amoco Chemical. *
Equitable Capital Management Corp., New York, a subsidiary of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, named Barbara J. Krumsiek senior vice president.


Venezuela Airline Drawing Bidders
Iberia, the Spanish state airline, and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines of the Netherlands received approval from the Venezuelan Government to bid with local investors for 60 percent of the state-owned airline, Viasa.
The airline's Government-owned holding company, Fondo de Inversiones de Venezuela, which is handling the airline's privatization, intends to retain 20 percent of Viasa and place another 20 percent with the carrier's workers.


Gorbachev's Illusion: A Center Role
A popular Soviet stand-up comedian has a routine in which he purports to explain where Mikhail S. Gorbachev really stands: "To left-wingers, he's on the right. To right-wingers, he's on the left. He sees himself in the center -- but that's an optical illusion."
The formula by the comedian, Mikhail Zhvanetsky, is popular among commentators and politicians who try to fix the Soviet President in the political spectrum as he appears to swing from left to right and back again.


INSIDE
Wall St. Convictions Upset
The only racketeering convictions arising from the Wall Street scandals of the late 80's were overturned by a Federal appeals court.
Page 35.
Less Work, More Study?


Senate Vote on Delay in Handgun sales
Following is the 67-to-32 roll-call vote by which the Senate approved legislation today establishing a five-day waiting period for handgun purchases.
A yes vote was a vote to approve the waiting period.
Voting yes were 48 Democrats and 19 Republicans.
Voting no were 8 Democrats and 24 Republicans.
Alabama: Heflin (D) No; Shelby (D) No.
Alaska: Murkowski (R) No; Stevens (R) No.
Arizona: DeConcini (D) No; McCain (R) No.
Arkansas: Bumpers (D) Yes; Pryor (D) Not Voting.
California: Cranston (D) Yes; Seymour (R) Yes.
Colorado: Brown (R) No; Wirth (D) Yes.
Connecticut: Dodd (D) Yes; Lieberman (D) Yes.
Delaware: Biden (D) Yes; Roth (R) Yes.
Florida: Graham (D) Yes; Mack (R) No.
Georgia: Fowler (D) Yes; Nunn (D) Yes.
Hawaii: Akaka (D) Yes; Inouye (D) Yes.
Idaho: Craig (R) No; Symms (R) No.
Illinois: Dixon (D) Yes; Simon (D) Yes.
Indiana: Coats (R) Yes; Lugar (R) Yes.
Iowa: Grassley (R) No; Harkin (D) Yes.
Kansas: Dole (R) Yes; Kassebaum (R) Yes.
Kentucky: Ford (D) Yes; McConnell (R) No.
Louisiana: Breaux (D) No; Johnston (D) No.
Maine: Cohen (R) Yes; Mitchell (D) Yes.
Maryland: Mikulski (D) Yes; Sarbanes (D) Yes.
Massachusetts: Kennedy (D) Yes; Kerry (D) Yes.
Michigan: Levin (D) Yes; Riegle (D) Yes.
Minnesota: Durenberger (R) Yes; Wellstone (D) Yes.
Mississippi: Cochran (R) No; Lott (R) No.
Missouri: Bond (R) No; Danforth (R) No.
Montana: Baucus (D) No; Burns (R) No.
Nebraska: Exon (D) Yes; Kerrey (D) Yes.
Nevada: Bryan (D) Yes; Reid (D) Yes.
New Hampshire: Rudman (R) Yes; Smith (R) No.
New Jersey: Bradley (D) Yes; Lautenberg (D) Yes.
New Mexico: Bingaman (D) Yes; Domenici (R) Yes.
New York: D'Amato (R) Yes; Moynihan (D) Yes.
North Carolina: Helms (R) No; Sanford (D) Yes.
North Dakota: Burdick (D) Yes; Conrad (D) Yes.
Ohio: Glenn (D) Yes; Metzenbaum (D) Yes.
Oklahoma: Boren (D) Yes; Nickles (R) No.
Oregon: Hatfield (R) Yes; Packwood (R) Yes.
Pennsylvania: Specter (R) No; Wofford (D) Yes.
Rhode Island: Chafee (R) Yes; Pell (D) Yes.
South Carolina: Hollings (D) No; Thurmond (R) Yes.
South Dakota: Daschle (D) Yes; Pressler (R) No.
Tennessee: Gore (D) Yes; Sasser (D) Yes.
Texas: Bentsen (D) Yes; Gramm (R) No.
Utah: Garn (R) No; Hatch (R) No.
Vermont: Jeffords (R) Yes; Leahy (D) No.
Virginia: Robb (D) Yes; Warner (R) Yes.
Washington: Adams (D) Yes; Gorton (R) Yes.
West Virginia: Byrd (D) Yes; Rockefeller (D) Yes.
Wisconsin: Kasten (R) Yes; Kohl (D) Yes.
Wyoming: Simpson (R) No; Wallop (R) No.


Your Taxes; More Paperwork For Income Credit
The good news for millions of lower-income Americans was that last fall's budget agreement expanded and sharply raised the benefits provided by the earned-income tax credit, that rare anti-poverty device praised by conservatives and liberals.
The bad news is that the Government has made these benefits much harder to get.
In a classic case of unintended -- though scarcely unforeseeable -- consequences, what had been a one-line entry on the basic tax form has ballooned into a two-page schedule and a maze of instructions.
The credit's claimants will be among the least equipped to deal with this.


Thatcher Will Leave the Commons But Plans to Keep Speaking Out
After 31 years in elected office, Margaret Thatcher, who resigned as Prime Minister in November, said today that she would not run for her seat in the House of Commons in the next election, which must be held within a year.
But Mrs.
Thatcher, who is 65 years old, immediately squelched any idea that she intended to assume a low profile.


A Plan to Curb Measles
This week a Department of Health and Human Services task force drafted a $90.9 million-a-year plan to stop the resurgence of an old scourge, measles.
The plan, to take effect in October 1992, would strengthen sadly depleted immunization services for poor children.
It deserves support by the President and Congress.
Measles, a disease that affected fewer than 1,500 Americans only eight years ago, claimed nearly 28,000 in 1990.
Eighty-nine of them died.
There are many reasons for the resurgence of measles -- medical, environmental and economic -- but no good excuse.


Music in Review
'Yevgeny Onegin'
Bolshoi Opera The Metropolitan Opera House Tomorrow and July 6


Quake Kills 2 Near Los Angeles; Damage Is Moderate
A strong earthquake deep under the San Gabriel Mountains jolted Southern California this morning, killing two people, causing moderate damage and leaving the region with its usual case of postquake nerves.
Seismologists at the California Institute of Technology said their initial readings put the strength of the earthquake at 6.0 on the Richter scale of ground movement.
If the preliminary measurement holds up, it would be the strongest quake in the Los Angeles area since 1971, when the northern suburb of Sylmar was rocked by a quake that measured 6.6.


Economic Crisis Forcing Once Self-Reliant India to Seek Aid
Facing a grave economic crisis, the newly elected Indian Government has begun urgent talks with the International Monetary Fund seeking emergency aid of several billion dollars.
Yet the conditions for such assistance are stirring anxiety in this nation, which historically prides itself on self-reliance.
At issue is not only the economy but also India's sensitivity to Western involvement.
What makes the nation's plight especially delicate is the realization that, without bowing to Western conditions for economic change, India could slide into collapse.


Iraqis Fire to Bar U.N. Inspectors; 'We Can't Allow This,' Bush Says
Iraqi soldiers defied United Nations inspectors today for the third time this week, firing warning shots over the inspectors' heads and again preventing them from investigating machinery that the United States says Iraq is using to make nuclear weapons, diplomats said.
The move caused concern in Washington, where President Bush said, "We can't allow this." He hinted at the use of force to make Iraq cooperate fully with the United Nations plan to destroy its weapons of mass destruction as part of the cease-fire agreement that ended the Persian Gulf war.


Vera Yarrow, Teacher And Diction Coach, 88
Vera Yarrow, a teacher in the New York City public school system and a diction coach to singrs and actors, died yesterday at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford.
She was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Yarrow, the mother of the singer Peter Yarrow of the group Peter, Paul and Mary, died of leukemia, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Lebanese Magazine Reports That 2 U.S. Hostages Are Ill
The Lebanese magazine Al Shiraa said today that the lives of two American hostages, Terry A. Anderson and Alann Steen, were endangered by serious illness.
The magazine is usually well informed about the 12 Westerners believed to be held hostage in Lebanon.
It quoted a "reliable source" as saying that Mr.
Anderson and Mr.
Steen were "in continuously deteriorating health condition" and that Mr.
Steen, 55 years old, "was not responding to medical treatment that he has been subject to." Al Shiraa gave no details on the nature of the men's illnesses.


A Partial Reversal in Fraud Case
The only Federal racketeering convictions arising from the Wall Street scandals of the late 1980's were overturned by a Federal appeals court yesterday in a decision that recommended against pursuing such charges against the defendants.
In a 2-to-1 ruling, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ordered a new trial on the tax fraud charges that were the centerpiece of the case against five principals of Princeton/Newport Partners L.P. and a former trader with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
But the decision is not likely to have a big impact on future racketeering charges because it was decided on narrow grounds.


Dollar Mostly Up, but Mark Is at Center of Day's Activity
The dollar settled mostly higher on world currency markets yesterday, but most of the day's activity centered on the German mark.
Gold prices advanced worldwide.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery settled at $368.10 an ounce, up $2.10 from Thursday.
The Republic National Bank said gold rose $2.20 an ounce to a late bid of $368.


In Mount Pinatubo's Shadow


Miss Ross Weds K. R. R. Schofield
Jessica Colby Ross, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilbur L. Ross Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Kenneth Richard Rupert Schofield, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher Schofield of Harare, Zimbabwe.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Schofield, 29 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Washington and received a master's degree in art administration from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father is a senior managing director of Rothschild Inc. in New York.
He also is the chairman of the National Museum of American Art in Washington and the Parrish Art Museum in Southampton, L.I.


Review/Dance; Blase Python Upstages The Action
It is not often that the real star of a dance production is a snake -- not a serpentine dancer, but a live python.
This handsome reptile made a grand entrance in "Maria Lionza, Kult und Kultur," which Espace Rhythmique, an Italian modern-dance company from Florence, presented on Thursday night at La Mama.
Because the work, choreographed by Belkis Rodriguez, concerned a charismatic Latin-American religious movement and the cast included dancers of several nationalities, "Maria Lionza" reflected the cultural diversity of contemporary dance.
Unfortunately, Miss Rodriguez made unimaginative use of her materials.


Jazz Festival; High Noon in Be-Bop Land With Saxophone Shoot-Out
Be-Bop: 40 and Younger, a concert held at the Equitable Center Thursday night that featured young musicians, cruised along amiably enough through the first half, then erupted in the second.
The show, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, reached its high point with a three- saxophone shoot out, just the sort of thing that audiences love.
On Charlie Parker's "Donna Lee," the saxophonists Christopher Hollyday, Billy Pierce and Bobby Watson, backed by a trio that included Mulgrew Miller on piano, Chris McBride on bass and Billy Drummond on drums, took each other on in an old-fashioned blowing war.


About New York
As the fiscal noose tightens around New York City's neck, more and more public servants find themselves on the pavement with scarcely more than a tear, a resume, maybe a thank you letter.
One of them is Godfrey L. Binaisa, a lawyer in the city's law department.
His thank you letter hardly diminished his indignation over the loss of his $60,000-a-year job and the fiscal mess necessitating it.


Mobile Artificial Eye With Faster Installation
Dr.
Gregg E. Gordon, an ophthalmologist at the New York Medical College in Westchester County, obtained a patent this week on a new artificial eye.
At the moment, most artificial eyes are fixed because they are not attached to the muscles that normally move the eye.
For people like Peter Falk, the actor who portrays the television detective Columbo, the artificial eye remains conspicuously immobile while the other eye moves around in the normal manner.


Kamieniecki and Yanks Make a Turn for Worse
Stump Merrill talked about mistakes tonight, but Scott Kamieniecki's pitching was not one of them.
Kamieniecki was exceptional again, but after the Yankees lost to the Milwaukee Brewers, 5-2, at County Stadium, the thing that stood out most was a debatable throw by Steve Sax in the sixth inning.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.81
5.91
7.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.55
5.55
7.74
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.73
7.61
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.10
8.17
8.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.40
8.47
8.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.45
9.52
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.21
7.24
7.50
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Music; A Crossover Dream Comes True in Liverpool: The Philharmonic Plays McCartney's Oratorio
This chronically depressed port city has had more than its share of woes lately, including a trash collectors' slowdown that made national headlines and left 12,000 tons of refuse on the streets before a settlement on Tuesday.
But for all its problems, Liverpool has always been a strongly musical city, with traditions in both the classical and popular sides of the art.
And tonight, Liverpudlians put their worries aside and turned their attention to the vast, ornate Liverpool Anglican Cathedral, where the two strains of musical culture entered into an unlikely alliance.
One partner in this alliance is the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, an orchestra that is highly regarded internationally and that has been celebrating its 150th anniversary this season.
The other is Paul McCartney, the 49-year-old rock star who, during his years with the Beatles, became one of Liverpool's most famous exports.
As part of its anniversary series, the orchestra commissioned Mr.
McCartney's first classical work, a collaboration with the American conductor and composer Carl Davis called "Liverpool Oratorio." Tonight, Mr.
Davis led the orchestra, its chorus, the cathedral's boys choir and a starry cast of soloists that included the soprano Kiri Te Kanawa and the tenor Jerry Hadley in the work's world premiere.


In the Nation; This Radical Court
Surveying the near-ruin of much of his life's work, Justice Thurgood Marshall has retired from the Supreme Court, apparently persuaded that none of the Court's decisions enforcing "the personal liberties protected by the Bill of Rights and the 14th Amendment" are safe from conservative reversal.
No wonder.
Just this term, the Rehnquist Court overturned four constitutional precedents and sharply restrained another.
Just this week it reversed its own interpretation of a Federal statute to limit prisoners' rights to file habeas corpus petitions.
The Court even invited lawyers to argue that it had wrongly decided some earlier cases.


Immigration Agent Guilty of Violating Rights
A New Jersey man who called himself the most decorated immigration agent in history with more than 70 commendations watched in silence yesterday as a Federal jury convicted him of civil-rights violations and making false statements against recent immigrants.
The charges stemmed from searches that the agent, Joseph Occhipinti, made while running "Project Bodega" and "Project Kuala Lumpur," two programs he organized to detect illegal aliens from the Dominican Republic and Malaysia who might be involved in illicit activities.


Keeping the Bugs Off, While Saving Your Skin
They're constant companions in warm weather.
In the garden, at the backyard barbecue, on the tennis court, at a picnic, on a hike, summer pests never lose your scent.
Insect repellants help keep them at bay, but at a price.
Many repellants feel uncomfortably oily on the skin, smell unpleasant and contain high levels of DEET, a possibly irritating compound that is, however, effective in warding off biting insects.


Tompkins Sq. Park Isn't Completely Closed
To the Editor:
Contrary to a news article of June 17, New York City's Tompkins Square Park is not closed.
Three newly renovated playgrounds are open, along with basketball, softball and handball areas popular with teen-agers.
The remainder of the park, under renovation, was rarely used by children or for legitimate park purposes.


Hawks Ready to Announce Two Trades
The Atlanta Hawks will send sixth-year point guard SPUD WEBB to Sacramento for shooting guard TRAVIS MAYS, Webb's agent confirmed yesterday.
According to published reports, the Hawks have also traded the rights to their second first-round draft pick, ANTHONY AVENT, to Denver for 7-foot center BLAIR RASMUSSEN.
Hawks general manager PETE BABCOCK would not confirm either trade.


Teaching Them to Think as Well as to Write
To the Editor:
Rachel Erlanger has not kept up with work in rhetoric and composition and thus in "Johnny's Teacher Can't Write Either" (Op-Ed, June 12) dismisses its scholars as bad writers, who practice willful obscurity.


Soviet Trade Bloc Is Out of Business
The nine member nations of Comecon, the Soviet-led trading bloc, signed an agreement today to put the organization out of business.
The ceremony in Budapest today was a formality because the members had previously agreed to disband Comecon, which had become an anachronism with the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe.
Trade within the bloc had already largely collapsed.


Revlon Plan For Bond Deal
Ronald O. Perelman, the New York financier who is the chairman and chief executive of Revlon Inc., has agreed to pay $12 million to bondholders to settle a suit growing out of his 1985 takeover of the company, attorneys for the bondholders and Revlon said yesterday.
In the class-action suit, the bondholders charged that Mr.
Perelman had not kept a promise he made during the takeover battle.
The pledge, which probably helped him win, was either to buy back bonds at par, or their face value, or exchange them for a new security once he won control.


Bridge
The declarer who is doubled into game in a part-score contract is full of happiness.
His opponents are wrapped in gloom.
If one could measure the total of such happiness in a roomful of tournament players, the result would be constant whether the game was being scored by Imps or by match-points.
This occurs because the successful declarer at Imps is much happier than his match-point counterpart, but it will happen to him less often.
At match-points one's opponents tend to make hungry doubles, with the result likely to be a top score for somebody.
West was taking a slight chance by doubling two spades on the diagramed deal, but his partner had shown some values and the misfit in clubs was likely to favor the defense.


&lt;Prices Paid to Farmers Up 2% in June
Prices farmers received for raw products rose 2 percent from May to June, and the overall commodity index was also 2 percent above its level of a year ago, the Agriculture Department said today.
Higher prices for oranges, pears and apples were partially offset by drops for lettuce, cattle and hay.


Havana Journal; A Film Is Banished, but Its Sly Grin Still Lingers
On several recent warm mornings here, lines began forming early at movie theaters as people came to see for themselves if the rumors about "Alice in Wondertown" could be true.
By midafternoon, the lines wrapped around entire city blocks.
Far from an innocent adaptation of Lewis Carroll's fantasy, the film is a scathing political allegory that somehow survived the country's rigorous censors to take potshots at Cuba's Communist system.


Murder Conviction Set Aside for Battered Bronx Woman
The murder conviction of Sarah Smith, a South Bronx woman who shot her husband after years of abuse, was thrown out yesterday after the judge found that one juror may have prejudiced deliberations by discussing a newspaper article about the case.
The judge, John P. Collins, had earlier rejected a defense request to reduce or dismiss the charge against Mrs.
Smith, a 44-year-old former welfare caseworker, on grounds that she had killed in self-defense.
He ordered a new trial after finding that a juror had defied his orders not to read news accounts of the case, and had given other jurors information from one article that would not have been admissible in court.


Conflict in Yugoslavia: In Slovenian Villages, a Fierce Determination but a Shortage of Firepower; Republic's Soldiers Wait for a Charge by Federal Army
A handful of young Slovenian militiamen sat nervously at the border post here today, clutching assault rifles and waiting for the Yugoslav Army to attack.
"They are all around us," said one of the militiamen, Anton Serbak, a bearded truck driver.
"If they come, we'll do our best, and try to defend. Then maybe we have to run, because what can you do against a plane or a tank?"


Indicators Index Posts a 4th Gain
The Government index designed to forecast the direction of the economy rose eight-tenths of 1 percent in May, the fourth straight monthly advance after six straight declines, the Commerce Department reported today.
The increase solidified expectations of a rebounding economy during the second half of the year.
But most economists still say they believe the recovery will be relatively weak, and some analysts, in fact, contend it will be short-lived.


Sports of The Times; Where Did Happy Stand On Jackie?
Did Happy Chandler take unwarranted historical bows?
Is the legend of Chandler as being instrumental in Jackie Robinson's breaking the major league color barrier in 1947 based on fact, or self-glorification well after the fact?
A.
B. (Happy) Chandler, the commissioner of baseball from 1945 to 1951, and a former Governor of Kentucky and United States Senator, died on June 15, at the age of 92.
Stories soon appeared about his contribution to that important event in sports and American history.


Celebrity Videos Part of Drug Crackdown
The Food and Drug Administration's campaign against the promotion of unauthorized treatments is only part of a broader effort to enforce laws restricting advertising and publicity for prescription drugs.
Dr.
David A. Kessler, chief of the F.D.A., said his agency was drafting regulations for video news releases and drug endorsements by celebrities.
"When celebrities go out and promote products as paid spokespeople," he said, "the public doesn't understand that it is basically an advertisement."


Legislators Planning to Restore $800 Million Vetoed by Cuomo
Girding for a showdown with the Governor, the State Legislature prepared today to restore almost all the spending he vetoed earlier this month.
The Legislature's plan all but guarantees that the state's budget struggle will continue into next month.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has vowed to veto -- once again -- any of the restorations that are not backed by additional revenues.


F.B.I. Interviews Robb Over Tapes of Wilder
Federal agents have interviewed Senator Charles S. Robb twice in the last eight days and served his office with a subpoena in connection with their investigation of telephone conversations that were secretly taped, the office of the Virginia Democrat said today.
A Federal grand jury in Richmond is investigating the taping of conversations involving Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder, a longtime rival of Mr.
Robb in the Virginia Democratic Party.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 15 about the trial of Sarah Smith, a Bronx woman who killed her husband, misstated an element of her defense.
Mrs.
Smith contended that her husband was awake when she shot him; she did not accept the prosecution contention that he was asleep.
The error was cited yesterday by a judge who overturned Mrs.
Smith's murder conviction.
An article about the case appears today on page B1.


The Korean War Memorial: Another Review, Another No
The Commission of Fine Arts has unanimously rejected the latest design proposal for the Korean War Veterans Memorial.
It was the commission's fourth review of designs for the $15 millon project.
The original winning design in a national competition was by four architects from State College, Pa.
It depicted a column of 38 soldiers as abstract figures marching along a walkway leading to a plaza with an American flag.
The architectural firm of Cooper-Lecky was commissioned by the chief client, the Korean War Veterans Memorial Advisory Board, to build the memorial, and in the redesign process the original idea was markedly altered.


Peter A. Clausen, 46, A Disarmament Expert
Peter A. Clausen, director of research for the Union of Concerned Scientists and an advocate of nuclear disarmament, died of cancer Monday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 46 years old and lived in Cambridge, Mass.
Mr.
Clausen joined the Cambridge-based organization in 1983 as a senior analyst.
He became research director in 1984.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Bankers Trust Company and Clark Melvin Securities Corp., Annapolis, Md., an investment firm, said they had signed an agreement giving American pension funds investment opportunities. *
Boeing Co, Seattle, said Cathay Pacific Airways, the Hong Kong carrier, had ordered three 747-400 jets, valued at about $440 million.


Blues and Stripers Taken on the Fly
As they grow long in the tooth, some anglers quit fishing and turn to growing roses or paunches.
Others keep on angling, but leave the long night hours beside the pounding surf or strenuous hikes to remote mountaintop trout ponds to those under 60.
Another contingent wearies of the usual and seeks new ways to outwit the quarry.
Nearly 60 years ago I began fishing for striped bass and bluefish off the South Shore of Martha's Vineyard, using the "heave and haul" technique, hurling a heavy lead jig attached to a handline over the crashing waves.
I never could cast more than 40 yards with that tarred marline, which came in 100-yard lengths that you wrapped around a cedar shingle.
Before the heave, you took all the line from the shingle and laid it in loose coils on the beach above the wash of the waves.


Not the Baseball Capital
To the Editor:
Your June 13 Washington Talk column on baseball in the nation's capital refers to both the original and expansion Washington Senators teams, stating, "Both teams eventually left, complaining of bad attendance at Griffith Stadium."


Prices of Long-Term Treasury Bonds Soar
Prices of long-term Treasury securities suddenly soared yesterday after being largely dormant for days.
Dealers said the initial demand for Treasury bonds reflected a stronger dollar and weaker stock markets in both Tokyo and Europe earlier in the day.
The demand grew as domestic stock prices began to drop along with commodity prices, a key barometer of inflation, which is the bane of the market in fixed-income securities.


F.D.A. Gets Tough on Drugs Offered for Unapproved Uses
At least 400 million of the 1.6 billion prescriptions that American doctors write each year are for treatments that lack the Food and Drug Administration's approval as safe and effective, physicians and Government scientists say.
Doctors say that research and experience justify their confidence in the benefits of these treatments.
But scientists warn that many drugs certified for some uses can have dangerous, unanticipated side effects in other uses, especially over long periods.


Review/City Ballet; As Season Nears End, More Debuts
The New York City Ballet may be ending its season at the New York State Theater on Sunday night, but debuts are still on the agenda.
On Thursday night, Ben Huys was new in the role originally danced by Ib Andersen in one of George Balanchine's most complicated ballets, "Robert Schumann's 'Davidsbundlertanze.' " Margaret Tracey, who became a principal last week, was seen on Sunday afternoon in Patricia McBride's original role in the "Rubies" section of Balanchine's "Jewels."


Rumors Hurt Chase's Stock
Chase Manhattan's stock fell sharply yesterday after rumors about problems at the bank swept through the market.
A spokesman denied all the rumors.
At the end of the day, Chase's shares were down $1.125, to $16.25.


A Timetable For Decisions
Here are the dates by which the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission, the President and Congress are expected to act on base closings:
June 27, 28, 30 : The commission renews deliberations on which military bases to close and restructure.


Cable Company in Texas Planning to Drop MTV
As television viewers in Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union and Poland are finally getting to see MTV, a small cable company in Tyler, Tex., has decided to take it off the air because of moral objections to the shows.
If the cable company, TCA, follows through with its plan to drop the service on Sunday, it will be the first time that MTV has been removed from a cable system for such reasons, said Carol Robinson, MTV's vice president for press relations.


Observer; Magnus Manus Shakus
Why is the Supreme Court so interested in the human body? people ask.
Don't those old-timers think of anything but abortions, G-strings and love between consenting homosexuals?
The answer is, they would like to.
Most of them yearn for the old days when Supreme Courts were so busy declaring Franklin Roosevelt unconstitutional that they didn't have time to keep an eye on the human body.
In those days of course Americans were more circumspect about their bodies.
Men wore three-piece suits to baseball games.
And snap-brim hats!


Pope Elevates 23 New Cardinals
Pope John Paul II formally elevated 23 new cardinals from six continents yesterday, including a long-imprisoned Chinese bishop whose appointment was denounced by Beijing's Communist government.
Bishop Ignatius Gong Pin-Mei, 89, after he received his red cardinal's hat yesterday at the Vatican. (Associated Press)


An Escape Beckons 'Prisoner in Queens'
To the Editor:
To Victor Triola, author of "A Prisoner in Queens" (Op-Ed, June 15), who describes himself as a "non-college-educated, single, white male in his late 20s," who is writing a play and feels trapped in a hostile and violent New York City:


A Niacin Formulation to Avoid Side Effects
In recent years, a wide range of medical authorities have documented the cholesterol-lowering abilities of niacin, a familiar vitamin found in many ordinary foods.
But there has been a catch.
To lower cholesterol, people have generally had to take the vitamin in exceptionally heavy doses, which frequently caused rashes, itching and flushes that temporarily turned a person's face, neck and chest beet red.
Taking niacin in timed-release forms avoided those side effects, but these formulations had been associated with liver problems.


A Young Airline's Battle to Survive Lean Times
America West Airlines, which filed for bankruptcy court protection late Thursday, is one of the few carriers created after deregulation that are still flying.
The airline, the nation's ninth largest, said it would continue in service while seeking to reorganize its finances and business under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


Mike Masaoka, 75, War Veteran Who Aided Japanese-Americans
Mike M. Masaoka, a decorated combat veteran who worked to restore the rights of Americans of Japanese descent after World War II, died Wednesday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 75 years old.
Mr.
Masaoka, who lived in Chevy Chase, Md., had suffered from heart problems for several years and died of congestive heart failure, a spokesman for the family said.


Linda Gall Weds Gerard F. Joyce Jr.
Linda Patricia Gall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter E. Gall of Garden City, L.I., was married last evening to Gerard Ferrer Joyce Jr., a son of Maureen Joyce of Port Washington, L.I., and Mr.
Joyce of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Paul Butler performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Garden City.
Mrs.
Joyce, 34 years old, graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior vice president of the Discount Corporation of New York, a dealer in United States Government securities.
He is a former Mayor of Garden City.


U.S. Advice on Trash Causes Uproar
Some corporations and Federal agencies are crossing swords on a new battleground: guidelines that Government agencies are developing for consumers.
So far, two Federal publications have been seriously wounded.
This spring, the Agriculture Department delayed the release of a revised nutrition chart after meat and poultry producers complained that it was unfair to their products.
Now it turns out that just a few months before that, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency quietly shelved a guide for consumers on ways to reduce household garbage; some companies and trade groups had complained that the guide maligned their products.


New Policies, Old SLogans in Ethiopia
When they took power in Addis Ababa, the national capital, in May, the Ethiopian guerrillas of Tigre Province insisted that their policies were democratic and capitalist, and skeptics pointed to the guerrillas' longtime espousal of Communist ideology.
But here in their provincial capital, where they have ruled for two years, the guerrillas appear to be making good on their newly adopted word.


Dillard to Buy 7 Florida Stores
Dillard Department Stores Inc. has agreed to buy seven department stores in western Florida from Maison Blanche, one of the largest family-owned department store chains in the country.
If Federal regulators approve the acquisition, Dillard, based in Little Rock, Ark., will pay $68 million in cash for the stores.
Maison Blanche, a full-service department store in the upper-moderate price range, acquired the stores in 1987 when the May Department Stores Company sold its 10 Robinson's stores in Florida.
All the stores in the Dillard deal were former Robinson's stores.


Conflict in Yugoslavia: In Slovenian Villages, a Fierce Determination but a Shortage of Firepower; Innocent Bystanders Get Caught In the Middle of a Bombardment
By about 10:30 this morning, several dozen trucks had been halted along a highway near this sleepy Slovenian village.
The trucks had become caught in the middle of a standoff between Slovenian and federal troops.
The drivers were sitting nearby, talking and drinking coffee, when two Yugoslav Air Force jets, one a Soviet-made MIG and the other a Yugoslav-made Orao, came from the south.


No Move Yet for Improving Anifowoshe
KID AKEEM ANIFOWOSHE's doctor has recommended that the injured boxer remain in a San Antonio hospital for another week rather than be moved back home to Las Vegas, Nev.
The possibility of moving him from Baptist Medical Center-Downtown to a Las Vegas hospital arose this week as his condition improved.
But Dr.
GERARDO ZAVALA has advised against a transfer.
"People with this type of injury may bleed later on if they are moved too much," Zavala said.


Hong Kong Airport Delayed
The Governor of Hong Kong, Sir David Wilson, said today that the British colony would delay construction of a multibillion-dollar airport project.
He said the $16.2 billion port and airport planned for Chek Lap Kok on Lantau Island would not be abandoned.


At Last, Congress Hears the Shots
The Senate's resounding vote for the Brady gun control bill is likely to be remembered as a watershed, the moment Congress finally found the courage to confront a bullying lobby that considers its special interest more important than public safety.
The need for more gun control has been painfully clear to city dwellers for several years, as drug dealing has given urban thugs the wherewithal to arm themselves with expensive, powerful handguns and assault rifles.


New Limits Set On Job Hours For Students
The Legislature voted today to make New York's child-labor law one of the strictest in the nation, sharply limiting the number of hours youths can work while in school and prohibiting them from working past 10 P.M. on school nights without permission from their parents and teachers.
The new regulations, which Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is expected to sign into law, stem from recommendations made three years ago by a task force appointed by State Labor Commissioner Thomas F. Hartnett.
The panel cited several national studies that concluded that the homework of many students suffered because of excessive work hours.


Guidepost; Tiered Accounts
The continued decline in bank savings rates has led more and more banks to offer tiered money market accounts.
They pay a higher rate of return, but a larger deposit is needed.
Depositors who have the right amount of cash can earn more than 2 percent more than the bottom tier.
Here's how much can be earned in interest annually on minimum deposits in tiered money market accounts at two typical banks.
1st Tier
2d Tier
3d Tier
Bank A
$500
$10,000
$25,000
5%
5.6%
6.15%
Bank B
$2,500
$20,000
50,000
5.25%
6.05%
6.75%
(Source: Bank Rate Monitor, N. Palm Beach, Fla.)


Businessland
Businessland Inc., the computer retailer, said it had received a temporary extension of financing for its inventory, enabling it to continue shipping products to customers pending the completion of a proposed merger with JWP Inc.
Earlier this month, Businessland, based in San Jose, agreed to be acquired for $54 million by JWP, a company based in Purchase, N.Y., that installs heating and electrical systems.
The computer retailer, which was near bankruptcy before the JWP offer, said the ITT Commericial Finance Corporation had agreed to continue the inventory financing until 10 days after JWP accepted the tender of at least 51 percent of Businessland's stock or until Aug. 15, whichever comes first.


Redemption Time in Albany
New York's lawmakers have only a few days before their recess to atone for a wretched legislative session.
Their eight-week delay in passing the budget set a new standard for political irresponsibility.
It also chewed up time for other business.
Here are several non-budget issues the Legislature could usefully address.
Gun Control.
The Assembly has passed six gun control bills.
So far, the Senate has acted on three bills that increase penalties for gun crimes.
The others are more important.
One would close a significant loophole by forbidding out-of-city gun sales to New York City residents who can't provide a city gun permit.
The other two would impose new requirements for notifying police about wholesale shipments and retail sales of guns.


U.S. Orders Tests On Implant Safety
The Food and Drug Administration has ordered the Surgitek Company to find out how much of a cancer-causing chemical may be in the blood, urine and breast milk of women who have polyurethane-coated breast implants made by the company, agency officials said today.
The agency's action is important because it may help resolve the continuing fight over whether the implants are safe, and also because it is the first time the F.D.A. has used its power to direct a manufacturer of a medical device to carry out safety studies after the product has been marketed.
The power was granted by Congress last year.


U.S. Electronic Data Move Challenged on Privacy Issue
The Government said Thursday that it would introduce a Federal standard for authenticating electronic data later this summer, but the announcement prompted an angry reaction from one of the leading private providers of software that protects computer data.
The company, RSA Data Security Inc. of Redwood City, Calif., said the Government had failed to address fears about the possibility of a secret "trapdoor," which would permit intelligence and law-enforcement agencies to look at private data.


4 Stolen Picassos Found, Prague Officials Report
Four Picasso paintings stolen from the Czechoslovak National Gallery on May 6 have been recovered by the Czechoslovak and German police, officials said today.
Three of the four paintings were shown at a news conference in Prague; the fourth, identified as "Absinth and Card," was reportedly found in Bayreuth, Germany.


Soybeans at a 3 1/2-Year Low; A Record Crop Is Expected
Soybeans futures prices sank to three-and-a-half-year lows yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as traders interpreted a Government report and weather forecasts to mean a record crop this fall.
On other commodities markets, corn futures prices plunged and wheat was mixed; energy futures were mixed.


The Fine Craft of Selecting a Piano That Isn't a Holiday for Strings Inside
Piano season, that time of year when children and adults begin lessons, starts in the fall, and thousands of people are beginning their search through the classified ads or visiting piano showrooms to find a suitable instrument.
Anyone who wants to get a jump on the busy season should start now.
Being an informed consumer when buying a piano is harder than it is for almost any other big-ticket item.
And first-time buyers often want a used piano, facing greater pitfalls.


What Caused the Quake?
The earthquake in California yesterday is believed to have been produced by a thrusting of the Los Angeles Basin under the San Gabriel Mountains to the north.
It did not involve movement along California's San Andreas Fault, where the Pacific Ocean plate meets the North American continent.
But like the movement along that fault, yesterday's earthquake resulted from the northwest drive of the Pacific floor relative to the continent.


Options Studied in Case Weather Satellite Fails
Because of newly disclosed flaws in weather satellites under construction, a Federal agency said today that it was forming a group to examine options in case the nation's main weather satellite fails before its troubled successor can be launched.
Dr.
John Knauss, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, asked the panel to report in three weeks on the feasibility and cost of replacing the weather satellite, GOES-7, if it fails.


Review/Rock; Julian Cope, Projecting Many Moods
Between them, Jim Morrison and Lou Reed influenced some of the worst, most pompous rock of the last decade.
But admiring them isn't necessarily fatal; add some humor, imagination and personal spark and the music can still make the simplest riffs speak of love and terror, of exaltation and despair.
Julian Cope, who emerged from the Liverpool band the Teardrop Explodes for a solo career in the 1980's, has never denied his debts to Mr.
Morrison, Mr.
Reed, Iggy Pop and Pink Floyd's founder, Syd Barrett.
Yet in a rare New York performance on Wednesday night at the Marquee, he turned out to be as much an oddball and individualist as any of his idols.
On stage at the Marquee, wearing the basic black (loose shirt, tight tights) of collegiate rock, he was a protean figure, prancing and capering in one song, darkly introspective in another, howling a rocker or, between songs, staring into the crowd with the addled but sly grin of Harpo Marx while fans yelled their affection.
Some songs would give way to dramatic monologues as the band vamped -- including the finale, where Mr.
Cope acted out hara-kiri -- but most were trim and terse.


Wang to Cut 4,000 Workers
Wang Laboratories Inc., which had trouble selling its own machines and now will sell computers made by I.B.M., said today that it planned to eliminate up to 4,000 jobs, or nearly a quarter of its work force.
The announcement came a week after the struggling computer maker said it would link up with the International Business Machines Corporation.
Under the deal, Wang will receive up to $100 million and sell I.B.M. computers.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Recalled Rob Ducey and Derek Bell, outfielders, from Syracuse of the International League.
Optioned Mickey Weston, pitcher, to Syracuse.
Basketball


Super Valu Plans Spinoff
To try to raise the value of its stock, Super Valu Stores Inc., the nation's largest distributor of food to independent grocery stores, said yesterday that it would file a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission in preparation for spinning off its Shopko Stores division into an independent company.
"We intend to do a public offering of Shopko common stock because we believe Shopko and Super Valu will be more accurately valued by the marketplace as two distinctly capitalized business entities," said Michael W. Wright, chairman, president and chief executive of Super Valu.


Larkin Lets Fly With 3 Homers To Lead Reds to Fifth Straight
Barry Larkin hit three consecutive homers, tying the major league record with five in two games, as the Cincinnati Reds beat the Houston Astros, 8-5, tonight for their season-high fifth victory in a row.
Larkin hit a pair of two-run homers and a bases-empty homer in his first three times at bat off Jim Deshaies (2-7), and drove in a run by hitting into a force play for a career-high six runs batted in.
Larkin also drew a walk in his final time at bat.


Norfolk Journal; Home From War, With Dad Aboard
Along with new bombs and new tanks and new field rations for war, the Defense Department has come up with a new way to bring the troops home.
Petty Officer 3d Class Robert W. Harjes sailed back into Norfolk today from the Persian Gulf with his father, Robert R. Harjes, a retired civil engineer from Island Heights, N.J., standing proudly by his side.


Inside Oiler Locker Room: A Bonus Offer?
Edmonton Oilers owner PETER POCKLINGTON paid his team $100,000 to win the sixth game of the Smythe Division final against the Los Angeles Kings, according to a published report.
Three players, who did not want to be named, told The Edmonton Sun that Pocklington entered the team's dressing room April 28 with a bag full of money and set it down on a Ping-Pong table.
"He just came in and laid it down and said if we win, we get it," one of the players said.


New York City Workers Preparing for the Worst
Municipal workers confronted head-on the reality of a shrinking city labor force yesterday, preparing for fewer services for the poor, shorter library hours, truncated cultural programs and dirtier streets and parks as officials struggled to reach a budget agreement.
In many cases, the workers and managers were unsure what the final cuts would be.
But with the July 1 deadline to reach a budget looming, they are finally, often sorrowfully, grappling with the specifics of the massive cutbacks.


5 Are Indicted In L.I. Beating of Black Youth
A Nassau County grand jury has indicted five white youths in the June 2 beating of a black teen-ager in Atlantic Beach, the Nassau County District Attorney's office said today.
The five, who are to stand trial on charges ranging from attempted murder to weapons possession, are accused in the attack on Alfred Jermaine Ewell, a 17-year-old high school student who was beaten with baseball and stickball bats after a graduation party in Atlantic Beach.


CHRONICLE
One party that caps the London social season is given every year during the Wimbledon tennis tournament by CARINA FROST and DAVID FROST.
It takes place in a tent in the gardens of their Belgravia home.
Since she is a daughter of the Duke of Norfolk and he is a chronicler of the powerful and celebrated, guests have included the titled, the tycoons (SIR JAMES GOLDSMITH and LORD ROTHSCHILD) and the talented (MICHAEL CAINE and SIR PETER USTINOV).
But London has been under water from heavy rain for weeks, as tennis fans know, and yesterday's forecast promised more of the same.
Now comes this fax: "Carina and David Frost regretfully announce the cancellation of their annual drinks party, due to the appalling weather conditions."


CHRONICLE
All rights to Elvis Presley memorabilia belong to a corporation headed by the singer's former wife, PRISCILLA PRESLEY , a Federal appeals court has ruled.
The decision by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit in Cincinnati on Thrusday rejected a legal challenge by SID SHAW of London, who owns Elvisly Yours in Memphis and London.
The court ruled that Elvis Presley Enterprises Inc., headed by Mrs.
Presley, "has exclusive rights to commercially exploit the name, likeness and image of Elvis Presley."


Music in Review
'An English Masquerade'  Opera at the Academy New York Academy of Art


Commission Votes to Close 6 Big Air Force Installations
A Federal commission voted today to shut down six major Air Force installations as it began final action on which bases to close to save money.
But the panel put off until Sunday, its final day of business, tough decisions on bigger installations that the Defense Department has considered for closure.
They include Fort Ord in Seaside, Calif., and Fort Dix, N.J.


Europe Shops for a Ballot Box
First, catch a rabbit.
This instruction for rabbit stew also applies to democracy.
First decide on it and acquire the major ingredient: freedom to choose.
Then the recipe is still needed, but its contents are not so obvious.
East European countries are confronting the recipe problem, with serious tensions in Poland.
So are older democracies, including Italy.
Poland, which is to have its first completely free parliamentary vote in October, is disputing the electoral law.
President Lech Walesa, chosen by direct universal suffrage, wants legislative candidates to run only on party lists, a way he considers sure to exclude former Communists.
Solidarity and ex-Communist deputies want people listed by their names only, giving independents a chance.


Rule Approved to Extend Nuclear Plants' Licences
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission approved a rule today under which operators of reactors with 40-year operating licenses that are expiring may apply for renewals up to 20 years.
The commission chairman, Kenneth Carr, said he was determined to approve the rule before his term expires Sunday, so the agency left some details to be worked out by its staff.


Rev. Lord MacLeod, 96, Founder Of Church Community in Scotland
The Rev.
Lord MacLeod of Fuinary, who founded an ecumenical religious community on the Scottish island of Iona, died on Thursday at his home in Edinburgh.
He was 96 years old.
The cause of death was not announced, but his son, Maxwell, said he had been ill for some time.


Fiat Exports Up
Fiat S.p.A., the Italian automotive giant, said its European exports were improving but that its earnings for the year would probably be lower than in 1990.
Fiat Auto, the group's car-making unit, posted a 7.5 percent increase European sales in the January-to-May period this year, compared with a year earlier.
"Fiat Auto is making money," said Giulio Merlani, Fiat's finance director.
Analysts have projected that Fiat's profits could drop to $538 million this year, from $1.2 billion last year, on a 5 percent rise in revenues, to about $46 billion.


SENATE APPROVES HANDGUN CONTROLS
In a victory for gun-control advocates, the Senate approved a compromise measure today that would create a five-day waiting period for handgun purchases and impose penalites on states that do not implement background checks to screen out felons.
The provision for a waiting period was approved after a week of floor debate and back-room jockeying in which the original proposal for a seven-day waiting period was reduced to five days to pick up support for the bill.
The action today clears the way for a vote on a complete anti-crime package after Congress returns from a Fourth of July recess.


Teaching Them to Think as Well as to Write; Ideological Attack
To the Editor:
What a surprise that in "Johnny's Teacher Can't Write Either" (Op-Ed, June 12), Rachel Erlanger chooses samples from two leftist scholars, James Berlin and Ira Shor, as examples of poor writing.
Conservative attacks on the quality of writing of leftist scholars are standard ad hominem criticism.
The charge alleges these scholars are poor writers and, by implication, ill-educated and misguided thinkers.


JVC in Germany
The Victor Company of Japan Ltd., known as JVC, said it would set up a technology operation in Germany on July 1 to address the new technical standards and other developments resulting from the integration of the European Community.
The operation, the JVC Technology Centre Europe G.m.b.H., will be based in Hessen, the company said.
It will collect and analyze information on product development and technical standards in the 12-nation community and will provide other support to JVC units in the region.
The European Community will become a unified trading bloc at the end of next year.


News Summary
International 2-5
Hostilities in Yugoslavia were halted after the leaders of the federation met with European Community mediators and agreed to take steps toward solving the crisis.
A cease-fire remained in place.
Page 1
In Slovenian village, bystanders as targets 4
At a border post, Slovenes await Yugoslav charge 4
News analysis: Mikhail Gorbachev confounds Soviets with his apparent swings along the political spectrum, from left to right and back again.
Is he really a confirmed Bolshevik or a dedicated reformer? 3
Comecon put itself out of business.
The ceremony in Budapest among the nine member nations of the Soviet-led trading block was a formality because they had previously agreed to disband the group. 3
Iraqi soldiers defied U.N. inspectors for the second time, firing warning shots over their heads and preventing them from investigating machinery the United States believes Iraq is using to make nuclear weapons. 1
Margaret Thatcher will not run again for her seat in the House of Commons.
But the former Prime Minister of Britain immediately squelched any notion that she intended to assume a low profile. 3
India has begun urgent talks for aid with the International Monetary Fund seeking billions in help.
Yet the conditions of such aid are stirring anxiety in the nation, which prides itself on self-reliance.  5
The promises of Ethiopian guerrillas that their policies are democratic have been met with skepticism.
But in Mekele, the provincial capital they have ruled for two years, they appear to be making good on their word. 5
Havana Journal: A banned film's sly grin still lingers 2  National 6-10
Gun control advocates won a victory as the Senate approved a measure to create a five-day waiting period for handgun purchases and penalize states that do not impose background checks to screen out felons. 1
About a quarter of all prescriptions written by doctors are for treatments that lack the Food and Drug Administration's approval as safe and effective.
Scientists warn that the practice can be dangerous.  1
Celebrity videos part of drug crackdown 9
U.S. orders tests on implant safety 9
Six major Air Force bases added to closings list 10
Robb subpoenaed in eavesdropping investigation 10
Thurgood Marshall's replacement will be picked from a short but still-open list of potential successors "in a very few days." But President Bush did not commit to choosing a black or another minority group member. 1
Marshall concerned about quality of successor, not race 8
The new watchdog over John Sununu is the President's counsel, Boyden Gray, who must approve the chief of staff's trips.
The tough-guy politician and the patrician lawyer are bound together, uncomfortably. 1
Panel to study options on weather satellites 9
License renewals for nuclear plants are now permitted under a new rule issued by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
The industry was satisfied while opponents said the rule was too vague to insure safety.  6
Man convicted of all charges in fatal mail bombing wave 6
Miami police move to high alert after racial violence 8
An earthquake rattled California, killing two people, causing moderate damage and leaving the region with its usual case of postquake nerves.
Seismologists said the quake registered 6.0 on the Richter scale.6
What caused the quake?  6
Norfolk Journal: Home from war, with Dad aboard 6
Reporter's notebook: Teamsters don't thank the sponsor 8
New trials for Wall Street defendants were ordered after the only Federal racketeering convictions arising from the financial scandals of the late 80's were overturned by an Federal appeals court. 35 Regional 25-28
The pace of the budget talks sped up in New York City over the last day or so, with the unions, for the first time, considering deep concessions, including the rollback of wage increases, union and city officials say. 1
City workers said tearful goodbyes while those who remained prepared for fewer services for the poor, dirtier streets and truncated cultural programs.
About 6,300 people were laid off; 4,500 more will follow soon.  27
A showdown with Governor Cuomo looked likely after the Legislature prepared to restore almost all of the spending he vetoed.
The plan assured that the budget battle will continue into next month. 27
A New Jersey prosecutor disclosed that a second hole in the jacket of a black teen-ager fatally shot by a white Teaneck policeman in April 1990 was caused by a bullet. 28
Broad changes in the child-labor law were approved by the New York Legislature.
The changes make the law one of the strictest in the nation, sharply limiting the number of hours youths can work while in school. 25
Reporter's notebook: The renovation of New Jersey's State House was intended to restore it to the glory of the Gilded Age.
The plans, which included $7,000 desks, were drawn in a more prosperous era. 25
Suffolk votes to seek 8 percent sales tax 26
A panel reversed the convictions of eight men, including the reputed former head of a crime family.
In throwing out the racketeering convictions, the panel sternly criticized the judge who handled the case in 1988 25
Biaggi, in poor health, to be released from prison early 26
Five white youths indicted for beating of black teen-ager 28
Owner of troubled disco found slain in his club 26
The murder conviction of a woman who killed her husband in the Bronx after years of abuse was thrown out.
A judge said that a juror may have prejudiced deliberations by discussing an article about the case. 25
Immigration official convicted of violating rights 26  Business digest 34  Arts/Entertainment
Korean War Memorial design rejected again 15
Music: Paul McCartney's oratorio 13
"Be-Bop: 40 and Younger" 13
Ella Fitzgerald at Carnegie 15
Music in Review 16
Julian Cope 13
Swing: 40 and Younger 15
Dance: City Ballet debuts 14
Espace Rhythmique 14  Sports 29-33
Baseball: Mets lose to Phillies 29
Yanks defeated by Brewers 31
Reds' Larkin hits three homers 30
Basketball: Yugoslav team loses player 31
Boxing: Tyson decisions Ruddock 29
Column: Berkow on Happy Chandler 29
Golf: Okamoto takes L.P.G.A. lead 33
Outdoors 33
Sports Leisure 33
Sports People 32
Tennis: No clouds for Agassi 29
Yugoslav focuses on game 31  Consumer's World 48
Selecting a piano
U.S. advice on trash stirs uproar
Taking the shakes out of camcorder shots
Keeping the bugs off
Guidepost  Obituaries 11
Arthur Watson, former president of NBC Sports
The Rev. Lord MacLeod, founder of Iona religious community
Mike M. Masaoka, civil rights advocate and combat veteran  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 22
Congress hears the shots
Redemption time in Albany
A plan to curb measles
Potshots at war intelligence
Letters 22
Russell Baker: Magnus manus shakus 23
Tom Wicker: This radical Court 23
Kathleen M. Sullivan: Marshall, the great dissenter 23
Robert J. Egan: "Beat the Bank" -- and collect 23
Flora Lewis: Europe shops for a ballot box 23


U.S. Judge Signs Biaggi Release, Citing Ill Health
A Federal judge yesterday unexpectedly ordered former Representative Mario Biaggi to be released from prison because of his poor health.
The once-powerful Bronx Democrat began serving an eight-year sentence in April 1989 for his part in the Wedtech bribery scandal.
He could be released as early as today from the United States Correctional Facility in Fort Worth, Tex., as a result of the ruling yesterday by Judge Constance Baker Motley in Federal court in Manhattan, said Mr.
Biaggi's lawyer, James LaRossa.


2 Economic Advisers Leaving Bush Council
Two of the three members of President Bush's Council of Economic Advisers are leaving the Government to resume academic careers.
John B. Taylor announced yesterday that he was resigning effective Aug. 2 to return to Stanford University.
Last week, Richard L. Schmalensee submitted his resignation to return to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


U.S. Partially Clears L.I. Japanese Scholar
After a five-year legal fight, a Japanese scholar on Long Island says that his name is to be removed from a State Department "lookout list" of ideologically undesirable aliens.
The State Department decision came in a letter to the scholar, Choichiro Yatani, whose case attracted public attention after he was detained by immigration officials for 44 days in 1986.
The officials said then that Mr.
Yatani was suspected of being a Communist and was ineligible to enter the United States under the McCarran-Walter Act.


The Budget Battles
NEW YORK The week-long waltz accelerated to a tango.
Budget negotiations between representatives of the Mayor and the City Council finally resumed as the new fiscal year neared.
The Dinkins administration dismissed as unbalanced the alternative budget that the Council has threatened to approve unless it reaches agreement with the Mayor before Monday.


Conflict in Yugoslavia; 2 YUGOSLAV STATES AGREE TO SUSPEND SECESSION PROCESS
The rebellious republics of Slovenia and Croatia agreed early today to suspend their declarations of independence after Yugoslav officials pledged to send federal troops back to their barracks and allow a Croatian to assume the country's rotating presidency, republic officials and a European mediator said.
The decision followed a day of intensified fighting in Slovenia, where Yugoslav warplanes bombed and strafed military and civilian targets, including airports and television towers.


Britain Bases Claim to Falklands on Force
To the Editor:
Your June 15 article on the Falkland Islands nine years after the Argentine-British war fought over them states that the islands were "First settled in the mid-1800's by Scottish sheep farmers."
In fact, when the British arrived in 1833, they found an Argentine colony already there and a small garrison under the command of Don Jose Maria Pinedo.
The commander of the British naval expedition forced Pinedo to haul down the Argentine flag and depart.
The British then estab lished themselves on the islands and have been there ever since -- except for the unfortunate 74 days of Argentine occupation in 1982.
There could have been no question about Argentine ownership at the time the British seized the islands.
There was some question until 1790, but at that point Spain and Britain signed the Nootka Sound Convention, under which Britain recognized Spain's right to its existing territories and agreed not to plant colonies of its own to their south.
As Prof.
John Gobbel of Yale said in 1927, in what is still regarded as the definitive legal study of the dispute: "The Spanish right to the Falklands became absolute at this moment, if indeed it had not been before."
Spain's sovereignty over the islands passed to Argentina when it became an independent state.
To assert that sovereignty, Argentina took possession of the islands in 1820 and maintained colonists and official representatives there until 1833, the year when the British arrived and took them by force.
How the British came to establish themselves in the islands hardly matters at this point.
The hard fact is that they have been there for almost 160 years.
Generations of islanders have grown up there.
The question is not likely to be resolved on a strictly juridical basis; rather, it will require a political settlement satisfactory to all sides, the islanders included.
The Argentine invasion of the islands in 1982 made such a settlement all the more difficult.
Yet it is worth remembering that when the Argentines speak of the islands as taken from them illegally and by force 160 years ago, they are right.
WAYNE S. SMITH Director of Argentine Studies, Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies Washington, June 17, 1991


Okamoto Grabs the Lead In L.P.G.A. Championship
Gunning for the first major championship of her career, Ayako Okamoto shot a 64 today to tie a course record and take a two-shot lead in the Mazda L.P.G.A.
Championship.
On a day when temperatures reached a humid 95 degrees, the 40-year-old Japanese star made six birdies and an eagle against only one bogey on the heavily forested Bethesda Country Club course to post a 36-hole total of 134, eight under par.
The round tied the previous women's competitive course record, set by Connie Cardenas, then Connie Chillemi, at the 1988 Greater Washington Open, which was won by Okamoto.


Tatars Challenge Kremlin
Crimean Tatars defied the Kremlin today by declaring sovereignty over the peninsula on the Black Sea from which they were deported in 1944.
The 240 delegates at a Tatar congress here voted almost unanimously to declare Crimea their homeland and to set up a 41-member governing body.
Delegates burst into applause when the result was announced in a hall decked with the Tatar flag -- a set of scales in gold on a light-blue background.


Man Found Killed Inside His East Side Nightclub
The owner of a troubled Lower East Side discotheque was found shot to death early yesterday on a balcony inside the cavernous empty nightclub, which has been open only sporadically for more than a year, the police said.
The discovery of the body inside The World, at 254 East Second Street, left investigators struggling to find a motive and to piece together how the killer got into the building, which was apparently locked.


The Rain Halts and Agassi Gets Chance to Shine
The clouds parted, the Royal Box filled with the gentry and Andre Agassi, a fair-haired flash of white with a nervous stomach and a court jester's urge to entertain, turned in a bravura performance in his Centre Court debut.
In a rain-splattered match that had been scheduled for Monday but started on Thursday and then was held over until today because of showers, Agassi worked overtime to overcome his jitters and an opponent with grass-court skills far more traditional than his own.
In the end, he prevailed, beating Grant Connell of Canada, 4-6, 6-1, 6-7, 7-5, 6-3, for his first Wimbledon victory.


Reporter's Notebook; Teamsters don't thank the Sponsor
Several times a day, the jeers and catcalls echo through the enormous, high-tech convention hall on the grounds of Walt Disney World.
This is the sound of the nation's teamsters venting their collective spleen.
It happens every time a speaker mentions the Federal Government, the union's omnipresent and uninvited guest here.
This might seem odd, since many of the 1,935 delegates would not be attending the teamsters convention, the first in five years, were it not for the Federal Government.


House Panel Approves Sweeping New Bank Rules
The House Banking Committee voted today to sweep away more than six decades of laws, dating to the Depression, that have prevented banks from expanding into new businesses and across state lines.
The legislation now heads to an uncertain fate before the Energy and Commerce Committee before moving on to the floor of the House of Representatives.
The bill is intended to address the growing problems of the banking industry, which although largely profitable is confronting its greatest crisis since the 1930's.
Members of the Banking Committee are far more sympathetic to the banks than the House as a whole.


Music in Review
New Music Consort  Symphony Space


Philip Gollnick Dies; Physiologist Was 56
Philip Gollnick, a physiologist and professor at Washington State University, died Wednesday after suffering a heart attack at his home here.
He was 56 years old.
For more than 25 years, Dr.
Gollnick conducted research that showed, among other things, how and why muscles adapt to levels of high activity.
Most recently he conducted research on the muscles of astronauts who flew on the space shuttle Columbia.


Channel Tunnel Linkup
French and British workers linked up under the English Channel today in the last of three tunnels making up the historic Channel Tunnel project -- three months ahead of schedule, developers said.
The final linkup was in the second of two parallel tunnels that will carry rail traffic between Britain and France starting in 1993.


Potshots at Gulf War Intelligence
Gen.
Norman Schwarzkopf took a broad swipe recently at U.S. intelligence in the Persian Gulf war.
Intelligence assessments, he told Congress, were belated and fudged.
Had he relied on them to choose the right moment to attack, "we'd still be sitting over there waiting." And, he added, exchanging target data between the Air Force and Navy was "a very cumbersome process."
Intelligence assessments were certainly imperfect.
But only the last flaw is easily fixed.
Other errors are unavoidable amid war's inherent uncertainty.
For someone with the general's long experience to misassess the assessors this way invites the question, what is he trying to accomplish?


Faced With Big Layoffs, Unions In New York Consider Givebacks
Faced with the most widespread layoffs of New York City workers since 1975, the Dinkins administration and union leaders have stepped up the pace of negotiations in the last day or so, with the unions for the first time considering deep concessions, including the rollback of wage increases, union and city officials said.
The reports of progress are the first positive signs in a tangled series of negotiations begun months ago among the Dinkins administration, the state, the City Council and the city unions all trying to solve the city's worsening fiscal problems.


Japanese Trading Charges on Stock Market Scandal
The stock market scandal took on a personal edge today, as the Nomura Securities Company and the Finance Minister, Ryutaro Hashimoto, each blamed the other for the wrongdoing and public outrage.
The bitter outbursts were a sign that the scandal has entered a new phase: Nearly everyone involved, including securities houses, regulators and even the police, are now running for cover and trying to avoid suffering further damage from the disclosures of improper activities.


CHRONICLE
New York Attorney General ROBERT ABRAMS was named outstanding Attorney General of the year by the National Association of Attorneys General.
He received the award on Tuesday at the organization's annual meeting in Seattle.


Marshall Urges Bush to Pick 'the Best'
Retiring Justice Thurgood Marshall, the sole black to have served on the Supreme Court, said today that the most important factor in choosing his successor should be "picking the best person for the job, not on the basis of race one way or another."
Seated in an armchair before an array of cameras and reporters in the Court's ceremonial East Conference Room, he said that while race would inevitably be a factor in choosing someone for the Court it should not be used as "an excuse for doing wrong." He defined that as "picking the wrong Negro and saying, 'I'm picking him because he's a Negro.' "


After a Rout, Cubs Drop Pitching Coach
The Chicago Cubs dismissed their pitching coach, DICK POLE, yesterday after the club's 12th loss in 13 games, a 14-6 rout by the St.
Louis Cardinals in which Cub pitchers allowed 21 hits.
The 40-year-old Pole was replaced by BILLY CONNORS, who was Chicago's pitching coach from 1982-86.
Pole was in his fourth season with the Cubs and his departure comes a little more than five weeks after Manager DON ZIMMER was dismissed.
Connors was Chicago's pitching coach for five years before going to Kansas City.
He was with the Yankees for the last two years before rejoining the Cubs as their minor league pitching coordinator. (AP)


Pesticide Uses Bacteria to Harm Only the Pest
Using genetic engineering to combine traits from three species of bacteria, a biotechnology company in Langhorne, Pa., has patented an insecticide to fight the Colorado potato beetle, a major farm pest, and two species of caterpillars.
Developed by Ecogen Inc., the new bacteria produce three proteins that are poisonous to the pests but harmless to humans and other animals.
When used as an insecticide, the bacteria are deprived of nutrients and die, secreting the proteins as toxic crystals that kill the unwanted pests.


Mets vs. Phillies: It's Darkest Before Dusk
It must be a dark night when your starting pitcher is gone before the daylight is.
Ron Darling, whose fastball was moving a lot faster after it was met with a bat than it was on its way to the plate, was crushed for six runs in barely more than two innings last night as the Mets absorbed a humbling 6-2 thrashing by the Phillies at Shea Stadium.


A Victim of Mistaken Identity
A teen-age honors student who was minutes away from graduation when he was handcuffed and jailed for two weeks was a victim of mistaken identity, The San Francisco Chronicle reported today.
Calvin Wong, an 18-year-old immigrant from Hong Kong, was arrested shortly before the start of graduation ceremonies at Alamo Park High School on a warrant filed by a family that had been robbed.
Mr.
Wong, who was held for two weeks pending the formal filing of charges, was released Wednesday when the family saw him in a police lineup and dropped the charges.


Yugoslav Team Loses Player to Upheaval
Complying with an appeal to its athletes by the breakaway republic of Slovenia, starting guard Jurij Zdovc withdrew from the Yugoslav national team shortly before tonight's semifinal game of the European basketball championships.
The plea was issued to protest the Yugoslav Government's military action in Slovenia, which came after that republic and Croatia proclaimed independence three days ago.


Jazz Festival; Ella Fitzgerald at Carnegie, Still With the Girlish Tone
Ella Fitzgerald, now in her 70's, had to be assisted on- and offstage at Carnegie Hall on Thursday night as part of the JVC Jazz Festival.
She sang sitting down and apologized between songs for a "nasal drip." But her musicianly ear, her perfect enunciation and the best parts of her style continue to hold off the years.
She can still be an exuberant human trumpet.
Time has reversed her gifts.
When she was younger, Miss Fitzgerald was renowned for her acrobatic scat-singing and daring melodic inventions and criticized for making even sad songs sound blithe.
But at Thursday's concert, the ballads were the best songs.
She sang luminous, knowing, slightly rueful versions of " 'Round Midnight," "More Than You Know" and "It's All Right With Me," still stretching and flexing the melodies here and there.
At times, her voice grew slightly weightier than in earlier decades, adding melancholy to her pearly articulation.


What Would Happen Without a Budget?
If New York City failed to adopt a new budget by the start of the fiscal year on Monday, it would not stop but it would slow down.
At the very least, it could lose the urgency to act that only deadlines compel.
The City Charter says that if a new budget is not in place, spending stays at the level of the current budget.
But since costs would continue to rise, even deeper cuts in city services would be needed if the stalemate dragged on.


Link Income Tax Rise To Local Tax Cuts
To the Editor:
"New York's Ordeal: The Tax Exit" (editorial, June 13) suggests that the Citizens Budget Commission endorses a personal income tax increase to restore expenditure cuts made by the New York State Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in the fiscal year 1992 budget.


Jazz Festival; The Swing Era Is Revisited By the Newer Generations
The two dozen musicians assembled on Wednesday at the Equitable Auditorium for a JVC Jazz Festival program called "Swing: 40 and Younger" were not yet born when the swing era ended in 1945, giving way to the be-bop era.
But the concert showed that musicians who grew up in a radically changed musical world are still building on and updating elements of swing.
There were a few reproductions of big-band arrangements that represented the period -- Fletcher Henderson's "Stampede," Duke Ellington's "Across the Tracks Blues," Sy Oliver's "Blue Skies." But the most interesting pieces were those that grew out of the music of the era.


Inquiry By F.T.C. Into Intel
The Federal Trade Commission has begun an investigation into the Intel Corporation's business practices, the company said today.
Intel said it was notified by a letter received on Thursday, and that it would cooperate fully and immediately with the investigation.
Executives at several personal computer manufacturers have said lawyers for the agency contacted them in recent weeks regarding reportedly anti-competitive practices by the Santa Clara, Calif., semiconductor company, which dominates the business of supplying microprocessors for computers.
But until today it was not clear that a formal investigation was under way.


Way to Stop a Dangerous Urban Game
The dangerous urban game is known by names like "elevator surfing" and "elevator chicken," and it is played by riding on top of elevator cars as they soar up and down.
In New York and other cities, many youngsters have been killed or seriously hurt.
To stop the game, a company in the South Bronx patented a device this week that sounds asiren and stops the elevator as soon as someone tries to get on top.
It was invented by employees at the Guardsman Elevator Company, which maintains and repairs elevators for large buildings.


Yanks' No. 1 Pick Has Pick to Make
An adviser to the family of Brien Taylor, the North Carolina high school pitcher whom the Yankees recently made the No. 1 selection in the amateur baseball draft, said yesterday that Taylor would not sign with New York if he chooses to enroll in junior college later this summer.
"The family has already said if they don't sign, if he does go to a junior college, the Yankees are going to lose him," said Scott Boras, a California-based lawyer who is acting as an adviser to the Taylors.


Traffic Alert
East Village Visiting Neighbors Street Fair: Fourth Avenue will be closed today from Fifth Street to Astor Place from 10 A.M to 7 P.M.
Lesbian Gay Pride March: Begins at Columbus Circle at 12:30 P.M. tomorrow, heads across Central Park South, down Fifth Avenue to Washington Square Park, west on Waverly Place and Christopher Street to Hudson Street.
The parade is expected to end around 5:30 P.M.





Orchestra of St. Luke's
The Orchestra of St.
Luke's is to perform Bach's "Brandenburg" Concerto No. 3 (BWV 1048) and Orchestral Suite No. 4 (BWV 1068) at 8:30 tonight at the Venetian Theater at Caramoor, on Girdle Ridge Road in Katonah, N.Y.
The program includes Telemann's "Water Music," an Overture in C, "Hamburg's Tides" and Vivaldi's "San Lorenzo" Concerto (RV 556).
The concert is to be preceded by a lecture by Michael Feldman, the orchestra's artistic director.
Tickets are $10 to $35.
Information: (914) 232-1252.


Monsanto Cutbacks To Cost 2,500 Jobs
The Monsanto Company said yesterday that it would eliminate about 2,500 jobs, close three plants and take a $325 million after-tax restructuring charge in the second quarter to improve efficiency and earnings.
The company, based in St.
Louis, said it hoped to achieve most of the job cuts through a voluntary program that includes early retirement or help in finding other jobs, said Scarlett L. Foster, a Monsanto spokeswoman.
She said if not enough people agreed to leave voluntarily then the company would begin making layoffs.


Federal Judge Given Rebuke For Mob Case
Sternly criticizing the judge who handled the case, a Federal appeals court yesterday reversed the 1988 racketeering convictions of eight men, including the reputed former head of the Genovese crime family.
In a ruling that included unusually harsh language toward a fellow judge, the appeals panel also expressed "frustration" over a controversy that arose when three jurors said that the judge, Mary Johnson Lowe of Federal District Court in Manhattan, had pressured them to reach a verdict.


Tyson Floors Ruddock Twice and Wins Rematch
Forget the rumors. Mike Tyson was ready.
The former heavyweight champion, who was said to be slacking off on his training, showed enough firepower tonight to take care of Donovan (Razor) Ruddock here at the Mirage.


Religion Notes
New Gauge on Prayer
Do you pray?


For Yugoslav Player, Game Is Paramount
If there is room for Goran Ivanisevic on the front pages back home, that would be a good portent for the troubled nation of Yugoslavia.
Ivanisevic is one of the most famous athletes in that country, which this week suffered violent unrest in the republic of Slovenia, which has proclaimed its independence.


Stocks Off Sharply; Dow Loses 28.18
Stocks fell sharply yesterday in lethargic trading as investors brushed aside a report by the Government that its index of leading indicators increased in May for the fourth consecutive month.
The Commerce Department report was merely the latest evidence that an economic recovery is under way, and together with yesterday's rally in bond prices, it ordinarily would have augured well for stock prices.


Youth Critically Shot After Traffic Accident
A 15-year-old Bronx youth was shot in the head and critically wounded during a dispute over a traffic accident in the Bedford Park section last night, the police said.
The incident occurred at Marion Avenue and 196th Street, where a car driven by the youth's stepfather was involved in a minor collision with a van shortly before 11 P.M., a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina S. Mohrmann, said.


Time Warner In Sweden Deal
Time Warner Inc.'s cable group said it paid $36 million for 20 percent of Swedish Cable and Dish, one of the largest cable television operators in Sweden.
Swedish Cable, serving 220,000 subscribers and 725,000 homes, has systems that can carry 40 to 53 channels.
The investment by Time Warner Cable will benefit the Swedish system because of the company's "expertise in cable systems and programming," said Gary Bryson, president of U S West Cable, a division of U S West Inc., the regional telephone company.
U S West Cable is part of a venture with United International Holdings, another major owner of Swedish Cable.
Other Swedish Cable owners are the investment firm Kinnevik; the media and industrial firm Bonnier; the conglomerate Marieberg, and the housing construction company Formator, all of Sweden.





New President Chosen At Lewis Galoob Toys
Lewis Galoob Toys Inc. named Mark D. Goldman president and chief executive yesterday.
Mr.
Goldman, formerly executive vice president and chief operating officer, succeeds David Galoob, who resigned as chairman, president and chief executive, effective immediately.
Mr.
Goldman, 40, joined the company in 1987.
Mr.
Galoob, 42, is the son of the founders of the company, Barbara Galoob Frankel and Lewis Galoob.
He became president of the company in 1971, after the death of his father, and has served as chairman and chief executive since 1988.
Mr.
Galoob also resigned his seat on the company's board but agreed to continue as a consultant for one year.


Coleman Parsons, Professor, 86
Coleman Parsons, professor emeritus of English at City College of New York, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old.
He suffered a stroke last year and had been in declining health since then, his family said.


96 Degrees Swelters to a Tie As New Yorkers Seek Relief


Safety Board Member Quits
Jim Burnett, an aviation safety expert who was ousted in 1988 as chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, retired today.
Mr.
Burnett, who earned a reputation as an outspoken safety advocate, served three terms as chairman, from 1982 to 1988.
He remained a member of the board after James Kolstad, a former airline public relations executive, succeeded him.
The board investigates all major transportation accidents in the United States and makes recommendations for safety improvements.


Bush Says List for Marshall Successor Is Short
President Bush declined today to commit himself to choosing a black or another minority member to replace Justice Thurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court, and the President said he had a short but still-open list of potential successors from which he would make his selection "in a very few days."
Senate Democrats, facing the loss of the last dependably liberal voice on the Court, said they would closely study any nominee for signs of ideological extremism.


Layoffs Bring the End of the Trail to a Park Patrol Team


Teaching Them to Think as Well as to Write; McRhetoric
To the Editor:
I welcome Rachel Erlanger's complaint that academic writing is often leaden, verbose, inelegant and even ungrammatical (Op-Ed, June 12).
Unfortunately, her perspicacity is unaccompanied by persuasiveness, especially in her criticism of the work of Prof.
Ira Shor.
Ms.
Erlanger discusses a lengthy passage on "the interdisciplinary approach to the study of the fast-food hamburger." She wonders whether "the writer is serious" and, as quoted, this excerpt may well appear the height of academic folly.


French Inflation at 3.2%
Consumer prices in France rose by three-tenths of a percent in May from the previous month, the Government said this week.
The rise translated to an annual increase of 3.2 percent, the National Statistics Office said.


CHRONICLE
Elected:
*BEVERLY SILLS, chairwoman of the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation.
Miss Sills, the mother of two children with birth defects, has worked for the organization for 20 years, visiting hospitals and raising funds.
"I won't be doing anything different," she said.
"They've just given me a title, that's all."


David Mankaba, 32, Zimbabwean Guitarist
David Mankaba, a guitarist whose pop group the Bhundu Boys helped popularize African music in Europe and the United States, died on Thursday of tuberculosis complicated by AIDS, relatives said today.
He was 32 years old and lived in Harare, the Zimbabwean capital.
It was the first time AIDS has been listed as the official reason for the death of a prominent figure in Zimbabwe.
Friends said on Friday that Mr.
Mankaba had asked that his illness be publicized to help in an AIDS awareness campaign.


So What's Going On in the Soviet Union?
To the Editor:
The United States news media, The Times included, is presenting the Soviet Union in an incorrect light.


World Markets; The Cable and Wireless Conundrum
Cable and Wireless P.L.C., the British-based telecommunications company with a presence in 50 countries, pleased investors earlier this month when it reported pretax profits up 15.5 percent for the fiscal year ended March 31.
And this in a recession year.
Moreover, more than 60 percent of the company's revenues are dollar based, so the strong rally of the dollar in the last five months sent analysts back to their calculators to raise their earnings forecasts for the current fiscal year.
Although its headquarters are in London, the company's heart is Hong Kong where the currency is tied to the dollar.
Cable and Wireless has a 58.4 percent controlling stake in Hong Kong Telecommunications, which provided 43 percent of the company's revenue and 59 percent of its profit last year.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Danbury Begins a Downtown Renewal
AFTER three decades of planning, and some false starts, Danbury has begun to revitalize its neglected downtown.
With 25 percent of retail space and 20 percent of downtown offices vacant, building a large municipal garage might seem to be the last thing Danbury needs, but a 550-car structure is now going up -- and there is method in the seeming madness.


New Yorkers, etc.
Almost everyone knows someone who is habitually late, a someone who, when faced with the fact, is stunned, astounded and insulted at the accusation.
Late?
Me?
Moi?
Not so!
The denial is voiced in a regretful but reasonable tone, indicating that it is being done more in sorrow than anger.
The look that accompanies it is understanding -- "you are a poor misguided creature," it says, "but I forgive you."
What led to this misguided conclusion on your part?
Let's start with this.
You arrange to meet at a theater with an 8 P.M. curtain time and, as is generally the case, you arrive 10 or 15 minutes in advance, wait on the sidewalk or in the lobby, and eventually, as more and more people wander inside, begin to nervously check your watch.
The final bell rings and, with a few backward glances, you slowly go to your seat.
Ten seconds before the theater goes dark and the curtain rises, there's your never-late friend choreographing her (or his) way to you, across the feet of the already-seated theatergoers.


Supreme -- But Also Court
Last Tuesday the Supreme Court overturned a 1963 opinion written by Justice William Brennan, who retired last year.
On Thursday the Court toppled two more precedents, one written by now-retired Justice Lewis Powell, and adjourned.
It's as though the new conservative majority quit for the summer not for lack of cases to decide but because it had run out of precedents to reverse.
Recklessly reversing precedents: That is not the role assigned to the Supreme Court.
The nine justices are indeed supreme and often have the last word.
But they are also a court, bound by restraints against willfulness and unfairness.
That marble temple wasn't built so that the nine could meet to poll themselves on matters of public interest.


In Step Toward Budget, California Assembly Backs Tax Increases
In a major breakthrough in long-stalled negotiations to close a $14.3 billion budget gap, the California Assembly passed large tax increases late Friday night and cut payments to families on welfare.
The actions, which include increases in sales and alcohol taxes and in motor-vehicle fees, still leave California $2 billion to $3 billion away from a balanced budget for the 1992 fiscal year, with a deadline of midnight Sunday.
But Gov.
Pete Wilson, who had faced a tax rebellion among fellow Republicans in the Assembly, said this afternoon that he was pleased by the actions and that he had received most of what he had asked for from the Democratic-controlled Legislature.


No Headline
Iraq Is Doubly Rebuffed: By Bush and by the Kurds
Kurdish leaders in northern Iraq said they had rejected an autonomy deal offered by Baghdad and hoped to renegotiate key points. age 6.
And President Bush accused Iraq's leader of "cheating and lying and hiding" on the nuclear arms issue.
Page 6.


Plane Averts Midair Collision, Then Crashes
A small plane nearly hit a commuter plane and then plunged into the Pacific Ocean on Friday night.
Two of the four passengers were killed, and two are still missing.
The bodies of two boys were found offshore today and the authorities are searching for their grandparents, who were also aboard the small plane.


Foreign Affairs; To Bomb Iraq Again
Saddam Hussein has committed the one blunder that may unite the U.S. and the U.N. again behind the renewed use of force against Iraq.
He tried to hide machinery to make nuclear weapons and got caught.
If Saddam does not follow through on his order to grant U.N. inspection teams instant and full access to all facilities -- or if there are any doubts or questions -- President Bush should move swiftly to orchestrate international support for surgical air strikes against suspected nuclear, chemical and biological weapons sites.


Kathryn Finck, A Banker, Weds
Kathryn S. Finck, an assistant vice president at the U.S.
Trust Company of New York, and Hartwell McI.
Gardner, a financial adviser in Manhattan and Wilton, Conn., were married yesterday at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Ridgefield, Conn., by Msgr.
Charles Stubbs and the Rev.
John Savard.
Mrs.
Gardner, 29 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick P. Finck Jr. of Fairfield, Conn.
Her father retired as chief executive of Highfield Manufacturing, maker of industrial security and safety equipment in Bridgeport, Conn.


Solutions Are at Hand
To the Editor:
As a 27-year-old woman who has been enjoyably weaned on MTV, and as a part-time volunteer at the New York Philharmonic Orchestra, I feel I have glimpsed both sides of the high/ low culture fence.
Today's city orchestras have developed large lists of wealthy elderly patrons who are knowledgeable about both the music and the lives of the "dead masters" and probably consider the time and money spent acquiring this knowledge wisely devoted.
In prior generations, as Joseph Horowitz noted, "musical pedagogy at all levels had stressed the ability to read music, to play an instrument, to perceive musical forms."


In Cromwell, Thai Food to Tease the Palate
FOR a while, Thai restaurants were popping up throughout Connecticut.
Now, after a recession-induced slowdown, there is a new one, Thai Gardens, in the town of Cromwell, near Middletown.
It is a welcome addition, both for its attractive and spacious dining room (including tables and floor cushions for Thai-style seating) in a small shopping center and, more important, for the authentic taste of the dishes on its sizable menu.


Making a Difference; A Prize Winner in Research
The honors keep rolling in for Leo Esaki, a Nobel physicist who has led in developing new types of ultra-fast computer chips.
Earlier this month, in a ceremony here, Dr.
Esaki received the Medal of Honor, the highest award of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers.
Dr.
Esaki, 66, is a researcher for the International Business Machines Corporation and has spent a lifetime applying the arcane principles of quantum physics to the design of electronic circuits.
Such quantum devices represent perhaps the most exciting frontier in semiconductor research today, promising smaller and faster electronic circuitry.


Camera
Joe Adachi wanted a camera club of his own.
As director and general manager of the camera division of Canon USA, his first chance for one came a year ago when the Canon Rebel 35-millimeter single lens reflex was introduced.
The Rebel, many marketing experts agreed, arrived at a bad time.
Single lens reflex cameras were not selling well because simplified point-and-shoot 35-millimeter cameras dominated the marketplace.
But far from becoming a failure, the Rebel, according to Canon, has become the top selling 35-millimeter single lens reflex in America.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Glen Rock 195,000
719 Lincoln Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 59-year-old colonial; sun room, fireplace, screened porch; taxes $4,654.
Hillsdale 192,000
221 Raymond Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; 2-zone heat, 1-year homeowner's warranty, large property; taxes $4,037.
Mahwah 185,000
90 Hopkins Court
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 11-year-old ranch; fireplace, deck, cathedral ceiling; taxes $3,602.
Oakland 148,000
4 Rockaway Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; deck, family room, full basement; taxes $3,479.
Park Ridge 182,000
178 Park Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 53-year-old Cape Cod; patio, new kitchen, fireplace; taxes $3,689.
Wayne 136,000
70 Maple Lane
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old custom built ranch; stone fireplace, French doors, cathedral ceilings; taxes $2,335.
OTHER AREAS West Hartford, Conn. 205,000
1170 Farmington Avenue
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 38-year-old cape cod; family room with w/b stove, in-law apartment with separate entrance, 60- by 150-foot lot; taxes $3,190.
Bedford, N.Y. 628,500
2 Falcon Woods Court
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; formal dining room, family room, playroom, exercise room; taxes $10,000.
Massapequa, L.I. 183,000
133 Unqua Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $3,700.


Sunday Dinner; Good Value at a Reasonable Price
Value for the dining dollar has been the driving force in the restaurant world for several years.
But just what is a bargain restaurant?
A multi-star establishment that provides excellent food and service for $50 a person could be considered a bargain.
On the other hand, a mediocre place that charges $12 a person certainly isn't one.
The best of both worlds, of course, is a restaurant that is both budget-priced and good.
Here are three examples, all in Manhattan.
Bellevues
496 Ninth Avenue, at 38th Street; (212) 967-7855 -- The sparkling little French bistro is unexpected along the squalid stretch of Ninth Avenue south of the Port Authority Bus Terminal.
You do not come here for a romantic repast.
The appeal in this stark, almost diner-like setting is the earthy bistro fare and affable service.
Current starters include mussels Morellet, which are steamed in a broth of white wine, garlic and herbs and finished with a touch of cream; cassolette of snails cooked with roasted garlic, fresh thyme and brandy; pork rillettes and a chicory salad composed of goat cheese, garlic confit and new potatoes in a warm vinaigrette.
Among the entrees are steak au poivre, calf's liver with bacon and onions, seared tuna with a balsamic and rosemary glaze on a bed of greens and grilled breast of chicken with a tomato-basil concasse.
For desserts there are profiteroles and creme brulee.
Appetizers are $4.25 to $6.95, entrees $10.95 to $15, desserts $4 to $5.
Sunday dinner hours from 5:30 to 11:30 P.M. (Review, Sept. 15, 1989.) Cafe de Paris
924 Second Avenue, at 94th Street; (212) 486-1411 -- New York City is filled with unassuming little neighborhood haunts that rarely if ever get press attention, and they get along just fine without it.
This inviting little pine and brick bistro is one such place.
The menu features a three-course dinner of a mixed-green salad, entrecote (actually a shell steak) served with a special house sauce and dessert for $25.50 (cash only).
The shell steak, which is served on an oval chafing dish with candles underneath, is tender and cooked as ordered, under a herb butter sauce.
There is a raspberry cocotte for dessert, along with seven other sweets to consider.
Other dishes on the menu include steak au poivre, stoked with lots of crushed black peppercorns and a Cognac-and-cream sauce; entree-size salads like goat cheese and mixed greens with walnuts, olives and tomatoes, or roasted duck with mixed greens, wild mushrooms and croutons.
Appetizers are $4.25 to $6.25, entrees $12.95 to $18.95, desserts $5.50.
Sunday dinner is from 5:30 to 11 P.M. (Article, Nov. 3, 1989.)  Pasta Presto
613 Second Avenue, near 34th Street; (212) 889-4131 -- You don't go to Pasta Presto for gastronomic enlightenment, but you do go for satisfying bargain-priced fare in an upbeat setting.
The two dining rooms, with white brick walls, cafe tables and bent-cane chairs, are filled nightly with an informal crowd.
Among the fresh and appealing appetizers are eggplant and zucchini salad in a light basil vinaigrette sauce; a salad of arugula, tomatoes, cucumbers and Gorgonzola cheese, and homemade mozzarella with sun-dried tomatoes.
The menu carries about 20 pastas and one or two daily specials.
Among them are a light and vibrant combination of penne, prosciutto, firm-cooked broccoli and garlic; spaghetti with chunks of chicken and eggplant in a light tomato sauce; farfalle with smoked salmon and spinach in a cream sauce, and linguine with seafood tossed in a white-wine sauce.
Among the desserts are Key lime pie and chocolate mud pie.
Appetizers are $2.95 to $6.95, main courses $6.95 to $12.95, desserts $3.50.
Sunday dinner service is from noon to 11:15 P.M. (Article, Nov. 3, 1989.)
This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times, and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location (New York City and suburbs), from articles published in the last 18 months.
Touch-tone telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 a minute).


Sports People: BASKETBALL; Daly's Dream Team
Detroit Pistons Coach CHUCK DALY was thinking as the United States Olympic coach yesterday when he listed his dream team for the Games next year in Barcelona, Spain.
With pro players eligible for the first time, Daly said the team would be heavily loaded with National Basketball Association talent.
He said he would like to have MICHAEL JORDAN, MAGIC JOHNSON, PATRICK EWING, KARL MALONE, KEVIN JOHNSON and ISIAH THOMAS.
Daly, who was scouting the European championships in Rome, said the United States Olympic staff had had informal contacts with several N.B.A. players.
"They are interested," he said.


Jazz Festival; Marian McPartland Imparts Intimacy to a Large Space
"Marian McPartland has done more for jazz pianists than anyone in the entire world," declared George Wein, the producer of the JVC Jazz Festival, from the stage of Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday evening.
Mr.
Wein was praising Ms.
McPartland's 13-year-old weekly National Public Radio series, "Piano Jazz," in which she interviews and performs with keyboardists of every age and style.
Mr.
Wein also performed briefly in the concert, which was conceived as an enlarged stage version of the radio program.


Elizabeth Visits Ulster
Queen Elizabeth II, making her first visit to Northern Ireland since 1977, saluted today the work of a British Army regiment.
Roads were blocked and security was intense as the Queen arrived in this southern suburb of Belfast to present colors to the Ulster Defense Regiment, a locally raised and largely part-time force.
The regiment enjoys strong support from Northern Ireland's Protestant majority.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Scudder Sidelined
The Cincinnati Reds have lost their third starting pitcher in two weeks.
Right-hander SCOTT SCUDDER couldn't throw yesterday in Cincinnati, and doctors diagnosed tendinitis in his right arm.
Manager LOU PINIELLA said Scudder would probably have to go on the 15-day disabled list.
That'll give the Reds three disabled starters: Scudder, left-hander NORM CHARLTON and right-hander JOSE RIJO.
Charlton went on the disabled list with shoulder tendinitis after he couldn't get loose June 18, and Rijo broke his left ankle while sliding June 20.


Jennifer Williams Weds Jerald C. Ruck
Jennifer Anne Williams, a daughter of Janine Elizabeth Jordan of Chapel Hill, N.C., and C. Roger Williams of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Jerald Carsten Ruck, a son of Elsa Kuhl Ruck of Sonoma, Calif., and the late John Ruck.
The Rev.
Jack Stevens officiated at Our Saviour's Lutheran Church.
Mrs.
Ruck, 31 years old, is a speech and language pathologist at Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District in Fairfield, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin at Madison and received a master's degree in speech pathology and audiology from North Texas State University.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior public-affairs executive at the Mobil Corporation in New York.
Her mother is an interior designer.
The bride's stepmother, Priscilla B. Williams, is a landscape designer.


An Early Fourth


Football; Anderson Is Confident The Giants Can Repeat
Ottis Anderson, the Giants' 33-year-old running back who has spent the last five seasons proving cynics wrong, said today that he did not expect the Giants to be the consensus favorite to repeat as Super Bowl champions.
But Anderson said all the pieces were in place for the Giants to do exactly what they did last season.


Postings: Rockefeller Center; Taiwanese Moving In
A Taiwanese enclave is growing in Rockefeller Center, on both sides of the Avenue of the Americas, between 48th and 49th Streets, underwritten by the Coordination Council for North American Affairs.
On the east side, in the Simon &amp; Schuster Building, the Chinese Information and Culture Center Library has been open since last month.
It has some 30,000 volumes in Chinese and English and more than 200 periodicals, as well as computer and audio-visual equipment.


Buying a Home Is Still an American Goal
DESPITE the recession and a deep real estate slump that has eroded home values in much of the nation, a large majority of Americans still consider homeownership the best long-term investment they can make, according to a New York Times poll.
When asked if they agreed with the assertion, "Buying a home is the best long-term investment in the United States," an overwhelming 84 percent of those surveyed nationwide said they strongly agreed or somewhat agreed.
The responses were nearly identical in New York City, its suburbs and the Northeast, where the value of many homes has plummeted more than 25 percent since 1988.


Campus Life: North Carolina; Audit Asks if Teachers Are Earning Their Pay
After a $59.2 mil lion legislative cutback in financing for the state's universities, North Carolina state auditors have begun an inquiry into professors' workloads and teaching schedules to determine what the state is getting for its money.
The inquiry affects the University of North Carolina here and 3 of the state's 16 other publicly supported universities.
The review, led by State Auditor Edward Renfrow, is intended to compare the university regulations on outside consulting and workloads with the actual practices of professors at the Western Carolina, Fayetteville and Appalachian state universities as well as the Chapel Hill campus.


For These Americans, Mexico Not Left Behind
Prof.
David Hayes-Bautista, a third-generation Mexican-American who sends his daughter to Mexico for tennis lessons, is part of an immigrant wave that he says is unlike any other in American history.
Because of the geographical closeness of the country of his ancestors and because of modern communications and transportation, he and other Mexican-Americans are maintaining ties with their ancestral culture to a degree generally not possible for other immigrant groups.


Ms. van Roden Weds H. G. Parker 4th
Willette Peck van Roden and Henry Griffith Parker 4th were married yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church of York, Pa., by the Rev.
Burton Parry.
The bride, 36 years old, is known as Wendy and will keep her name.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and is a sales representative in Philadelphia for the publishing division of Alling &amp; Cory, a wholesaler of paper products in Rochester.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert C. van Roden Jr. of York, owners of Wellspring, a book publisher in York.


BASEBALL: Notebook; Buddies Share a Special Moment
The moment, three years removed, remains vivid in both of their minds.
"We were on a road trip, it was 3 in the morning and Joe Sparks called us to his room," Rex Hudler recalled, referring to the manager of their minor league team.
"We were sitting on the bed, and he said, 'They want you up in Montreal,' " Otis Nixon related.
"We jumped up and down."


Three Coins Up Captures Bowling Green at Belmont
Three Coins Up outdueled the favored Phantom Breeze to win the $200,000 Bowling Green Handicap at Belmont Park yesterday.
For a mile and a quarter around the inner turf course, Phantom Breeze led the 12-horse field with Three Coins Up second.
But at the end of the mile-and-three-eighths course, the 3-year-old chestnut colt had pulled ahead by two lengths under the whip of J. D. Bailey.


Tossing and Turning on the Fields of Dreams
In a simpler time the distinction between fan and player was as clear as the lines that distinguished fair play from foul: Fans admired their heroes, and heroes were wrapped in an aura of myth.
Athletes were taught to cheer their opponents, never to gloat in victory and to always shake hands in defeat.
In the 90's the rules are being tossed out and made up along the way.


Tennis; Briton Scores Upset In a Roar
Vrrrooom!
Here comes Nick Brown, riding on a wild card and a Harley-Davidson, all the way to the third round of his own nation's tennis championship.
Ivanisevic is ranked 10th; Brown is No. 591.
Brown also became the first Englishman to beat a seeded player at Wimbledon since John Lloyd beat Eliot Teltscher six years ago.


Judith Jackson Wed to Clayton Fossett
Judith Barbara Jackson and Clayton Linsley Fossett were married yesterday at the Bryn Mawr Community Church in Chicago by the Revs.
James H. Hargett and Stoddon G. N. King, Congregational ministers.
The bride is a daughter of Herbert C. Jackson and Dr.
Gloria Jackson Bacon, both of Chicago.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul C. Fossett of Orange, Conn.
Mrs.
Fossett, 25 years old, and her husband, 26, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
The bride, until recently a financial analyst at Morgan Stanley in New York, is a doctoral candidate in American studies at Yale University, where she was a Mellon fellow in the humanities in 1989.


Baseball; Yankees Weigh the Costs Of Signing or Not Signing
Can the Yankees afford Brien Taylor? Can they afford to pronounce him too costly?
As the mother of the first choice in the baseball amateur draft waits for the Yankees to resume stalled negotiations, baseball executives watch to see if another organization will reaffirm the concept of paying more than $1 million to a recent high school graduate.


A Rambunctious Medium Versus Good Intentions
No subject in recent years has focused the art world's attention on the vexing question of the relationship between art and politics as has the AIDS epidemic.
Understandably, documentary photography has been at the center of the continuing debates over what role, if any, art can play in mobilizing public opinion about AIDS.
Now a new show by Brian Weil, at the midtown Manhattan branch of the International Center of Photography through July 21, makes an ambitious attempt to provide an overview, in photographs and words, of the AIDS epidemic.
The result brings into focus some of the unresolvable questions about photography's role as a medium of persuasion and education.
Mr.
Weil's presentation consists of a series of large, grainy black-and-white prints depicting diverse aspects of the AIDS crisis, from patients afflicted with AIDS-related diseases to men in a drug shooting gallery in Chicago and the making of a gay safe-sex video.


PAKISTAN'S GAMBLE WITH QUICK REFORM
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, in office for less than eight months, is staking his reputation as the country's first head of government from the urban middle class on the most sweeping economic and social changes ever attempted in this underdeveloped nation.
His ambitious modernization program -- coupled paradoxically with the introduction of a bill making Islamic law paramount in a still-shaky democracy -- is risky, Pakistani analysts and diplomats say.


The Executive Life; Dirty Shirts at the 6:18, Clean Collars Tonight
It's 6:18 on a Tuesday morning, and the Greenwich, Conn., train station is bustling.
Cars drop off sleepy-eyed commuters, who dash to the newsstand, coins and monogrammed briefcases in hand, before heading to the Manhattan-bound platform.
Some commuters, however, carry something more.
James Carrier, a salesman with Reuters Information Services, races in with an armful of crumpled shirts.
"No starch," he blurts to an attendant at the blue-and-white booth just inside the station's entrance.
"See you tonight."


Cold Season Loses Its Chill, Giving a New View of Winter
Not only the cold war is over; so, apparently, are cold winters.
The official heating season of 1990-91 ends today, and in many places, the weather was the mildest it had been in 30 years.
How cold wasn't it?
For the 12-month period that ends today, temperatures in New York and Washington were 18 percent warmer than normal, Boston 14 percent, Cleveland 14 percent, Chicago 9 percent, Seattle 6 percent and even Fairbanks, Alaska, by about 6 percent.


When Congress Wrote the News
PRESS GALLERY
Congress and the Washington Correspondents.
By Donald A. Ritchie.
Illustrated. 293 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $29.95.


Audiences Aren't Stupid
To the Editor:
Joseph Horowitz has created a false dichotomy between old and new music  [ "Immortal Masterpieces to Snooze By," June 9 ] .
In the past, when Beethoven, Mozart and other great composers were active, the world simply did not have the amount and variety of music that we have today.
There is nothing wrong with having this wealth of music available to us.
It has never prevented new works from being heard, and indeed Mr.
Horowitz barely mentions a single one of the countless new works that have been premiered by our orchestras and other groups is recent years.


Alice Rudd Engaged To Wed Brooks Elder
September wedding plans for Alice Diane Rudd and Brooks Bernard Elder have been announced by her parents, Julia Meade Rudd and O. Worsham Rudd, both of New York.
The bridegroom is a son of Robert E. Elder of Rowayton, Conn., and Rachel Peckham-Elder of Tiverton, R.I.
Miss Rudd, 27 years old, is a vice president at Prime Charter Ltd., an investment concern in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a partner and executive producer at You &amp; Me Productions, a music production company in New York.
Her mother is an actress known as Julia Meade.


Daniel Moves Into Contention in L.P.G.A.
Between Ayako Okamoto's late mistakes and defending champion Beth Daniel's late heroics, the L.P.G.A.
Championship turned into a wide-open competition going into the final round on Sunday.
Okamoto, who took a two-shot lead into the third round after a record seven-under-par 64 over the tight Bethesda Country Club course, could not make a birdie putt today despite excellent shot-making and, almost in frustration, three-putted the final two holes for a 73.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE COW IS MOOING ANYHOW: A Scrambled Alphabet Book to Be Read at Breakfast.
By Laura Geringer.
Illustrated by Dirk Zimmer.
HarperCollins. $14.95. (Ages 3 to 7) Mother leaves her daughter to finish breakfast alone while she dresses, and an alphabet full of creatures -- creepy, crawly, some on wings and some with horns -- come to keep her company.
An alphabet fills the borders, and there is an index of the animals at the end.
BY THE SEA.
Written and illustrated by Michelle Koch.
Greenwillow. $13.95. (Ages 3 and up) The illustrations in this book of concepts -- like near and far, dry and wet -- are all set on a misty day at the seashore.


Travel Advisory; Classics to Pop At Quebec Fete
More than 800 performers from around the world are scheduled to appear inside the walls of the old city of Quebec at the city's International Summer Festival from July 4 to 14.
The musical performances will center on three outdoor stages adjacent to the Chateau Frontenac on the St.
Lawrence River and to City Hall.
The Emerson Quartet from the United States and the French soprano Francoise Pollet will perform, and a concert on the grounds of the Quebec Seminary will feature a collaboration between the Quebec Symphony, the Montreal Jubilation Gospel Choir and a rhythm and blues musician.
Admission to the classical concerts will be from $12.50 to $20, but most of the festival's performances will be free, including popular concerts by groups from various countries as well as shows by street performers.
More information: (418) 692-4540.


Melissa Boocock Weds John Angus Soderberg
Melissa Brett Boocock and John Angus Soderberg, teachers at St.
George's School in Newport, R.I., were married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in Riverdale, the Bronx, by the Rev.
William A. Davidson.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger B. Boocock of Riverdale.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lars O. Soderberg of Flemington, N.J.


Beyond the Usual Catch: Shark or Skate
THERE is more to fish than swordfish, tuna, salmon and flounder.
But for some cooks, venturing beyond these common varieties is a daunting prospect.
Trying a new kind of fish, like trying to cook a vegetable that is not part of the normal repertory, takes confidence.
Some understanding of the texture of fish and a familiarity with the timing required when cooking it are necessary.


Judge Orders Ailing Biaggi Released From a Prison in Texas
Suffering from serious heart problems, former Representative Mario Biaggi was released yesterday from a Texas prison, where he had been serving an eight-year term for his role in the Wedtech bribery scandal.
Describing Mr.
Biaggi's condition as life threatening, his lawyer, James LaRossa, said the former Congressman from the Bronx would be flown to "an undisclosed place for medical attention and rest."


Soccer League Extends Deadline
The Major Soccer League on Friday extended its deadline for posting its letter of credit by one month to July 29, prompting Commissioner Earl Foreman to say his league expects to have seven to nine teams next season.
In a telephone news conference from his Chevy Chase, Md., home, Foreman also announced the awarding of new franchises, or essentially the continuation of old franchises, to San Diego and Dallas.


CONSEQUENCES
I have just finished reading Pogrebin's very moving and very important column.
I am crying as I write this, as I graduated from college in 1958 and remember the 1950's very well.
We just didn't know anything in those days.
I hope Pogrebin's column will help influence readers about the importance of choice -- for all women.
It must have taken a lot of courage for her to write about this sensitive issue.
ANNE G. SELINGER
Morgantown, W.Va.


Travel Advisory; Navy Displays Vintage Planes
The Blue Angel Atrium, one of the latest additions to the National Museum of Naval Aviation in Pensacola, Fla., is a seven-story glass and steel building housing four A-4 Skyhawks.
The planes are suspended from the ceiling in a diving diamond, a signature flight formation of the Blue Angels, the Navy's flight demonstration team.
The museum, with over 100 aircraft on display and 250,000 square feet of exhibit space, is one of the largest air and space museums in the country, and is still expanding.
The museum's collection of planes from the past 80 years include the wood-and-fabric prototype aircraft of early aviation pioneers, planes from the world wars and supersonic jets.
The museum's new west wing is devoted almost exclusively to carrier aviation.
It includes a nearly full-size copy of the deck and island of the Cabot, a World War II-era aircraft carrier.
World War II fighter planes are parked on the re-created wooden flight deck, and other aircraft are suspended overhead.


Fashion; Cool Customers
WHEN I WAS YOUNG, I WAS ultra-
classique
By contrast, Robert M. Greenberg, 43, the owner of a design and production company, has achieved a style that reflects that of Rei Kawakubo, whose downtown boutique, Comme des Garcons, stocks the understated, overscaled clothes he wears almost exclusively.
With his rimless glasses and unrelievedly plain black or navy suits and shirts, Greenberg looks like a friendly curate, the discreet embodiment of Kawakubo's ascetic outlook.
But, as he would admit, he is also a material guy, amassing clothes with the ardor of an Annenberg buying up Impressionists.


Taking the Children to New York Events
With school out for the summer, parents may be looking for amusements for their children in New York City.
Here is a sampling of children's activities, compiled by Dulcie Leimbach.
Dates and times are subject to change.
All Ages
July


Ice Demons, Clicks and Whispers
INSIDE THE REHEARSAL STUDIO, THE BREAK is over.
The juice and coffee containers are drained, the books and needlepoint put away, the gossip shelved and 17 performers again tackle the "Desert Tango" section in Part II of Meredith Monk's opera, "Atlas."
One of the women begins a throbbing lament.
As is usual in Monk's work, it's almost entirely wordless.
But wait.
The singer, Dana Hanchard, has a bad throat today.
She's not singing her part; she's just moving her mouth.
The sound is coming from a small woman with long, brown hair pulled into an off-kilter ponytail who's sitting cross-legged on the floor in front of the other spectators, her eyes fixed intently on Hanchard and the activity building up in the studio.
Her body rocks slightly, but she shows no strain, no effort, while the full-throated, rippling plaint pours out of her.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The bottom two rows of bricks at the base of the chimney in my basement are painted.
There is a white powdery substance on the basement floor that seems to be coming out of the mortar on the third and fourth rows above this.
The house is about 50 years old.
What is causing this powder to form?
A.
This is efflorescence, a white residue that is formed by excess alkaline salts in the masonry.
It is usually caused by a moisture condition in the brickwork, and so you should check the chimney structure on the outside.
Start by inspecting the chimney cap at the very top.
If it is cracked or missing entirely, it should be repaired.
If this is not the problem, then it is likely that some mortar joints on the outside, or possibly all of them, need tuck-pointing, which is not unusual after 50 years.
This calls for scraping out the old mortar to a depth of a half-inch and then replacing with fresh mortar.


Making a Difference; Tinkering at Radio Shack
Radio Shack grew into the largest retailer of home electronics by selling solid if unflashy house-brand consumer electronics and electronics parts.
But last week it said it would do a bit of tinkering with its successful formula.
Radio Shack's parent, the Fort Worth-based Tandy Corporation, announced that in September some Radio Shacks would begin selling name-brand products.
A week earlier, Tandy said it would open six stores to sell name-brand computers as well as its own line of machines.


Headliners; Honor Delayed
More than 23 years after Capt.
James Eddie Reed was killed in a firefight in the Mekong Delta, the Army has agreed that his final action was heroic.
In 1988, his widow, Brenda Reed, was going over Captain Reed's records and found discrepancies in accounts of her husband's last battle.
As her quest to learn more was publicized, surviving members of her husband's unit contacted her to say that Captain Reed deserved a commendation for the Mekong Delta fight, in which exposed himself to enemy fire to help aim his unit's return fire.
Ms.
Reed pressed the claim, but the Army rejected it because Captain Reed's commander, who had been pinned down in another battle at the time, failed to immediately recommend a citation.
After several appeals, Ms.
Reed contacted William D. Clark, a deputy assistant secretary of the Army, who subsequently overruled the boards that had denied Captain Reed a medal.
This week Ms.
Reed is to be presented with her husband's posthumous Silver Star.


Daphne Beckwith Wed to George Lamb
Daphne Shevlin Gale Beckwith, a daughter of Jane Gale Holt of Fairfield, Conn., and the late George C. Beckwith 3d of Palm Beach, Fla., was married in Rye, N.Y., yesterday to George Kinsey Lamb, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Richard Lamb of Rye.
The Rev.
Edward Johnston, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the home of Mr.
Lamb's grandmother Mrs.
Bayard Whitney Read
Mrs.
Lamb, 27 years old, is the office manager at Brooks Brothers in Stamford, Conn.
Her husband, 32, is a salesman at the same store.
She graduated from Endicott College; he graduated from Hartwick College.


Stephanie Ann Hatch Wed to Mark Stuart Danetz
Stephanie Ann Hatch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Hatch Jr., was married yesterday at her parents' home in Palatine Bridge, N.Y., to Mark Stuart Danetz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Danetz of Teaneck, N.J.
Judge Joseph Rosenzweig of State Supreme Court officiated.
Mrs.
Danetz and her husband are both 24 years old and graduates of Cornell University.
Her parents own a dairy farm.
Mr.
Danetz is a studying at the Purdue School of Veterinary Medicine.
His father is a lawyer.


Surprisingly, New York Does Budget For the Future
As New York City lurches along, it is tempting to ask if its financial problems are caused in part by a failure of its planning process.
Are there steps the city's planners could take now to reduce the likelihood of budget crises in the future?
On many counts, the city's financial planning process gets high marks when compared with other cities, counties and even states.
Unlike many municipalities, it takes the trouble to go through a four-year planning exercise every year, and then review it quarterly.


LuAnn Reppert Weds
LuAnn J. Reppert, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Nelson Reppert of Tully, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas Andrew Love, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Love of Darien, Conn.
The bride's father, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Reppert home on Keuka Lake in Hammondsport, N.Y.
Mrs.
Love, a teacher at the Children's Center, a day-care organization in Brookline, Mass., graduated from Syracuse University.
Mr.
Love, a recording engineer at Soundtrack Inc. in Boston, graduated from Curry College.


On Language; #@//( ) ! = Hash, At, Slash, Backslash, Open, Close, Bang
THE PREFIXES
META-
AND
mega-
-- no.
Stop.
Belay that.
Something is bothering me and I cannot write on today's chosen subject.
That is because the first key I punched on my computer keyboard has an arrow pointing upward on it; in the typewriter era, before anybody who matters today was born, that was just the
shift key
, so named because it shifted the keyboard into uppercase. I call it the
bus-stop sign
because bus stops in Manhattan used to have signs in the shape of arrows pointing upward, but they're gone, presumably because people waiting for buses got stiff necks looking at the sky.


Data Update
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Apr. 91
Mar. 91
Apr. 90
Nation
$ 100,200
$ 98,200
$ 95,700
Northeast
144,100
142,700
141,300
Midwest
77,400
78,200
75,200
South
88,000
87,300
85,900
West
151,800
147,300
137,800
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.85
9.89
10.36
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.31
7.30
8.58
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.69
9.72
10.19
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.31
7.25
8.30
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.77
9.75
10.23
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.13
7.12
8.47
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
10.06
10.17
10.61
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.70
7.72
8.66
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
6.37
6.40
8.14
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.23
9.24
9.84
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Boxing; Toney Is Knocked Down But Manages to Keep Title
James (Lights Out) Toney retained his International Boxing Federation middleweight title this afternoon, surviving an early knockdown by Reggie Johnson to win a spirited 12-round split decision at the Las Vegas Hilton.
Judge Mike Glienna scored the bout for Johnson, 114-113, while the other judges, Ricardo Days (114-113) and Patricia Jarman (115-112), had it for Toney.


Perspectives: Commercial Leases; Recasting Rents in City-Owned Buildings
RAISING commercial rents is not an easy task for city government.
Restructuring them for tenants in place, with no tenancy turnover, is harder still.
Restructuring means bringing rents in line with fair market values and ending the distortions that favor some tenants over others merely because they have stayed in place for a long time.
The administration of Mayor Edward I. Koch tried to raise the rents of commercial tenants in city-owned buildings slated for redevelopment on urban renewal sites, and for stores in tax-foreclosed residential buildings.


Good News About Native Dogwoods
THE dogwood has been magnificent this year.
Especially beautiful was the May-blooming native dogwood,which belongs to the Northeastern woodlands, where it is an understory tree.
Woodlands are often polka dotted with the white of its magnificent splendor.
Another distinction is its horizontal branching, which makes the tree look as though it is growing in layers.
Gaining in popularity is the kousa dogwood, which has just finished blooming.
Unlike the native species (Cornus florida), which blooms before the leaves come out, the kousa dogwood blooms in June, and the somewhat larger flowers sit on top of the foliage.
The kousa's popularity is for good reason.


Headliners; Uncommon Causes
Margaret Thatcher still has a lot to tell the world, it seems, and the back benches don't make a suitable pulpit.
The former Prime Minister announced last week that she would leave the House of Commons -- whence she repaired last year after being turned out of the Tory leadership and 10 Downing St. -- after the next general election.
Once out of the House, she said, "I can be freer to say things because people will know that I am not waiting in the wings, that I am saying things because I passionately believe them." Mrs.
Thatcher dropped what she said was "more than a hint" that the House of Lords -- after the requisite elevation to the peerage -- might be an appropriate place to speak her mind.
"I think I would like to have a forum in Parliament," she said, "and that's the only other one." Then too, the world will sometimes be her stage.
"People are beginning to realize that I have quite a lot to do on the international scene," she said, "and one's advice is sought."


Many Palestinians Look for New Leaders and a Chance for Peace With Israel
A growing number of officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization, stunned by the damage to their movement from its support of Iraq in the Persian Gulf war, are openly calling for changes in the group's leadership and greater democracy in its decision-making process.
These officials say their aim is to dampen the role of hard-liners in the Palestinian leadership in exile -- in Tunisia, Syria, Iraq, Lebanon and elsewhere -- and to give Palestinians who are living under Israeli occupation in the West Bank and Gaza Strip a greater say in shaping future P.L.O. policies, including the terms of any settlement with Israel.


Take 2 Sitcoms and Call Me in the Morning
Without medical TV series, some of us probably wouldn't have become doctors.
As a child, I watched religiously, learning medicine from Marcus Welby, learning about hospitals from "Medical Center." The shows promised me a world full of life-and-death drama, crisp decisions made under pressure, meaningful interactions and grateful patients.
Times have changed.
Nowadays, medicine is apparently mostly good for a laugh.
The comedies come and go like gurneys in the emergency room, from ABC's "Doogie Howser, M.D.," to CBS's "Doctor, Doctor," to ABC's short-lived "STAT." And instead of wise Dr.
Kildare, there is the not-as-smart-as-he-thinks-he-is Dr.
Joel Fleischman of "Northern Exposure" on CBS, brought to you by the same people who produced the offbeat "St. Elsewhere."


Genentech's Defense Has Fallback Positions
Like a clever defense attorney, Genentech Inc. has had many fallback positions in its defense of T.P.A.
T.P.A.'s reputation as the superior drug arose from a 1985 clinical trial that showed that after 90 minutes it dissolved blood clots in twice as many patients as did streptokinase.


Big Movies, Big Bucks, Big Bombs
In a pinch, you can tell a sweeping story using not much more than basic props, but these days the pinch is obsolete.
Making an ambitious film at present implies a certain contempt for cutting corners.
It would be desperately unfashionable, especially during summer blockbuster season, to unleash a film that didn't do its big-budget utmost to impress.
This is not without precedent in other areas.
From the standpoint of size, publicity and fundamental emptiness, the Hindenburg was impressive, too.
We need not think of the Hindenburg to realize that a vast, bloated spectacle may be headed for disaster; we need only look to the screen.
This summer has brought an extraordinary display of hollow pyrotechnics in slow, puffy action films that cost huge sums to make and will waste huge amounts of time.
They are linked not only by a money-to-burn abandon but by a crazy incongruity between purpose and scale.
When else in the history of Hollywood would it have been deemed reasonable to spend nearly $40 million on a film about firemen ("Backdraft") and upwards of $50 million on in-jokes and ill humor ("Hudson Hawk")?


A la Carte: Up Close and Friendly With Oysters
LAST week John DeVito, who eats six to eight oysters every morning for breakfast, spoke to a diner who was afraid to try even one.
The meeting was at an oyster clinic at the Riverbay Restaurant in Williston Park.
The Riverbay takes oysters seriously.
It probably offers more varieties than any restaurant on the Island.
The Riverbay owners, the Poll Brothers, hold the clinics because, they said, they have observed over the years that many seafood lovers do not eat oysters.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The bottom two rows of bricks at the base of the chimney in my basement are painted.
There is a white powdery substance on the basement floor that seems to be coming out of the mortar on the third and fourth rows above this.
The house is about 50 years old.
What is causing this powder to form?
A.
This is efflorescence, a white residue that is formed by excess alkaline salts in the masonry.
It is usually caused by a moisture condition in the brickwork, and so you should check the chimney structure on the outside.
Start by inspecting the chimney cap at the very top.
If it is cracked or missing entirely, it should be repaired.
If this is not the problem, then it is likely that some mortar joints on the outside, or possibly all of them, need tuck-pointing, which is not unusual after 50 years.
This calls for scraping out the old mortar to a depth of a half-inch and then replacing with fresh mortar.


Brad Gano Weds Peggy A. Wilcock
Peggy Ann Wilcock, an events coordinator at Morgan Stanley, and William Brad Gano, a vice president of Salomon Brothers, both in New York, were married last evening at Christ Episcopal Church in Short Hills, N.J.
Canon Leonard W. Freeman performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Eric Peacher, a Methodist minister.
Mrs.
Gano, 29 years old, graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. Wilcock of Short Hills.
Her father is the president of Tom Wilcock &amp; Son, a sales agency in Milburn, N.J., representing sporting-goods makers.


U.S. Judge Is Convicted in New Orleans Bribe Case
A Federal district judge, on trial here on charges that he accepted a bribe, was convicted today at the Federal courthouse where he has served since 1978.
A 12-member Federal jury found Judge Robert F. Collins, 60 years old, guilty of three counts of bribery, conspiracy and obstruction of justice.
His co-defendant, John H. Ross, 59, a well-known New Orleans urban planner, was also found guilty of the same charges.


Travel Advisory; .S. Airlines Expand Service To Madrid
American Airlines and United Airlines are now operating expanded service to Madrid following an agreement by United States and Spanish aviation officials.
Under the agreement, Delta, Continental and Iberia will also be increasing service.
American, which began flying to Madrid from Dallas in 1988, now also has a daily flight in each direction between Madrid and Miami.
The new Miami-Madrid route allows easier connections between Latin America, the Caribbean and Europe.


Blast Collins? Here's the Return
To the Sports Editor:
Elizabeth Johnson (Mailbox, June 16) is presumptuous to assume that when it comes to tennis, "we tennis players watch it mainly to improve our game. On the contrary, tennis, like most other subjects covered by television, is presented for its entertainment value.


Through the Wars, It's 'For the Boys'
Vietnam is up the hill.
Korea is down the road.
And World War II took place in an airplane hangar months ago.
"For the Boys," whose filming has turned a fire-ravaged canyon in California into Fire Support Base Fuller in Vietnam, spans three wars, six countries and an uneasy peace.
In the foreground of the scene being shot, a U.S.O. troupe headed by James Caan and Bette Midler sings and dances its way across the middle of this century.


Sunday Outing; Of Treasures Around Bucks County
When S. J. Perelman wasn't writing plays in Manhattan, or sailing around the world with Al Hirschfeld ("Eastward Ha!"), he, his wife, Laura, and their two children lived in Erwinna, Pa., in a Bucks County rural area dotted with stone farmhouses that is an hour and a half southwest of Manhattan.
There, when his children were babies, he called his house "Boiling Diapers." In a letter written in the summer of 1939, this is how he saw the weather: "Drought, tent moth, and pestilence succeed each other and give place to drought, tent moth, and pestilence."


Favored by Suicides
To the Editor:
Alexander Theroux, in his letter (May 26) on Dava Sobel's review of "The Enigma of Suicide" by George Howe Colt, laments that a "sociologically diagnostic" fact about Golden Gate Bridge leapers was not mentioned -- that "virtually every person jumps, not from the bay side, but from the side facing land, and people."
Spare the sociobabble.
It is the bay side of the bridge that looks back at San Francisco.
The other side faces the Pacific.
And it is the bay side that is favored by suicides -- not for a final nose-thumbing or goodbye, but because the pedestrian footpath runs along that side of the span.
No one with his heart set seriously on a high dive into the frigid waters of San Francisco Bay would be so foolhardy as to risk a dash across six lanes of high-speed traffic.
JOSEPH KOENIG  New York


Nancy Lewis Wed To C. M. Whelan
Nancy Sime Lewis and Dr.
Christopher Michael Whelan were married yesterday at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I.
The Very Rev.
Robert V. Wilshire, the Dean of the Cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden City, L.I., performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Mark Connolly, a Roman Catholic priest.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Lewis Jr. of Locust Valley.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Whelan of Bedford, N.Y.
The bride, 28 years old, is a senior account executive at Manning, Selvage &amp; Lee, a public relations company in New York.
She is a cum laude graduate of St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a senior vice president of the investment banking firm of Kidder, Peabody in New York.


Data Bank/June 30, 1991
New Orders for Durable Goods
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
3.8
3.6
--4.6
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.1
0.4
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.8
0.4
0.9
Farm Prices
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
2.0
2.0
0.0
Auto Production
June 28
June 21
June 14
In units
123,823
117,547
118,390
Jobless Claims
June 14
June 7
May 31
In thousands
431
448
401
Corporate After-tax Profits
I Q'91
IV Q' 90
III Q'90
Percent change
--6.3
--1.0
8.0
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars in percent
--2.8
--1.6
1.4


Stamps
Who's Who
Collectors wondering who's who on United States stamps can now find the answers in a useful book by Richard Thomas.
Published by Linn's Stamp News, its title is, not surprisingly, "Who's Who on U.S. Stamps."
Many of the personalities on stamps are obscure: Who, for example, was Philip Mazzei, who appears on a 40-cent airmail stamp issued in 1980? (He was an Italian-born aide to Jefferson, and he was chosen as the subject for a stamp under pressure from the Italian Government.)


Beth S. Lerman Weds
Beth S. Lerman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Lerman of West Hartford, Conn., and Neil G. Becker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Becker of West Hartford, were married there last evening by Rabbi Harold Silver at Temple Beth Israel.
The bride and bridegroom are associates at Hartford law firms, she at Green &amp; Kleinman and he at Berman &amp; Sable.
Mrs.
Becker, 29 years old, graduated from Connecticut College and received a J.D. degree from American University.
Mr.
Becker, 28, graduated cum laude from Duke University and received a J.D. from Emory University.


Yachting; Liberty Cup as a Testing Ground
Pedro Campos of Spain, a skipper in the Liberty Cup Match Racing Regatta in New York Harbor, has his work cut out for him.
No one knows that better than Makoto Namba, a Japanese competitor and one of Campos's Liberty Cup opponents.
Both skippers are helmsmen using the Liberty Cup as training for the America's Cup trial races in San Diego next winter.


Wall Street; Digging for Details in a Prospectus
All those regulators who think the average investor, or even the average regulator, reads a hot company's prospectus may find the recent history of Stratton Oakmont eye-opening.
Stratton Oakmont is a brokerage firm on Long Island.
In the last year, the firm has handled at least four stock offerings for high-sizzle companies -- a Hollywood television producer, for example, and a firm that offers alternatives to animal laboratory testing.


More Funds Needed for Both Nursing Homes and Home Care
To the Editor:
In "The Nursing Home Rip-Off" (Op-Ed, June 2), Mary Johnson seeks to discredit long-term care facilities.
I was shocked at some of her statements.
Equally disturbing is Ms.
Johnson's effort to validate her opinions by misrepresenting those of Robert and Rosalie Kane, two highly respected gerontologists.


Smoking Aloft
To the Editor: I agree with Marjorie and Robert Peterson (Letters on Travel, May 26).
American carriers
are
more considerate of the welfare of all passengers.
I travel first class four times a year on trans-Pacific flights out of New York and use an American carrier, but there is still a lot to be desired.
If there is only one person in first class who smokes, that person will light up the moment the no-smoking sign goes off and will continue to smoke until it goes on again.
The entire first class will have an invisible cloud of smoke in it at its destination.
On every trans-Pacific flight, I deplane with a sore throat, stuffed nasal passages and heavy lungs.


Celebrating a Little-Known Artist
RIVERDALE GALLERY, at 450 West 238th Street, is a storefront with a monastic interior where columns of frame samples run the length of one wall.
At the moment, the gleam of these gold, silver and black chevrons is counteracted by the flow from small landscapes hanging on the opposite wall.
There are 27 of these and, together with a dozen etchings, they make up about one-tenth of the work known to have been done by Robertson Kirtland Mygatt (1861 to 1919).
Mygatt died in New York City and probably was born there, too, but he lies buried in the Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, at Tarrytown.
His father, a naval officer, came from Ohio; his mother was the daughter of Archibald Robertson, a miniaturist who painted a portrait of George Washington and who founded the Columbia Academy of Art, later the American Academy of Fine Art, in New York City.
Although the father died young, of tuberculosis, there seems to have been no shortage of money, for young Robertson, along with his brother, Otis, is known to have accompanied the mother on trips to Europe and is believed to have studied there.


Headliners; Murder Mystery
It would have made a great story.
President Zachary Taylor, a moderate who opposed the spread of slavery, was assassinated by a fellow Southerner who laced his last meal with arsenic.
It's true that some historians have speculated that if Taylor hadn't died suddenly on July 9, 1850, after helping lay the cornerstone of the Washington Monument, his moderating influence could conceivably have steered the country away from civil war.
But Clara Rising, a novelist and former humanities professor who is writing a book about Taylor, found the conspiracy theory so compelling that she convinced the coroner of Jefferson County, Ky., where Taylor was buried, to exhume the grave and have samples of hair and fingernails tested at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Last week the killer was identified: a severe but natural case of gastroenteritis, which can be caused by a number of different diseases.
Ms.
Rising insisted that the project was worth all the fuss.
"We found the truth," she said.


Teen-Age Boy Dies in Subway
A 13-year-old boy playing in a Washington Heights subway tunnel touched the electric third rail and died, and a second boy was injured, the police said.
The boys went into the tunnel at 190th Street and Fort Washington Avenue on the A line at 8:15 P.M.
Friday "to play or do whatever," a police spokesman, Sgt.
Ed Burns, said.
Jesus Depena, of 83 Post Avenue in upper Manhattan, was dead on arrival at Bellevue Hospital, Sergeant Burns said.
The injured boy, Adrian Berrios, also 13, was in stable condition at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.


For Yugoslav-Americans, Partisan Emotions and Worries Over the Bloodshed
When Croatian- and Slovenian-Americans met for a fish fry and dancing to ethnic music in a Chicago suburb Friday night, their monthly social gathering turned to serious talk of civil war looming in the Yugoslavian federation.
For many immigrants and descendants in the United States, the jubilation over the rebellion for independence in their native lands is now tempered by other emotions.
Opposition to the Breakaway
They are worried by the violence that has erupted, fearful for the future and frustrated at Washington's failure to endorse the declarations of independence by the republics of Croatia and Slovenia.


Robin Stafford Has Wedding
Robin Anne Stafford, a daughter of Jane T. Kendrick of Woodbury, Conn., and Mark Harril Saunders, a son of Harold H. Saunders of Falls Church, Va., and the late Barbara M. Saunders, were married yesterday at the home of the bride's mother.
The Rev.
Gary Finder of the Lewinsville (Va.) Presbyterian Church officiated.
Ms.
Stafford, who is 24 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Smith College.
Until recently, she was the advertising coordinator for Heldref Publications, a publisher of scholarly journals in Washington.
Ms.
Stafford is a daughter also of the late Craig F. Stafford, a lawyer in Charlottesville, Va.
Her mother is the librarian of the Thomaston (Conn.) Public Library.


Yonkers ZIP Code Plan Could Change Addresses
THREE years ago, William E. Sheerin, a 20-year resident here, bought a gracious brick Colonial home on the city's east side, in what is known as the Strathmore section.
Along with the house, its well-groomed yard and the tree-lined streets in the neighborhood came a tony Scarsdale mailing address.
As Mr.
Sheerin, a high-school teacher, explained it, buying the house was a major investment, a goal that he and his wife, Patricia, had worked toward for many years.


Review/Dance; Refracting X-Change's Many Facets
Kenneth King and Bryan Hayes have been working in their own choreographic styles for years, avoiding not risks but passing fads in dance.
They are good company -- civilized, demanding of themselves and their dancers and even fun -- as a shared evening of dance proved on Thursday at the St.
Mark's Church Danspace Project.
Both choreographers approach dance in an orderly, intelligent manner, though Mr.
King tempers that with some wild textual flings into the worlds of science and technology at their most arcane.
In the work of Mr.
Hayes, who is also a teacher at the Merce Cunningham studio, one is invited to enjoy the organizing principles of a dance as much as the often surprisingly sensuous results.
Working together over a four-year period, according to the program notes, the two came to understand and even use each other's quite different choreographic processes.


Hanging Out


Tennis; Game, Set, Match: Sampras Is Out
It made the grass grow but sent two highly seeded players away feeling quite low.
The sun came out and stayed out for the first time here all month, and bathed in its unfamiliar glare, defending United States Open champion Pete Sampras and Goran Ivanisevic of Yugoslavia, two hard-serving teen-agers who supposedly had the right kind of talent to prevail at Wimbledon, desultorily played their way out of the event in its second round.


Not All Tennis Is Equal in Value
To the Sports Editor:
I take issue with Gerard Smith ("In Francs or Pounds, Women Serve Up Equal Entertainment," The Times, May 26).
The women tennis players should be content with what money they make (on and off the court).
This isn't small change, by any means.


Awakening to the Power and Passion of a Museum
If the sprawling Ionic temple of the National Gallery of Art looks as if it has commanded the Mall forever, it's worth remembering that this building is two years younger than the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
The gallery opened 50 years ago this spring, which makes it a youth by museum standards.
But never was a new building so instantly old, so determined to follow its elders.
Like one of those brash undergraduates who write for the Dartmouth Review, this building flaunted its conservatism; every inch of these marble facades by John Russell Pope seemed crafted to rebuke the steel and glass modern architecture that, by 1941, was already taking over the world.
The building's origins as a kind of neoconservative polemic blinded me for years to its inherent qualities as a work of architecture.
I admit to once having found it pompous and empty; paradoxically, it was the opening in 1978 of the modernist addition to the gallery by I. M. Pei (known as the East Building; the original structure by John Russell Pope is now officially called the West Building) that began my process of awakening to this building's true glories.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11
An ultimatum by the Yugoslav army was issued to the secessionist republic of Slovenia, saying that unless it agreed to a cease-fire the army would take "decisive military action." Page 1


Quotation of the Day
"For Slovenia there is no return from independence." -- Dimitrij Rupel, the republic's Foreign Minister.  [ 8:3. ]


Man Consumes 70 Condoms Of Drugs and Dies in Custody
A man who swallowed 70 condoms filled with heroin died in the custody of the Customs Service, the agency said on Friday.
The man, Ohuoha Uguru, 34 years old, of Lome, Togo, was using a Nigerian passport when he was arrested on June 22 after landing at Kennedy International Airport from Nigeria, the Customs agency said.


These Are Heroines?
To the Editor:
Janet Maslin reaches everywhere to justify the immoral and illegal acts of her "heroines." Heroines?
For murder, arson and robbery?
As Ms.
Maslin implies, many women decried the buddy movies of the 1960's for lawlessness, violence and stereotyping of compliant women.
Now it seems Ms.
Maslin is asking for equal time.


Streetscapes: 1557 Broadway; New York's First Automat
THERE was much ado about the closing of New York City's last Horn &amp; Hardart restaurant at 200 East 42d Street in April, even though there was little of the automatic left in that 1958 ersatz Automat.
Amidst the nostalgic hubbub there was no reason for anyone to take notice of a garish little commercial building on the west side of Broadway north of 46th Street -- except that, underneath all the plastic and sheet metal, survives not the last, but the first, Horn &amp; Hardart Automat in New York.


Hers; 'Excuse Me,' He Said
It IS A NEW ENGLAND winter afternoon, very clear and very cold.
I am taking my usual walk around a neighborhood not far from my apartment, a pleasant neighborhood of white colonials, privet hedges and flagstone front walks.
Station wagons sit in the driveways, snow shovels lean against garages.
A few houses have yellow ribbons pinned to wreaths on their doors.
It is a neighborhood I particularly enjoy visiting because it seems hopeful and, in its well-tended way, secure.
Walking briskly because of the cold, I barely notice a silver car -- Camaro? -- parked across the street from me, or the tall man getting out.
Barely notice him stoop back inside, perhaps for something he has forgotten.
A man coming home early from work.
I am past the man and his silver car when he calls out, "Excuse me," and I turn around.


Beyond the Usual Catch: Shark or Skate
THERE is more to fish than swordfish, tuna, salmon and flounder.
But for some cooks, venturing beyond these common varieties is a daunting prospect.
Trying a new kind of fish, like trying to cook a vegetable that is not part of the normal repertory, takes confidence.
Some understanding of the texture of fish and a familiarity with the timing required when cooking it are necessary.


Towns Under Siege As Lebanon Militias Trade Fire In South
Christian and Muslim towns in southern Lebanon came under attack today for the second straight day as rival militias traded artillery fire.
Security officials said shells and rockets crashed into Jezzin, the largest population center in the south, and the predominantly Sunni Muslim port of Sidon some five miles to the west.
Three people were wounded in Sidon and two in Jezzin.


Baseball; Templeton Proves Looks Are Deceiving
Garry Templeton, each leg sporting a small cast of ice and bandage, pulled the shirt over his head, sat back in the chair of his locker in the clubhouse of the Mets and laughed.
"Forty Is Not an F Word," the shirt read.


Hall's Uncertain Life in the Platoon
Friday's loss still lingered, so it may not have been the right time to ask Stump Merrill about his lineup for the next night.
He wasn't quite finished playing this one out in his mind.
But someone approached anyway, wondered whether Mel Hall would find himself in the batting order tonight against Milwaukee left-hander Teddy Higuera.
Merrill, the Yankee manager, shook his head.


The World; Nicaragua's Assembly: No Longer Chamorro's Rubber Stamp
LIKE all Nicaraguan leaders before her, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro has viewed the country's National Assembly as little more than an appendage of her own power: to be ignored when it agreed with Government policy, and manipulated or divided when it did not.
But while that strategy worked for the Somoza family dictatorship and even Sandinista revolutionaries, control over the assembly now appears to have slipped abruptly from Mrs.
Chamorro's hands, confronting her and her countrymen with an unfamiliar new crisis: a democratic palace coup.


Sununu Draws From His Political Fund to Cover Personal Expenses
Money from a $230,000 political fund left over from John H. Sununu's tenure as Governor of New Hampshire is helping cover his personal expenses as White House chief of staff, and payments from the fund have stepped up in the last eight months, public records show.
New Hampshire law allows money raised for state races, like Mr.
Sununu's for governor, to be used for the personal expenses of a candidate or a candidate's family.
When Mr.
Sununu went to Washington in 1989, however, his aides said the balances in the fund would be used only for political purposes.


Tax Appeals
To the Editor:
Iver Peterson's article on May 26 regarding Co-Op cost increases opens the door to a monster problem that has been generally ignored by co-op boards and management alike.
Although the right to appeal a tax assessment (certiorari) is clearly specified by law, few co-ops have exercised this right in the last 10 years.
As a matter of fact, at a recent co-op cost seminar, whether to exercise this right (certiorari) at all was a subject for debate!
Commercial property owners pursue these tax appeals on a regular continuing basis as standard business practice.


New &amp; Noteworthy
BREAK AND ENTER, by Colin Harrison. (Avon, $4.95.) While his mother is suffering from cancer and his marriage is falling apart, an assistant district attorney in Philadelphia tries to solve a double murder.
"In this intensely felt first novel, Mr. Harrison heroically balances the philosophical drama of a man's crisis of faith with the puzzle-narrative of a legal whodunit," Marilyn Stasio said here last year.
THE POLITICS OF RICH AND POOR: Wealth and the American Electorate in the Reagan Aftermath, by Kevin Phillips. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) Like the Gilded Age of the 1880's and 90's and the Roaring 20's, the 1980's were a time of tax cuts, deregulation, weakening of the unions, financial speculation, runaway debt and an increase in the number of millionaires.
And now as then, Kevin Phillips predicts, the excesses of the rich will lead to a backlash of populism.
"Drawing on an array of basic economic data, Mr. Phillips succeeds in placing the carryings-on that make headlines against the background of a wider trend toward markedly greater inequality of income and concentration of wealth," Dennis H. Wrong said here last year.


Travel Advisory; Tokyo Adding Fast-Train Link
Passengers will no longer have to transfer by regular train in Tokyo to connect with a bullet train.
A 2.5-mile line connecting Tokyo and Ueno Stations in Tokyo opened June 20, allowing bullet trains to originate from Tokyo Station in the central part of the capital.
The northbound Tohoku and Joetsu Shinkansen bullet trains will continue to stop uptown at Ueno before leaving the city.
Previously, bullet train passengers had to transfer by regular train or taxi from Tokyo station to Ueno to catch a northbound bullet train or from Ueno to Tokyo to connect with southbound trains.
The two northbound bullet trains run to Morioka and to Niigata on the Sea of Japan coast.
The southbound train goes to Kyoto and Fukuoka (Hakata).
Work on the project began 10 years ago.


Ms. Blake Weds Wayne A. Neale
Shirlene Alicia Blake, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Horace A. Blake of Freeport, L.I., was married yesterday in New York to Wayne Alexander Neale, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie A. Neale of Hollis, Queens.
The Rev.
Lloyd L. Springer performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Puck Building.
Mrs.
Neale, 28 years old, is a professional dancer and a licensed massage therapist.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Her father is vice president for North America of British West Indies Airlines International in New York.
Her mother is a film producer and coordinator.


The Executive Life; Dirty Shirts at the 6:18, Clean Collars Tonight
It's 6:18 on a Tuesday morning, and the Greenwich, Conn., train station is bustling.
Cars drop off sleepy-eyed commuters, who dash to the newsstand, coins and monogrammed briefcases in hand, before heading to the Manhattan-bound platform.
Some commuters, however, carry something more.
James Carrier, a salesman with Reuters Information Services, races in with an armful of crumpled shirts.
"No starch," he blurts to an attendant at the blue-and-white booth just inside the station's entrance.
"See you tonight."


The Hammer of the Klan
A SEASON FOR JUSTICE
The Life And Times of Civil Rights Lawyer Morris Dees.
By Morris Dees with Steve Fiffer.
Illustrated. 355 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $24.95.


The Executive Computer; What a More Powerful Pen-Based Computer Can Do
The NCR Corporation has introduced an intriguing pen-based "notepad" computer that is truly ahead of its time.
The notebook-size NCR System 3125, operated by an electronic stylus rather than a keyboard, does not yet have any software, and it has not yet received approval from the Government agency that approves electronic devices.
While NCR says the System 3125 will be ready in August, it may be many months before there are software applications to take advantage of the machine.
Even so, people who saw the prototype computer at the annual PC Expo trade show in New York City last week said it represents the beginning of a class of computers that are likely to be widely used by businesses in years ahead.
Millions of people, from blue-collar workers to doctors, cannot use conventional portable computers because the keyboard is inconvenient when they are walking around on the job.


THE LIES THAT BIND
If I were Thaler's wife, Amy, I would cut out his article and make him eat it ("How is it, dear?" "Yummy!") -- one last mendacious meal before he hits the road to learn that, while nobody said it was the easiest, honesty is still the best policy.
JUDITH JACKSON
Naperville, Ill.


Not the Beginning of the End
To the Editor:
I was disappointed by the apocalyptic tone of "The S.E.C. and the Death of Disclosure" (Market Watch, June 9.) I do not perceive the Securities and Exchange Commission's initiatives concerning foreign corporations as the beginning of the end for disclosure.


Traffic Alert
Lesbian Gay Pride March: Begins at Columbus Circle at 12:30 P.M. today, heads across Central Park South, down Fifth Avenue to Washington Square Park, west on Waverly Place and Christopher Street to Hudson Street.
The parade is expected to end around 5:30 P.M.
Amsterdam Avenue Street Fair: Amsterdam Avenue will be closed today from 66th to 71st Street from 11 A.M to 6 P.M.


When Chaos Remains
To the Editor:
"Breaking Chaos Into Constituent Parts," (Managing, June 2) -- about 10 Goldome branches being absorbed by Manufacturers Hanover -- was fascinating and obviously a self-serving piece of information delivered by Manufacturers.


France
To the Editor: Gillian Tindall is correct in saying that no specific locale for the nighttime fete in "Le Grand Meaulnes" has been identified (Travel, June 2).
With the help of Hachette's Guide Litteraire de la France, however, we discovered an intriguing possibility in the ruined Abbaye de Loroy in the Foret de St.-Palais, just off the route from La Chapelle d'Angillon to Bourges.
First the pavement gives out, then the road itself, and the remaining structures must be approached along a path through a meadow waist high with grass and wildflowers.
It is a mysterious place, with ruined arches reminiscent of a Friedrich painting and well worth a visit, particularly for a "Meaulnes" fan.
The Guide Litteraire has entries for nearly every town in France and describes itineraries of locales associated with many authors, including Alain-Fournier.
"Le Grand Meaulnes," by the way, is available in an English translation in a Penguin Classics edition.
HESTER BRADBURY, IGNACIO NAVARRETE Berkeley, Calif.


Sharpton Arrested During Protest of Queens Case
The Rev.
Al Sharpton was arrested yesterday in front of Police Headquarters in Manhattan after he slapped red paint on a pillar to protest the dismissal of charges against four Queens police officers who had been accused in the death of a suspected car thief.
After calling Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown an "Uncle Tom" for not denouncing the officers, Mr.
Sharpton told about 50 protesters with him that it was time to leave "Uncle Tom's Cabin." He then painted the name "Tom" in red letters on one of the brick pillars in front of One Police Plaza.


Tyson Leaves Behind A Battered Ruddock
At the end of 12 rounds Friday night, Donovan (Razor) Ruddock was a badly beaten man.
Blood was smeared across his lips and onto his mouthpiece.
His face was puffy beneath both eyes, with the swelling more pronounced on the left.
And as it turned out, his jaw was broken.
But the fact that Ruddock was still vertical at the fight's end was the curious twist on an evening that most experts had thought Mike Tyson would make a mercifully brief one.


Timothy Cook Wed to Deborah Lynch
Deborah Ann Lynch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Lynch of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Timothy John Cook, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Cook of Cassington, Oxfordshire, England.
The Rev.
James Gorman performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Mercy Roman Catholic Church in Port Chester, N.Y.
Mrs.
Cook graduated from Rosemont College.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of the Singer Foundation, the philanthropic arm of the Singer Company, in New York.


Elizabeth Cody Is Married
Elizabeth Wallace Cody, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Cody of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Bedford, N.Y., to Donald Dinning Kimmel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Kimmel of Louisville, Ky.
The Rev.
Dr.
William E. Foley officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, is the foreign rights manager for the Sheldon Fogelman Literary Agency in New York.
She is a graduate of the Emma Willard School and Kenyon College.
The bridegroom, 27, is an actor.
He attended Southern Methodist University.


Q and A
Lodgings That Accept Dogs
Q.
How can I get information on which hotels or motels in the United States make provisions for pets? -- Alan D. Oslick, Laredo, Tex.
A.  Here are some listings of lodgings that allow dogs.
"On the Road Again With Man's Best Friend," by Dawn and Robert Habgood, is available in two versions: one for New England ($12.95) and one for the West Coast ($11.95).
These are 1991 updates of "Traveling With Man's Best Friend." These guides present a selection of vacation accommodations -- bed and breakfasts, inns, hotels and resorts -- that allow dogs (many only with prior approval), and provide detailed descriptions.
At the end of the book, the authors also list motels and motor lodges that accept dogs as well.
There are city hotels like the Ritz-Carlton in Boston or the Four Seasons in Seattle, included.
The New England guide takes in Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Vermont, New Hampshire and Maine and the West Coast guide includes California, Washington and Oregon.
They are available in some bookstores or from the publisher, Dawbert Press, Post Office Box 2758, Duxbury Mass. 02331; (800) 933-2923.
Add $2.80 shipping charge for one book, plus 50 cents for each additional one.
A mid-Atlantic guide, which will be $12.95, is due in December.
"Take Your Pet U.S.A." is a 433-page book published in 1990 listing lodgings nationwide.
It gives names, addresses, telephone numbers and room rates plus restrictions on pets, whether deposit or additional fee if required and whether the lodging has a pet exercise area.
With a greater number of entries, it is better for finding lodging en route.
The book is $9.95 plus $2 shipping from Artco Publishing, 12 Channel Street, Boston, Mass. 02210; (800) 255-8038.
"Traveling With Towser" is a 60-page brochure published in 1989, giving only names and addresses of lodgings that accept dogs.
It is available for $1.50 from Quaker Professional Services, 585 Hawthorne Court, Galesburg, Ill. 61401.
None of the listings include Hawaii and North Carolina.
Hawaii has a 120-day quarantine before pets can be admitted, and North Carolina prohibits dogs in hotels.
There are hotels with kennels in North Carolina, the books say, but they do not list any.
When traveling with a dog (or cat), take along a leash and collar with identification tags, a container of fresh drinking water, the dog's familiar bedding and bowls for food and water, and a favorite toy or two.
It may be useful to have your dog's vaccination records in case of emergency.
While on hotel grounds, dogs should be leashed.
Try to avoid leaving pets alone in bedrooms; if they must be left, they should be put in a cage or in the bathroom, always with adequate food and water.
And let housekeeping know there is an animal inside.
Owners should walk dogs away from the main grounds and should always clean up after them.
Some accommodations limit the size of dogs permitted.
Dogs should be well behaved; animals that bark constantly or otherwise are unmanageable may be rejected.
And an unruly pet may lead management to change its mind about allowing animals in the future.
Gettysburg Battlefield Tours
Q.
We plan to drive to Gettysburg.
Are there any tours of the battlefield? -- R. F. Bohn, Irvington, N.Y.
A.
There are several ways to tour the battlefield at the Gettysburg National Military Park.
One is on your own, perhaps after viewing a 20-minute orientation program at the park's visitor center, (717) 334-1124, which is between Tawneytown Road and Steinwehr Avenue, directly across from the National Cemetery.
The story of the three-day battle fought July 1, 2 and 3, 1863, is told on a 750-square-foot electric map.
Another option available at the visitor center is to hire a guide licensed by the National Park Service.
For $20, the guide takes visitors in the visitors' car on a two-hour tour.
Though there are 90 full- and part-time guides, sometimes one is not available on busy summer afternoons, so it is best to get there early.
The Gettysburg Tour Center, 778 Baltimore Street, (717) 334-6296, offers two-hour bus tours of the battlefield.
A car tour with taped narration is $9.75 and one led by a licensed guide is $10.95.
Tape cassettes that provide a mile-by-mile narration of the battle may be bought or rented at the National Civil War Wax Museum, 297 Steinwehr Avenue; (717) 334-6245.
It costs $11.13 to rent a tape and player (with $20 deposit) and $12.67 to buy a tape.
The tour takes two hours without stopping and three and a half to four hours if visitors make all the stops recommended on the tape.
Spas in Bagni di Lucca
Q.
Are there still spas at Bagni di Lucca in Italy?
If so, could you tell dates of operation and an address to write for more information?
Lauretta Dimmick, Denver
A.
Yes, there are three spas active in the Tuscan resort.
The address for information is C.E.P.L.A.T. (Consorzio Enti Pubblici Lucchesi Acque e Terme), Villa Ada, Bagni di Lucca, 55022 Lucca, Italy; telephone (0583) 87223.
The spas are open from April through November, generally only in the morning.
Bagni di Lucca has three thermal centers.
One is Casa Boccella-Yean Varraud, (0583) 87221, which has two grottoes with natural vapor said to be good for gout, arthritis and obesity and to be healthful for the skin.
Mud baths and massage are also available.
The waters of the second, Bagno Bernabo, (0583) 87282, are said to be good for treating skin problems.
The third, Bagno Alla Villa, more commonly called Villa Ada, (0583) 87223, is known for its mineral water, said to be good for digestive and liver problems.
There is an admission fee of $38 for Casa Boccela and $15 for Villa Alda, wich include a medical exam; there is none for Bagno Bernabo.
Use of the baths is about $6 to $12.
Mud baths are $15 to $18.50.
Massage is $14.
Reservations are suggested.
Iceland Weather
Q.
What kind of weather can I expect in Iceland at the beginning of October? -- Toby Hecht, Bedminster, N.J.
A.
Reykjavik, Iceland's capital and main port, is rather cool in early October, with average high temperatures in the high 40's and average lows in the low 40's.
The fall is one of the wetter times there, with an average of 21 rainy days in October, though the total precipitation averages 3.7 inches, just a little more than New York gets in an average of nine rainy days in the same month.
It seldom snows in Reykjavik in October; when snow falls it is usually light.
The inland is mountainous and much colder, and snow is common in autumn.


Britain
To the Editor: .
For those Americans on a budget touring Britain at a time when the dollar is still not buying as much as it used to, the farmhouses mentioned in Carol Grant Gould's "At Home in Scotland and England" (Travel, May 5) not only provide excellent and inexpensive accommodations but also give American travelers a chance to meet the British in their home (and working) environment.
Readers can obtain a free 48-page directory of farmhouse accommodations in England, Scotland and Wales from the British Tourist Authority, 40 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019; (212) 581-4700.
Ask for the booklet Stay on a Farm.
BEDFORD PACE Director, Public Relations U.S.A., British Tourist Authority New York, N.Y.


The World Over, Women's Progress Is Uneven; Sexism in Surgery
To the Editor:
With the resignation of Dr.
Frances Conley for long-endured sexual harassment, Stanford University has lost one of its finest academic surgeons (news article, June 4).
The rift that her departure has created goes deeper than the walls of Stanford operating rooms.
The myth of the surgeon as a tall, handsome man who barks out precise orders to cowering female nurses is perpetuated by television, newspapers and magazines.
Attitudes that are deeply ingrained during childhood do not disappear by adding a professional degree at the end of one's name.


Lauren Beth Winer To Wed M. E. Marrus
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard A. Winer of South Orleans, Mass., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Lauren Beth Winer, and Michael Edwin Marrus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David E. Marrus of Monmouth Beach, N.J.
Miss Winer, 29 years old, is the publisher at Institutional Investor in New York of the Journal of Portfolio Management and the Journal of Fixed Income.
A magna cum laude graduate of Wellesley College and a member of Phi Beta Kappa, she has an M.B.A. from Harvard University.


Scott Symington Weds Maureen E. McOwen
Maureen Elizabeth McOwen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. McOwen of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday in Larchmont to Douglas Scott Symington, a son of Marilyn E. Symington of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Garey T. Symington.
The Rev.
Joseph A. DeSanto performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 30 years old, is an account executive for the Mechtronics Corporation, a manufacturer of merchandise displays in Stamford, Conn.
She is a graduate of Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y.
Her father was an advertising sales executive at Newsweek magazine in New York.


Making a Difference; Duplicating Yew Bark in a Lab
Until last week, the Escagenetics Corporation was known as an agricultural biotechnology start-up company with technology for producing clones of food flavors like vanilla and strawberry in a test tube.
Now the San Carlos, Calif., company is in the limelight for harnessing this technology to produce taxol, a promising anti-cancer drug found only in the endangered Pacific yew tree.
Derived from the bark and needles of the yew, taxol is being used to treat women with advanced breast and ovarian cancer, diseases responsible for more than 50,000 deaths in the United States each year.
Unfortunately, it takes about a half-dozen 100-year-old yew trees to treat one patient for a year, and the yew has been rendered nearly extinct by loggers, who regard the tree as a weed.


Bridge
A month ago, for a variety of reasons, China briefly became the capital of the international bridge scene.
Two weeks of activity began with the Far East Championships in Canton.
The home country won the titles in three divisions, Open, Women and Junior, but the members of the Chinese Open Team suffered a disappointment: although they were overall winners, they did not win the right to compete in the Bermuda Bowl in Yokohama, Japan, in October.
Australia and New Zealand regularly compete in the Far East contests, but because they are from another zone, their results do not count in qualifying for world championships.


Upstate Savoyards


Wall Street; Reverberations of a Catastrophe in the Philippines
The eruption of Mount Pinatubo this month and a subsequent typhoon and earthquake have been calamities for the Philippines, where at least 100 have died and countless buildings were buried.
The disaster has eclipsed the news of an important oil strike in the islands in February -- a boon for this oil-importing nation -- and a strong rally in the Philippine equity markets earlier this year.
One barometer of the financial market's worries about the disaster is the share price of the First Philippine Fund, a closed-end fund traded on the New York Stock Exchange.


YUGOSLAVIA'S ARMY ISSUES ULTIMATUM TO REBEL REPUBLIC
The Yugoslav Army issued an ultimatum today to Slovenia, saying that it would take "decisive military action" unless the secessionist republic agreed to an unconditional cease-fire, gave up control of all border posts and ended its cutoff of essential supplies to the army.
The ultimatum came amid scattered skirmishes after the collapse of an accord mediated by three foreign ministers of the European Community to end three days of fighting between the national army and local militias in the breakaway republic.


When Kids Fly Without Adults
SITTING awake at home when a child is traveling is no fun, but it is part of being a parent and encouraging a child off into independence.
At this season, when the young travel farther afield, the need for preparation increases, in order at least to avoid the avoidable.
The following two stories from parents who wrote to this department point to sensible precautions.
John Vaughan, who lives on Nantucket, is 11 years old.
On March 31 at 2:45 P.M., he was to take Continental Express flight 3747 by himself from La Guardia Airport back to his family on Nantucket.
The adult who escorted the child to the old Eastern Airline shuttle terminal asked if he could walk him onto the plane.
A Continental gate employee told him, no, she would do it.
John disappeared from the escort's view.


RECORD BRIEF
Beethoven: Symphony No. 9
Julia Varady, soprano; Jard van Nes, mezzo-soprano; Keith Lewis, tenor; Simon Estes, bass-baritone; Ernst Senff Chorus; Berlin Philharmonic conducted by Carlo Maria Giulini.
Deutsche Grammophon 427 655-2; CD.


Sports People: BASKETBALL; Mahorn Waiting
Maybe RICK MAHORN won't be in a Philadelphia 76ers uniform next year.
Or maybe he will.
Either way, he expects to be in the N.B.A.
HAROLD KATZ, the owner of the 76ers, has until tomorrow to decide whether to exercise an option for the remaining season on Mahorn's contract.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE COUPLE  By Thomas Hurlimann. Translated by Edna McCown. Fromm, $16.95.


Topics of The Times; In Kuwait, Less Injustice
Lending half an ear to the world outcry, the Kuwait Government has commuted the death penalty imposed on 29 persons convicted of collaborating with Iraq.
They will serve life terms in jail.
But at the same time, the harsh sentences imposed by martial law courts on all others have now been confirmed by Kuwait's Prime Minister, Crown Prince Saad al-Abdullah al-Salem.
In truth, all the convictions resulted from flawed trials that denied defendants the rudiments of accepted legal safeguards.
The ruling family tacitly concedes as much by commuting the death sentences.
It would do far more to restore Kuwait's reputation by ordering new trials for all.


In Connecticut, Fight Continues Over Revenues
The Connecticut House of Representatives tonight approved an $8.1 billion spending plan for the fiscal year that begins on Monday that includes a new spending-cap system intended to slow government growth in future years.
But confusion remained on how to pay for the spending plan.
The House members prepared to vote late tonight on Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s income-tax proposal, even though it is still unpopular.
They did so with no clear sense of its prospects, and little idea of what would happen if it failed.


A Tent Filled With Flowers
The New York Botanical Garden and a flower-filled tent were the setting for the garden's Centennial Ball on June 20.
The evening began with a cocktail reception in the newly planted outdoor gardens surrounding the turn-of-the-century greenhouses.
Party favors were a perfume created from the garden's cattleya orchids.
In Rumson, N.J., Jean Wrightson erected a tent for 250 guests on the lawn of her estate for the June 22 wedding reception for her son, Jeffrey G. Wrightson, and Grace V. Fowler.
The bride arrived at the church ceremony in a pristine 1932 Packard town car.


Melissa Vine Is Married
Melissa G. Vine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Vine of East Brunswick, N.J., was married last evening to Robert W. Weiler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Weiler of West Chester, Pa.
Rabbi Harold Swiss and the Rev.
Henry Fehrenbacher, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the New York Academy of Art.
Mrs.
Weiler, 26 years old, is an investment analyst at First Capital Holdings in Los Angeles.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
The bridegroom, 27, is to join Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the New York investment bankers, as an associate in August.
He graduated from the University of Virginia and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of California at Los Angeles.


A Russian Poet Finds a New Poetry In Collage
When Andrei Voznesensky came here last winter as poet-in-residence at the University of Pennsylvania, he was in good spirits.
The Soviet Union was in terrible shape, but in one way and another he had proved himself, as on many previous occasions, to be not only a gifted poet but an exemplary citizen.
He was soon to show that art, too, can set an example.
At a public reading in Moscow, he had faced down 200 anti-Semitic hooligans who had block-bought seats in the front rows.
Confronted at question time with handwritten questions of an unprintable foulness, he challenged the authors to stand up and make themselves known.
None of them dared to.


The World Over, Women's Progress Is Uneven; 'Thelma and Louise'
To the Editor:
"What Were the Women 'Asking' For" (Editorial Notebook, June 13), Mary Cantwell's commentary on the movie "Thelma and Louise," is well intentioned.
But her interpretation of the joint suicide of the two women as "triumphant" is as naively romantic and dangerous as the portrayal of this tragedy at the movie's end.
When Thelma and Louise drive their car off a cliff, the screen becomes surreal and beatific, in short, a cartoon in which they are smiling and driving off into the heavens.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
May construction spending, in percent
0.8
0.4
National purchasing managers survey
45.4
47.0
Tuesday
May factory goods orders, in percent
1.8
1.0
Wednesday
May new home sales, in percent
1.2
0.8
Late June auto sales, in millions
6.5
6.1
Friday
Initial jobless claims, in thousands
431
425
Non-farm payroll, in thousands
59
59
Unemployment, in percent
6.9
7.0
Tuesday: Federal Open Market Committee meeting Thursday: Fourth of July, markets closed  Friday: Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee held in May *
President Gorbachev and Chancellor Kohl meet in Kiev  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


What Evil Lurks in Connecticut? The Novelists Know
SOME writers of mystery novels in Connecticut are exploiting the state's landscape for their own nefarious purposes.
They said they liked to write tales of crime and mayhem set in pleasant Connecticut locales, because they wanted to thrill, chill or intrigue their readers by evoking what Orania Papazoglou, a writer from Watertown called "the evil under the nice."
Her husband, William L. DeAndrea, also a mystery writer, said, "It's almost always suburban or rural Connecticut that's written about." He said that people like Hillary Waugh of Guilford, author of 46 whodunits and the like, zero in on "small towns and small-town concerns."


Prosecutor in Georgia to Seek New Charge in Mail Bombing
A Georgia prosecutor says he will seek state murder charges that could lead to the execution of Walter Leroy Moody Jr., who was convicted in Federal court on Friday in the killings of a Federal judge in Alabama and a lawyer in Georgia.
Spencer Lawton Jr., the District Attorney in Chatham County, Ga., said today that he would seek a murder indictment against Mr.
Moody, who could be sentenced to death in Georgia if convicted.
The Attorney General in Alabama has not decided whether to pursue a capital murder case.


Politics Trip Up Chicago School Revolution
In the fall of 1989, Chicago handed over each of its 540 public schools to parent-led councils and gave them broad authority over personnel and curriculum in the most radical attempt in this country to reshape a big-city school system.
What began as a revolution born of hope and desperation has become a sometimes bitter tug of war for many of the local school councils as they struggle against a resistant central office, intransigent principals, factional fighting on the councils themselves and major setbacks that have put into question the councils' very place in the school system.
Despite its shortcomings, the program remains in place, and councils are preparing for a round of elections in the fall.


Public &amp; Private; Another One Such
Once in the silver city, O Best Beloved, close upon the banks of the Great, Gray-Green, Greasy Limpopotomac River, the men in suits gathered as they were wont to do.
There were no women present, as was customary.
And the Main Man gathered them round and spoke thus:
I need another one.


Sarah Stahl Is Married
Sarah E. Stahl, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald A. Stahl of Rochester, was married yesterday to Drake D. Stimson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Stimson of San Marino, Calif.
The Rev.
Earl S. Johnson Jr. officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Pittsford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Stimson, 26 years old, and her husband, 27, were employed until recently at the Bank of New York, where she was an assistant treasurer and he was an assistant vice president.
They are to enter the M.B.A. degree program at Northwestern University in the fall.


From Office to Forest With 'As You Like It'
AT first glance, the Levin Theater Company's staging of "As You Like It" is sleek, streamlined and suggestive of a point of view.
The setting, listed as "Frederick's corporate headquarters," is the symbol of conformity and constriction.
Two dear friends, Rosalind and Celia, the very models of contemporary "working girls," are junior executives on the move. (Rosalind gets her ideas for "mannish" disguise by thumbing through GQ.)


C.P.A.'s Aren't Social Misfits
To the Sports Editor:
In "Gooden and Figures Don't Add Up" (The Times, June 10), David Cone described himself and pitching: "I'm a pitcher, not some cold-blooded certified public accountant."


Extraordinary Experimentation From Overseas
The dance programming in the New York International Festival of the Arts was narrower in scope than three years ago, much like the entire festival.
The general consensus is that greater selectivity made the two-week event more manageable.
But an impresario in these circumstances is only as good as his or her selectivity; as far as dance was concerned, the festival programming was unusually fine.
Although there were a few interdisciplinary events, the true dance entries fell into either of two categories: the French dance avant-garde and Asian dance, seen in traditional and more experimental forms.


Corrections
A film listing in the Arts and Leisure Guide today for the Queens Museum's German movie series misstates the date for Josef Rodl's "Wild Clown." It is July 13, not next Saturday.
Martin Theo Krieger's "Zischke" will be shown on Saturday.


Bush Accuses Iraq of Lying About Arms
President Bush accused Saddam Hussein today of "cheating and lying and hiding" on the issue of nuclear inspections, as a top State Department official vowed that the United States would "solve this issue, one way or another."
A day after Iraqi soldiers prevented United Nations inspectors from investigating machinery thought to be related to Iraq's nuclear capability, Mr.
Bush said he believed that "the authority exists" for military force under existing United Nations resolutions but said he had not discussed that option.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
REAL PONIES DON'T GO OINK!  By Patrick F. McManus. Holt, $16.95.


REAGAN REQUESTS SEARCH OF '80 FILES
Former President Ronald Reagan wants his 1980 campaign files searched for documents that might shed light on allegations that campaign officials conspired to delay the release of American hostages from Iran until after the Presidential election.
"Although I firmly believe these charges are groundless, I feel we should do all we can to clear the air of this unsubstantiated allegation," Mr.
Reagan said Friday in a letter to Ralph Bledsoe, director of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, Calif.


Headliners; No Such Thing?
For six months, Benjamin Rodriguez poured out his 18-year-old heart to a reporter from The New York Post: Benji, as he was called, described his workaday world as a mugger, telling in sometimes gory detail how he committed up to 30 armed robberies a week.
When the reporter poured out his story in several installments last week, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said he was outraged.
He demanded, "Did the newspaper even consider the fates of the victims in waiting, the people who would be beat up, carved up, shot up while The Post perfected its story?" The Post's executive editor, Jerry Nachman, said it was not his newspaper's job to collar criminals and that that Mr.
Brown was simply embarrassed at the authorities' inability to stop "people like Benji." After Mr.
Rodriguez was arrested, charged with attempted robbery and other crimes, Mr.
Brown said that the youth might be less of a terror than The Post reported.
He said that Benji confessed that "he fabricated most of the stuff."


Maria E. Amata, Lawyer, Married
Maria Elena Amata, a daughter of Margaret Amata and Jesse Amata, both of Old Lyme, Conn., was married yesterday in Scarsdale, N.Y., to Frederick James Onorato, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin F. Onorato of Scarsdale.
Msgr.
Edward M. Connors officiated at Immaculate Heart of Mary Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 26 years old, is an associate in the New York law firm of Dreyer &amp; Traub.
She graduated from Marymount College and received a law degree fom St.
John's University.
Her father is the president of Yankee Recycling Consultants in Waterbury, Conn.
Her mother is a real-estate agent for the Westledge Agency in Old Lyme.


Baseball; The Ripken of Old Back in Tune
Funny, Cal Ripken Jr. doesn't hear too much about the streak any more.
You know the streak, the 1,483 consecutive games after yesterday's action, second only to Lou Gehrig's original Iron Man streak of 2,130.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
TOON HEAVEN
The original movie cartoon of "Minnie the Moocher," starring Betty Boop, is among the treasures to be savored at twin exhibitions opening today at the Museum of Cartoon Art in Rye Brook.
"Cartoons -- The State of the Art" and a "Summer Film Festival" cover every aspect of the medium.
In addition to Miss Boop, debut movie appearances of Mickey Mouse, Superman, and Tom and Jerry will be shown continuously, along with television cartoons of the 1960's, including Crusader Rabbit and Underdog.


Jazz Festival; Ellis Larkins In an Hour Of Pianism
The pianist Ellis Larkins, who settled in Baltimore several years ago, made an infrequent New York appearance on Wednesday to play one of the JVC Jazz Festival's late-afternoon recitals at Weill Recital Hall.
He opened his one-hour performance with "What's New?" The answer is, thankfully, "Nothing." Using the gentlest of touches, he still manages to create a sense of pulsing rhythm that sweeps through everything he plays.
His playing is the epitome of effortlessness.
His fingers seem barely to make contact with the keys, yet as he brushes by them with a flip of a finger, the music emerges with simplicity and clarity.


'Chutzpah'
To the Editor:
In concluding his review of "Chutzpah" by Alan M. Dershowitz, Sidney Zion writes: "In the meantime, his book ought to be required reading for Jews, and on the suggested list for goyim."
The appearance of a sentence in The New York Times that employs a derogatory term for gentiles is offensive.
There is no place in responsible journalism for racial or religious invective, no matter how innocuous or colloquial it may appear.
DANIEL SCHMIDT  New Rochelle, N.Y.


Miss Johnson, Teacher, Weds
Jacqueline Johnson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wesley Charles Johnson of the Bronx, was married there yesterday to Michael Terry Simpkins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leroy Simpkins of Graniteville, S.C.
The Rev.
Hubert L. Reaves officiated at the Sharon Baptist Church.
Mrs.
Simpkins, 27 years old, is a special-education teacher at Intermediate School 52 in the Bronx.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Old Westbury, L.I., and received an M.S. degree in special education from Lehman College.
Her father is a custodian at Public School 140, and her mother, Dorothy Mae Johnson, is a cook at Public School 14, both in the Bronx.


Technology; Fuel Cells: Finally Coming of Age or Too Good to Be True?
First developed in the 1960's for use in space, fuel cells have come down to earth.
This month, the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, the northern California utility, started up the first complete power plant based on a molten carbonate fuel cell.
A fuel cell is a device that converts the energy of a fuel directly to electricity and heat, without combustion.
Because there is no combustion, fuel cells give off few emissions; and because there are no moving parts, fuel cells are quiet.
Although a fuel -- in this case natural gas -- is consumed, P.G.&amp; E.'s fuel cell plant is about 50 percent more efficient than conventional gas-powered turbine power generators.


It's a Merrily Asynchronous World We Have
Last week seemed to prove that the world's stock markets are as tightly intertwined as the circuitry on a computer chip.
Shocks from far
-
flung markets -- a potential cease-fire violation in Baghdad, a tax hike in Bonn, a financial scandal in Tokyo -- helped knock the Dow, which closed at 2906.75, down by 58.81 points for the week.
But don't jump to the conclusion that the world's stock markets will keep marching in lockstep.
True, investors all over the globe are becoming decidedly less provincial.
Every day more than $600 billion sloshes around the world's currency markets.
Foreigners tripled their holdings of American stocks during the 1980's.
American stockholders, meanwhile, quintupled their ownership of foreign shares.


So What's Going On in the Soviet Union?; Appendix Addendum
To the Editor:
Having just returned from Moscow, I found it astonishing that you -- with your record of sensitive, in-depth coverage of the Soviet Union's paralysis and collapse -- should publish something so naively misleading as "The Cold War and Appendix B" (editorial, June 3).
You describe the case of an unnamed American scholar (he apparently did not know Russian) who had his appendix removed in the Soviet Union last year in a provincial hospital, without antibiotics.
It was a positive experience.
In contrast to health services in the United States, where he had a second appendectomy last month, "he felt
cared
for."
No one disputes the generous warmth of Russians in their private lives.
But to rethink the merits of the Soviet system versus our "superbly equipped but impersonal" emergency wards on the basis of this story is simply absurd.
How a foreigner is treated in that land of crooked mirrors is no index of reality -- and certainly no index of victory in the cold war.
If anecdotes are desired, check out a Soviet citizen (who cannot find aspirin, much less antibiotics, and never rates a smile from his country's gray and pervasive officialdom).
It's how a system values the life of its own people that should be the focus of Western concern as we consider aid to the Soviet body politic, so desperately sick and at last on the historic brink of admitting that it is sick by its own hand.
CARYL EMERSON  Professor of Slavic Languages and Literature, Princeton U. Princeton, N.J., June 14, 1991


East Coast Arts Rises, Limping, From the Dead
IF you have been looking for explanations about the disappearance of the East Coast Arts Theater at Wildcliff, look again.
After almost a year of inactivity, the five-year-old showcase for plays in progress re-emerged on June 13 for 10 performances of "Last Class," a newly revised work by Richard Lenz.
The play's final showing is to take place at 3 P.M. today.
It will be followed by a discussion with Mr.
Lenz and with the center's artistic head, Joe Cacaci, who also directed the play.
For more information or reservations, the telephone number is 632-1978.


Ruse on the Road
To the Editor: I would like to alert travelers who rent cars at the Miami Airport to a potentially dangerous situation.
My wife and I recently rented a car and were driving to Miami Beach on a well-traveled highway.
We had driven for perhaps a mile when a car, blowing its horn furiously, pulled alongside.
Two young men in the car shouted that smoke and sparks were being emitted from our tailpipe.
I thanked them and, despite my wife's suggestion that we stop to investigate, continued on our way.
When we arrived at our hotel and recounted the experience, we were told that Miami newspapers continually report such incidents.
It seems that when tourists stop to investigate, those who had falsely warned them also stop -- ostensibly to help.
Instead, when the tourist steps out of his car to see what is wrong, he is mugged.
ARTHUR R. KASSIN Danbury, Conn.


Intricate, Playful, Soaring: Wood That Defies Flat Definition
"WOOD" is the name of the show at the Elements Gallery for Contemporary Design in Greenwich.
The show, which remains through July 20, aims to "highlight the color, grain and texture of wood by featuring different artists' interpretations," said the gallery's manager, Lisa Hampton.
Nineteen woodworkers from across the country are represented by a diverse selection of boxes, bowls, candlesticks, sculpture, furniture, lamps, birdhouses and jewelry.
Prices range from $20 and $40 for little laminated boxes, a patchwork of exotic and native woods, by William Jaquith Evans of Oakland, Calif., to $11,000 for a sculptural table by Howard Werner of Mount Tremper, N.Y., or for an amusing piece of folk art, "New York, New York" by Walter Einsel of Westport.
Mr.
Einsel, interested in the technical aspect of mixing found objects in a mechanical way, presents an Uncle Sam whose hand comes out holding an apple marked "for sale" while his eyes roll to reveal dollar signs.
A spiral of maple resembling a nautilus shell forms the base of Mr.
Werner's coffee table, supporting a circle of glass four feet in diameter.


Tie Salaries To Team Success
To the Sports Editor:
At best, salaries in baseball are only remotely related to a team's success or failure.
I would propose that a player be paid, at least in part, on the basis of a team's success rather than on individual statistics.
I would suggest that a team distribute its bonuses on the basis of team successes.


In New York, Deli Is High Art
TO a New Yorker, deli is both a type of food and, as in Stage Deli, Carnegie Deli and Second Avenue Deli, the restaurant that serves it.
A maven, someone who appreciates good deli, short for delicatessen, never takes it to mean a convenience store.
In the New York of Woody Allen and fast-talking Broadway types, pastrami and corned beef are quintessential deli.
There are other ingredients, among them roast beef and kosher salami, to pile onto sandwiches four to six inches thick and serve with spicy yellow mustard, sour pickles and pickled tomatoes.
But the reputation of a deli rests squarely on the quality of its pastrami and corned beef.


A New Band That's All the Rave
The trance-dance rhythms and euphoric aura of acid house music have drastically altered the outlook and aspirations of most British rock groups.
Older bands have incorporated the new beats and technology into their established sound: the neo-psychedelia of Primal Scream, the new wave of Jesus Jones, the mod revivalism of the Farm are all now welded to a state-of-the-art rhythmic undercarriage.
Younger groups have simply grown up in a pop environment where house is "the new rock-and-roll."
E.M.F., a product of this musical revolution, have a foot in either camp.
Ian Dench, the group's 26-year-old guitarist and songwriter, was previously in a 60's-fixated band, Apple Mosaic.
E.M.F.'s other members, who are 20 or 21, grew up in an era where house-music techniques like rhythm loops and sequencer riffs are "just the way bands do things now."


Dear Dirty Dublin
To the Editor:
As a male and an American, I must apologize for William Styron's blithe recollection of the day Dublin imprisoned him and Philip Roth ("Dear Dirty Dublin: My Joycean Trek With Philip Roth," June 9).
Of Dublin's "girls," Mr.
Styron recounts Mr.
Roth's "good-natured cultural perception" that "you couldn't eyeball them directly. They simply weren't used to being admired. . . . Give them a look and they'll raise their arms to hide their bosoms." I write to remind Mr.
Styron that since the Norman invasion, the Celtic capital has experienced many occupations.
His account of this more recent appearance of American tourists, who confuse eyeballing Dubliners with admiring them, ignores the subtle wit and beauty of the city's women and men.
JOHN LAVIN  Lafayette Hill, Pa.


Cash in the Curl
THE SKY WAS BLUE, THE sand was white, and Tom Carroll, one of the best surfers in the world, was "getting tubed." The fans who had clustered on the beach for the Marui Pipeline Masters Competition burst into applause as Carroll shot through Hawaii's legendary Pipeline, but something else was going on over at the judges' stand.
"Better put on your caps," said the contest director, "here comes the guy from Coors." Offshore, the wave ejected its rider, and a spray of salt smoke rose overhead; on the beach, the judges dutifully donned their promo caps.
The location may have been the North Shore of Oahu, the time midday, but in an age of commercially driven metaphysics, it was Miller Time, Schaefer City, the Silver Bullet Express. . . .
Hey, dude, this Bud's for you.
Beer and surfing have always had one thing in common: foam.
More recently they joined hands for the 1990 Pipeline Masters surfing contest, known informally as Pipemasters and sponsored by Marui, a Japanese department store.
But Marui and Coors were hardly the only companies buying advertising at Pipeline.
Many contestants bore the names of their own sponsors, either on their equipment or wet suits: names like Quiksilver and Billabong (clothing), Gorilla Grip, Trac-Top, Astrodeck, Bubble Gum Wax and Sex Wax (traction aides for the top of your board), Aleeda, Victory, Rip Curl and Wavelength (wet suits), Ray-Ban sunglasses, Laguna Surf &amp; Sport, KNAC (a Long Beach, Calif., heavy-metal station) and, perhaps the only patron who did not buy his way into the contest, Jesus.
At times, it seemed as if the waves themselves were telling you in one way or another that Kilroy Was Here.


All About/Commercial Radio; Too Many Stations, Too Few Buyers and Depressed Prices
These are dog days for commercial radio and not just because the recession has hurt advertising.
For starters, the radio dial has become far more congested in recent years because the Federal Communications Commission has approved well over a thousand new stations since the early 1980's in efforts to foster competition.
The result: more broadcasters chasing the same advertising dollars, sometimes amid increased interference.
How bad are things?
Advertising revenues last year were about $8.84 billion, virtually unchanged from the year before, according to the Radio Advertising Bureau, an industry group in New York.
And the F.C.C. recently reported that 197 AM stations and 30 FM stations have simply chosen to go off the air, because they could not meet expenses or find anybody to buy their licenses.
In the past, analysts say, it has been very rare indeed for stations to "go dark."


Kenya
To the Editor: An item on Kenya (Travel Advisory, May 5) quoted the U.S.
State Department's warning to Americans traveling to that East African country and also quoted the concern of the United States Embassy in Nairobi about the safety of tourists after an elderly American missionary couple was attacked late at night on a lonely road near Nairobi in April, and one of them was killed.
While I am writing this, many in New York, Los Angeles, Detroit and Miami are becoming innocent victims of crimes.
The State Department warnings do a great disservice to Kenya.


Wise Guys, Tough Guys And, Yes, a Few Nice Guys
Grown men scream, guitars blare, drums go boom-chunk-boom-chunk-crash.
It's the heavy-metal fanfare for summertime, when stadiums and music sheds provide a profitable tour circuit and teen-agers don't have to go to school in the morning.
Two albums bound to be roaring through the summer have just been released: Skid Row's second album, "Slave to the Grind" (Atlantic 82242; CD and cassette), and Van Halen's ninth, "For Unlawful Carnal Knowledge" (Warner Brothers 26594; CD and cassette).
"Slave to the Grind" has already established a heavy-metal benchmark; it entered the pop album chart at No. 1.
Behind its conformist wardrobes (jeans, leather, long hair), stylized pandemonium and hell-raising imagery, heavy metal has wise guys and tough guys, philosophers and dolts, romantics and bullies.
The music makes a difference -- no other mainstream rock style shows off so much flashy virtuosity -- but heavy metal's fiercest competition has to do with attitude.
As the music of hormonal overload and explosive emotions, heavy metal can be jubilant or enraged, and in the wake of Guns 'n' Roses' 12-million-selling album, "Appetite for Destruction," anger has re-emerged as a hot commodity.


THE LIES THAT BIND
Paul Thaler is right about one thing: lovers do lie all the time (About Men: "The Lies That Bind," June 9).
It can hardly be avoided, in the sense that communication between two people necessarily involves a process of selection.
Selectivity leads at least to omission, and omission may be misleading or downright deceptive.
But Thaler is not talking about the inadvertent or unconscious lie; his essay is about the motivation for the planned, the crafted lie.
Thaler should take care.
Having once falsely applauded his wife's "overdone chicken with a peculiar white sauce," he may find himself condemned to eat it once a week for the remainder of his married life.
BONNIE BUNCH
Stony Brook, L.I.


Joan Gumowitz, Physician, Weds
Dr.
Joan Gumowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold S. Gumowitz of Kings Point, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Jeffrey Banks Matthews, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman S. Matthews of Purchase, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert Widom officiated at the Pierre.
The bride, 33 years old, graduated from Harvard University and received her M.D. degree from the University of Pittsburgh.
She is an anesthesiologist at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston and an instructor at the Harvard Medical School.
Next month she is to begin a fellowship in critical care medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
Her father and her mother, Anne Gumowitz, are real estate developers in New York.


Answering The Mail
Q. &gt;
The bottom two rows of bricks at the base of the chimney in my basement are painted.
There is a white powdery substance on the basement floor that seems to be coming out of the mortar on the third and fourth rows above this.
The house is about 50 years old.
What is causing this powder to form?
A.
This is efflorescence, a white residue that is formed by excess alkaline salts in the masonry.
It is usually caused by a moisture condition in the brickwork, and so you should check the chimney structure on the outside.
Start by inspecting the chimney cap at the very top.
If it is cracked or missing entirely, it should be repaired.
If this is not the problem, then it is likely that some mortar joints on the outside, or possibly all of them, need tuck-pointing, which is not unusual after 50 years.
This calls for scraping out the old mortar to a depth of a half-inch and then replacing with fresh mortar.


Doctor Asks to Tell of Suicide
Dr.
Timothy E. Quill said he went public about his role in the suicide of a cancer-stricken patient to create debate about the right to die.
But as far as he is concerned perhaps the most important discussion of his actions will take place in private before a Monroe County grand jury.
The Monroe County District Attorney, Howard R. Relin, has announced that he will ask a grand jury next month to decide whether Dr.
Quill should be prosecuted for his part in the barbiturate overdose last May 19 of P. Diane Trumbull, a 45-year-old leukemia patient.


Miss Garretson Wed in Capital
Margaret Elizabeth Garretson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Garretson of Severna Park, Md., was married last evening to Edward Hill Carter, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Burr N. Carter 2d of Richmond.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Nancy E. von Oehsen at St.
John's Episcopal Church in the Georgetown section of Washington.
Mrs.
Carter, 26 years old, received an M.B.A. from Northwestern University last week.
She is a Dartmouth College graduate and is to join GA Partners, a real-estate consultant division of Arthur Andersen in Washington.
Her father is president of PCD Inc., a manufacturer of electrical products in Millersville, Md.


Sports of The Times; A Rest Day for Tennis Tradition
THEY measure things in centuries here.
In England they can state that this is the eighth coldest June since 1657, and back it up with statistics.
The little old lady with white hair outside the Southfields tube station can caution jaywalking Yanks to wait for the walk sign because "We don't want to have to clean you up from the street."


EUROPE TO PRESS A YUGOSLAV PACT
The European Community said today that it would maintain pressure on the Belgrade Government to reach a broad new political accord with the rebel republics of Slovenia and Croatia.
After a two-day meeting here, community heads of government said the Yugoslav crisis would be taken up next week by the 35-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and that European economic aid to Belgrade would be suspended if it resumed its offensive against the two republics.


The Nation; Abstract Death Penalty Meets Real Execution
IN the summer of 1987, Louisiana executed eight men in 11 weeks.
Suddenly, in a state so enthusiastic about capital punishment that a legal newspaper dubbed it "Death Mill, U.S.A.," juries stopped handing out death sentences.
Opponents of capital punishment say the phenomenon supports one of their foremost articles of faith: that Americans say they want executions more than they actually do.


On the Street; Farmers in the City
Overalls are fashion news and how you wear them is what counts.
One shoulder strap hanging loose with the front bib falling in a bias fold is the look of the moment.
It gives this traditional workman's garment instant summer status for teen-agers.
But adults are not above copying it.
Overalls were to farmers what blue jeans were to gold-rush prospectors in the 19th century.
They became infamous in song when a pair was found in Mrs.
Murphy's chowder, and elevated into high culture in artist Grant Wood's "American Gothic" painting.
Now they're back as high fashion.
What next?


Scene Stealers At Stratford Fete
The Stratford Festival is, arguably, North America's finest repertory theater.
But it is also a major tourist attraction, and like its competition -- the Rockies, Old Faithful, Niagara Falls -- it knows the value of grandeur.
Even in these times of penury, it continues to produce Shakespeare on such a lavish scale that, were the impulse not roundly discouraged, half the spectators would probably be grabbing for their Instamatics.
Consider the transition from the first to the second scene of "Hamlet," one of the principal offerings of this, the festival's 39th season.
Chased away by the cock's crow, the gray ghost of Hamlet's father has disappeared into the inky blackness, trailing a cloak that seems to be fashioned of cobwebs.
The members of the watch, still blinking uncertainly at what they've seen, dash off to apprise Hamlet of the indistinct apparition.
Then, with barely a pause, the lights come up blazing on the court of Elsinore and a breath-catching vision of 19th-century opulence -- fire-engine-red military uniforms dripping with braid, and white satin ball gowns edged with pearls.


Old Lyme Exhibit Recalls Pleasant Valley's Artists
OVER the years many artists have been attracted to the section of Old Lyme called Pleasant Valley, and their work often depicted its streams, farms, hills and buildings.
The valley has changed -- most of the farms are gone -- but people can still see houses where the artists lived and scenes that they painted in an exhibition, "Three Artists of Pleasant Valley," at the Florence Griswold Museum in Old Lyme through July 28.
Those featured in the exhibit -- Robert Vonnoh (1858-1933), Oscar Fehrer (1872-1958) and Eugene Higgins (1874-1958) -- were summer residents of the valley, living and working near the intersection of Route 156 and Beaver Brook Road.


Lisa McNally Has Wedding
Elizabeth McNally, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. McNally of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday at St.
Joseph's Church in Bronxville to William Charles Cassidy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Cassidy of New Canaan, Conn.
Msgr.
James M. Connolly and the Revs.
Robert T. Kennedy and Robert J. Randall officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, is known as Lisa.
She is a school counselor in alcohol and drug-abuse prevention for the New York archdiocese.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.


The Nation; The Conservative Majority Solidifies
Criminal Law Rights of Convicted Cut Back Sharply
Two rulings among the many significant ones of the term, which lasted from Oct. 1, 1990, to June 27, cut back sharply on the ability of death row inmates and other state prisoners to challenge the constitutionality of their convictions or sentences by filing petitions for writs of habeas corpus in Federal court.
Both were decided by 6-to-3 votes, with Justices Marshall, Blackmun and Stevens dissenting.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending June 15  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 175,000
107 West 25th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, den, 12-ft. tin ceilings, south exposure, common roof deck; maintenance $767, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Sinvin Realty)  Madison Square Area 410,000
7-9 East 20th Street  (Holtz House)  1,800-sq.-ft. open-loft condo; elevator, high-ceilings, storage room; common charge $336, taxes $3,120 (Broker: Halstead Property Co.) Greenwich Village 536,000
31 West 12th Street  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; maid's room, decorative fireplace, high-ceilings, 3 exposures; maintenance $720, 22% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper East Side 1.375 million
244 East 62d Street  5-bedroom, 5-bath, single-family, 4-story brownstone; maid's room, dining room, floor-through living room, front and rear bay windows, 6 marble fireplaces, rear garden, in historic district, 16- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $12,400 (Broker: Leslie J. Garfield Co.)  Upper West Side 212,000
245 West 104th Street  (Armstead)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, renovated, windowed kitchen, south exposure; maintenance $682, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: A.J. Clark)  BRONX  City Island 405,000
698 King Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, rear cottage facing L.I Sound, 50- by 150-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Williamsbridge 206,000
919 East 222d Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, enclosed front porch, 2-car garage, 50- by 98-ft. lot; taxes $1,450 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  BROOKLYN  Kensington 215,000
208 Beverly Road  3-family, detached, frame house; 2 bedrooms in two units, 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; 1-car garage, 35- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful Inc.)  Prospect Park South 499,000
106 Marlborough Road  8-bedroom, 5-bath, single-family, Georgean-style brick house; dining room, butler's pantry, 4 fireplaces, solarium, 2-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $4,200 (Broker: Sommers Real Estate)  Windsor Terrace 270,000
228 Seeley Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, hospitality suite in finished basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 140-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Susan N. Breen Realty)  QUEENS  Howard Beach 69,000
84-09 155th Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, terrace, parking space provided; maintenance $640, 62% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  Richmond Hill 245,000
115-16 103d Avenue  3-family, detached, frame house; 3 bedrooms and den in two units; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; full basement 3-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Veterans Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills 155,000
18 Midland Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, study, enclosed front porch, 59- by 187-ft. lot; taxes $850 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  West Brighton 87,000
305 Taylor Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, semi-attached Victorian; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $510 (Broker: Rand Properties)


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


Explorer, Imaginer
To the Editor:
The account by David Richards of a writer's dedication to esthetic values through both the fat and the lean years  [ "Edward Albee and the Road Not Taken," June 16 ]  gave courage to those others of us "writers who are gay" (to adopt Mr. Albee's distinction) who read with some bewilderment Edmund White's canonization of certain "gay writers" in the Times Magazine of the same Sunday.


Carol H. Newhall Wed To Lewis L. Neilson Jr.
Carol Harrison Newhall, an officer at the Mellon Bank in Philadelphia, and Lewis Levick Neilson Jr., a lawyer in Philadelphia, were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
The Rev.
Timothy D. Dobbins officiated.
Mrs.
Neilson graduated from the Shipley School and Williams College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Newhall of Penn Valley, Pa.


Design; Little Shops of Splendor
MARC BERG, DIRECTOR OF THE Azzedine Alaia shop in Manhattan, was surprised when students began flocking into the SoHo store to take notes on the decor.
"We're used to F.I.T. students coming in to sketch the clothes, but we'd never had students examining the interiors before," he says.
"Apparently there was a question about the store on an art-history exam at Columbia." Just where the shop belongs in the history of art may be a question best left to academicians.
In the history of retailing, however, this is but one example of how high-end fashion designers devote much of their energy to creating an image that goes well beyond what hangs on their racks.


Brooke Malpass Weds Craig Jack
Brooke Jonas Malpass, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles U. Malpass of Bronxville, N.Y., and Rye Beach, N.H., was married yesterday in Rye Beach to Craig MacLaren Jack, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald MacLaren Jack Jr. of Shaker Heights, Ohio.
The Rev.
Warren H. Dean performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's-by-the-Sea Episcopal Chapel.
The bride, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia School of Architecture and was until recently a renovation and construction project coordinator at the Pritzker School of Medicine at the University of Chicago.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Malco Diversified, an investment consulting concern in New York.
Her mother, Ann J. Malpass, is a vice president of external affairs and public events at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.


The World; Cocaine Manufacturing Is No Longer Just A Colombian Monopoly
IN rural Peru, in the heart of the world's biggest coca-growing area, a police squad recently stumbled onto a big, elaborately equipped laboratory for refining high quality cocaine, a disheartening discovery in a country that has historically been almost exclusively a source of raw material for the drug.
The discovery of the laboratory, shielded from sight by a thicket of tropical trees on the edge of the Santa Ana River, added to growing evidence that the business of refining and exporting cocaine is spreading beyond Colombia to other countries in South America.


Managing; Where the Cadre Sets the Pattern
The American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation's financing arm, A.T.&amp; T. Credit, is in turmoil.
Since October, the unit, with $2.5 billion in assets and 300,000 customer accounts, has been rejiggering job titles, responsibilities and bonus plans.
In May, it moved here from nearby Morristown.
Many of its 620 employees are lining up for courses in coping with change.
Yet the staff is energetic rather than panicked.
One reason: Every aspect of the new structure, from the description of the president's job to the decor, was designed by the workers.


Elizabeth A. Slaughter, an Executive, Wed to Wesley Albert, a Restaurateur
Elizabeth Ann Slaughter, a daughter of Bernice Slaughter of Tampa, Fla., and Oak Bluffs, Mass., and the late Henry A. Slaughter, was married yesterday in Nyack, N.Y., to Wesley Sylvester Albert, a son of Henry Albert of Antigua and the late Christophene Jacobs. .
The Rev.
Robert A. Jewett and the Rev.
A.
Eric Joseph officiated at Grace Episcopal Church.
The bride is a director of marketing and technology at Nynex in New York.
She graduated from Wilkes University and received a doctorate in clinical psychology in a joint program of the University of Massachusetts and Harvard University.
Her father was a general counsel for the New York State Workmen's Compensation Board and a state administrative law judge.
Her mother, who is retired, was a manager in New York of pharmaceutical procurement for the United States Air Force.


Sunday Menu; Mozzarella Meets Jalapeno For a Mexican-Italian Mix
Corn, black beans and jalapeno spell Mexican.
So what do you make of those ingredients when they are plopped on top of polenta and sprinkled with fresh mozzarella?
It's really unimportant because the dish is so satisfying, attractive and quick that you may end up calling it a favorite.


THE KUWAITI INFERNO
I was captivated by Salgado's pictures of the burning Kuwaiti oil fields.
While most of the country is praising the job done by the military, I choose to praise the brave men who are attempting to put an end to this environmental destruction.
DOREEN L. DUFF
New York, N.Y.


Miss Donahue Has Wedding
Cynthia Mary Donahue and Douglas Thibault Labrecque were married yesterday at Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church in Rumson, N.J., by the Rev.
Joseph W. Hughes.
The bride is a daughter of Mrs.
Laurence A. Donahue of Rumson and the late Dr.
Donahue.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas G. Labrecque of Fair Haven, N.J.
The bride, a graduate of the Moore College of Art and Design in Philadelphia, is an executive assistant in sales at Calvin Klein Cosmetics in New York.
Her father was a neurosurgeon.
Her mother, Maxine Donahue, is the executive director of the National Catholic Parent Federation.


The World; How Tito's Heirs Made A Mess of Yugoslavia
YUGOSLAVIA'S latest agony its third in this century after the deaths of more than one million citizens in each of the two world wars -- is traceable in many respects to one man: Josip Broz Tito.
It was Tito who in 1971 cut down the bright younger politicians -- men and women -- who might have led the country on a more liberal path nearly two decades ahead of the overthrow of Communist regimes in Eastern Europe.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PLAY ABOUT PLAYWRIGHT
The Royal Dramatic Theater of Stockholm will perform a staged reading of one of its productions at the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford on Friday and Saturday at 6:30 P.M.
Max von Sydow and Margaretha Krook will be the leading players in "And Give Us the Shadows" by Lars Noren, supported by the original Swedish cast, including Peter Andersson, Reine Brynolfsson and Lakke Magnusson.
Bjorn Melander has directed the production in English.
This is the second work by Mr.
Noren to be presented at a National Playwrights Conference.
His earlier play "Night and Day" was seen during the 1983 conference.
Retitled "Night Is Mother to the Day," it was given a full production at the Yale Repertory Theater in 1984.


Laurie M. Scott Married in Maine
Laurie Melchior Scott, a daughter of Bruce Robert Scott of Cambridge, Mass., was married in Dark Harbor, Me., yesterday to Paul David Kazilionis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wladislaus J. Kazilionis of Portland, Me.
The Rev.
David W. Bolton performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Kazilionis, 28 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University, where her father is a professor of business administration.
She is also the daughter of the late Anne Melchior Scott.


1,200 Kuwaiti Refugees, Fearing Collaborator Charges, Flee to Iraq
More than 1,200 refugees have fled into Iraq from a camp just inside Kuwait in the last 10 days, apparently because many of the men at the camp feared that they would be punished as collaborators if they ever returned to their homes in Kuwait.
International relief officials said today that a census at the camp at Abdali showed that there were 1,732 people there on June 26, down from nearly 3,000 counted in the previous census on June 20.
They said more refugees probably left in the last three days.


Ms. Welch Wed to Lieut. G. S. M. Dyer
Martha Lee Welch, a daughter of Claude E. Welch Jr. of Buffalo and the late Nancy Edwards Welch, was married in West Hartford, Conn., yesterday to Second Lieut.
George Sinclair Mitchell Dyer, U.S.A.F., a son of James M. Dyer of New York and Theodora Mitchell Bennett of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Rev.
David Wayne, an Episcopal minister, and the Rev.
Patricia Felletter, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Asylum Hill Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Dyer, 23 years old, graduated from Harvard University and is to enter the University of Connecticut School of Medicine in August.
Her father is a professor of political science at the State University of New York at Buffalo.


Cuba vs. Pan Am Games: And the Winner Is?
Seven days a week, often late into the night, workers can be seen ferrying truckloads of earth, welding steel beams and laying tiles at the huge seaside athletic complex here that is being rushed into readiness.
Despite being strapped with what the Government has called the worst economic crisis since the seizure of power by Fidel Castro in 1959, Cuba has staked its prestige on the successful hosting of the Pan American Games and with less than five weeks to go before their start is engaged in a frantic and costly race to complete their preparation.


Betsy P. Mahaffey Married
Betsy Peck Mahaffey, a sculptor in New Haven, and Mark Alden Branch, a senior editor of Progressive Architecture magazine in Stamford, Conn., were married yesterday at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Louisville, Ky., by the Rev.
Richard Humke.
Ms.
Mahaffey is keeping her name.
The couple, both 26 years old, are graduates of Yale University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Logan McC.
Mahaffey of Louisville.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Branch of Drumright, Okla.


Correction
An article last Sunday about Scotch Plains, N.J., misstated rental figures for Country Club Village.
One-bedroom apartments are $730 a month and two-bedroom apartments are $900.


Get 'Em While They're Young
To the Editor:
Joseph Horowitz discusses the "decline" of classical music without once coming to grips with an essential factor in creating the current situation: the failure of elementary schools to provide even the most rudimentary elements of music appreciation.


Travel Advisory; Memphis to Get Rights Museum
The Lorraine Motel in Memphis, where the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in 1968, has been converted into the National Civil Rights Museum, and is set to open July 4.
D'Army Bailey, president of the Lorraine Civil Rights Museum Foundation, says the new museum will document "the sights, sounds, outrage, danger and emotion of the civil rights movement."
The museum will contain a bus like the one on which Rosa Parks touched off the civil rights movement in Montgomery, Ala., in 1955, when she refused to move to the back.
Also on display will be a reproduction of a lunch counter representing those that were the scene of the sit-ins that took place in subsequent years.
The museum will offer several audiovisual programs and sound-and-light displays.


Q and A
Rent Overcharge  Question: I am the prime tenant of a rent-stabilized apartment.
I came to the conclusion I was being overcharged on my rent and filed a complaint with the State Division of Housing and Community Renewal in June 1990.
I have received a docket number but have heard nothing since then.
Is there any way to establish when a complaint will become an active investigation and how long it will take to settle the matter? . . .
Lise Holst, Manhattan


Budget Talks in New Jersey Stall Over Dispute in Layoffs
The President of the State Senate suddenly called off a scheduled session of his house today as talks between the Democratic leaders of the Legislature stalled a day before the state's budget deadline.
In an atmosphere of increasing distrust between Democratic leaders of the two houses, aides to the Senate President, John A. Lynch, said the move was meant to increase pressure on Assembly leaders.
The two houses are divided over how many unionized workers must be laid off to close a $1.5 billion gap in the $14 billion budget.


Nancy Grundman and Jay M. Grossman to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Neil Grundman of Harrison, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Nancy Grundman, and Jay Marc Grossman, the son of Dr.
Martin Grossman of Coral Springs, Fla., and Linda Grossman of Plantation, Fla.
Ms.
Grundman, 25 years old, is studying law at Fordham University.
Her fiance, 26, is a law student at Yeshiva University and a sports agent with Athletes and Artists in New York.
They graduated from Union College.


Profits - Dick Snyder's Ugly Word
On Oct. 25, 1972, Richard E. Snyder, then an executive vice president of Simon &amp; Schuster, met two young reporters in a room in the Hay-Adams hotel in Washington.
It was a rainy afternoon and the journalists were depressed; a story they had published that day as part of their investigation of the Watergate break-in contained a conspicuous error.
Undeterred, Mr.
Snyder told Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein he would still pay $55,000 for their proposed book.
The Washington Post reporters had been offered $60,000 by another publisher for what would come out in 1974 as "All the President's Men."


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Damp and Woodsy  Q. I have a country house with a moist area at the edge of a woodland that I would like to landscape.
What flowers and foliage plants can I use here?
Nancy Greene, Philadelphia.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
JEAN RHYS  Life and Work. By Carole Angier. Little, Brown, $35.


Campus Life: Syracuse; 1887 Observatory, All 375 Tons of It, Moves to New Site
With painstaking effort, Syracuse University relocated its landmark observatory last week from the spot it had occupied for more than 100 years.
Construction crews moved the Holden Observatory, built in 1887, 180 feet to the southwest to make room for a five-story addition to the the prestigious Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Brookhaven 115,000
37 Aster Place
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, den, attached 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.
Copiague 158,000
355 West Drive
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, 60 feet of waterfront; taxes $2,300.
Islip Terrace 135,000
3 Rocket Drive
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 27-year-old high ranch; dining room, porch, patio, 2-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Massapequa 183,000
133 Unqua Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $3,700.
Middle Island 113,000
293 Lakeview Drive
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 16-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 0.5-acre; taxes $3,600.
Miller Place 150,000
186 Parkside Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; den with fireplace, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.
OTHER AREAS Hillsdale, N.J. 192,000
221 Raymond Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; 2-zone heat, 1-year homeowner's warranty, large property; taxes $4,037.
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 347,500
59 Butternut Road
3-bedroom, 2 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old split-level; family room, patio, study, fireplace, cathedral ceiling, balcony; taxes $7,378.
West Hartford, Conn. 205,000
1170 Farmington Avenue
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 38-year-old cape cod; family room with wood stove,in-law apartment with separate entrance; taxes $3,190.


FOOTBALL: Notebook; Browns Won't Be Built in a Season
Since Bill Belichick left the Super Bowl champion Giants to become helmsman of the Cleveland Browns, who finished 3-13 last season and resembled Lake Erie's version of the Titanic, he has been up to his elbows in new schemes and personnel.
And after four months on the job in Ohio, he has come to a not-so-startling conclusion: Super Bowl champions are not built in an off season.


Campus Life: Berkeley; A Way to Remove Tenured Teachers For Incompetence
For the first time, tenured professors could be dismissed if found incompetent under a 12-step review process approved this month by the University of California Academic Council.
If the process is endorsed by the university's president, David P. Gardner, it will be the only policy on incompetency of tenured professors in the nation, said Charles Nash, a chemistry professor and chairman of the task force that drew up the proposal.


Renee E. Bytner Engaged to Wed
The engagement of Renee Estelle Bytner to Richard Hyde Gregory, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Gregory, has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent D. Bytner of Albany.
A September wedding is planned.
The prospective bride, 24 years old, graduated from Albany Academy for Girls and Skidmore College.
She was presented at the Debutante Cotillion and Holiday Ball in Palm Beach, Fla.
She is an account executive at Liz Claiborne, the women's clothing company in New York.
Her father and her mother, Jean Bytner, own Bytner Travel in Albany.


Holly Allen Weds William Rexford
Helen Ponder Allen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Richardson Allen Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to William Lang Rexford, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Rexford of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
John Bishop performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Rexford, who is 23 years old and is known as Holly, graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the president of the Dellconn Oil Corporation in Wilmington, Del.


Elgar on the Amazon
GERONTIUS
By James Hamilton-Paterson. 264 pp. New York: Soho Press. $19.95.


Corrections
A picture last Sunday with a report about the marriage of Katherine Brooke Mitchell and Andrew Davis Constan was published in error.
It showed Jane Elizabeth Mitchell, who was married to Dr.
Matthew John Eppley; a report of that wedding appears today on page 40.


Mosque Sees Growth in Its Future
IT was almost time for afternoon prayers at the Masjid-ul-Islah.
Men and boys were assembling in a 44-foot-square room facing a sign with Allah written in gold-on-black Arabic letters.
The 30 boys were in back, learning the rituals of Islam on the green and white carpet.
Some covered their heads with white kufis, similar to Jewish yarmulkes.
One wore a New York Yankees cap.
The atmosphere was reverent but hardly austere.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 30, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
2
1
THE VOICE OF THE NIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.95.) A reprint of a 1980 novel, published under a pseudonym, about a shy boy and his evil best friend.
3
2
DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $5.95.) Dirk Pitt tries to save America from an extremist.
4
6
SECRETS OF THE MORNING, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.95.) A young music student is haunted by the ghosts of her lovers, present and past.
5
1
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Guests from many parts of the world get together in a small Scottish town.
6
5
ONCE A PRINCESS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.95.) A woman in Mississippi is visited by the European prince to whom she was affianced.
7
4
THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $5.99.) Murder and chicanery amid the mansions of California's Orange County.
8 *
6
"G" IS FOR GUMSHOE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.95.) A private eye is on a hit list.
9 *
1
BREATH OF SCANDAL, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) The nightmare a woman suffered in a Texas town and how she gets even years later.
10
37
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
11
2
SECOND CHILD, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) A horrible crime committed 100 years ago comes back to haunt a quiet Maine village.
12
1
MOUNTAIN LAUREL, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.50.) An Army officer's assignment, on the eve of the Civil War, to escort a glamorous singer during her tour of the Colorado gold fields.
13
16
RED DRAGON, by Thomas Harris. (Dell, $5.95.) An F.B.I. agent hunts a serial killer.
14
1
BOOGEYMEN, by Mel Gilden. (Pocket, $4.95.) A new novel about the machinations of the crew of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise.
15
5
HAMMERHEADS, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.95.) The Coast Guard versus the drug cartel.
16 *
9
MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.99.) A woman journalist's coming of age.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
6
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
84
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
3
10
MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff describes the craft of the game, as practiced by three players and a manager.
4 *
15
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
5
5
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
6
46
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) The Arab-Israeli conflict as observed by a New York Times correspondent over the past decade.
7
399
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
8
5
BY WAY OF DECEPTION, by Victor Ostrovsky and Claire Hoy. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An account of the operations of Mossad, the Israeli spy service.
9
39
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
10
1
DAVE BARRY TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Fawcett, $10.) Reflections on the crises of middle age by the syndicated humorist.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
15
THE REVENGE OF THE BABY-SAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
48
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
28
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
10
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
5
5
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Julie Silverstein Engaged to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Silverstein of Minneapolis have made known the October wedding plans for their daughter, Julie Marice Silverstein, to Dr.
Daniel Stuart Groisser, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Victor W. Groisser of West Orange, N.J.
Ms.
Silverstein, 23 years old, graduated from the University of Wisconsin and expects to receive a master's degree in social work from the University of Michigan in December.
Her father, a neurologist, is a medical director at Parkinson's Clinic at Methodist Hospital in St.
Louis Park, Minn.
Her mother, Sybil S. Silverstein, is a medical social worker.


Baseball; With Temper Tantrums in Check, Boyd Discovers a Tranquil Setting
It once seemed as if Dennis (Oil Can) Boyd, a pitcher who soared onto the major league scene with an abundance of talent, was destined to crash and burn because of his turbulent career with the Boston Red Sox.
Instead, Boyd landed and found not a fiery end, but peace and tranquillity with the Montreal Expos.


Campus Life: Maryland; Fraternity Chapter In Hazing Incident Loses Its Charter
The charter of a University of Maryland fraternity has been revoked by its national organization because several members forced new inductees to steal furniture, clothing and other items from other schools, the fraternity's national office said.
The action was taken against the Zeta Beta Tau Epsilon chapter because a "scavenger hunt" conducted by freshmen members violated the fraternity's policies banning pledging and hazing practices, said James E. Greer Jr., the executive vice president of the fraternity, which is based in New York.
The national office banned pledging in 1989 in an effort to end hazing, Mr. Greer said.


Chess
The end of Kasparov's streak shows there are times when even the best of the best fall short.
Some critics are making too much out of Gary Kasparov's recent drop-off in performance.
After an extraordinary record of winning outright or tying for first place in every tournament he has entered in the last 10 years, the world champion took second place in the Linares Tournament, which ended March 14; he tied for third place with Anatoly Karpov in the Verenigde Spaarbank Max Euwe Memorial Tournament in Amsterdam, which ended in mid-May.


The Nation; When Men Get a Case Of the Vapors
THERE is a growing school of thought, among those who study the American political landscape, that men may be biologically unsuited to hold political office and leadership positions.
In the past, it was felt that manly discourse worked in the service of "ambition, business and power," as Hugh Blair, an 18th-century theorist, put it.
And, unlike the feminine chatter in the parlor, manly discourse was thought to be impersonal, unemotional, forthright and reasonable.


Summer in the City: An Adventurer's Guide
With school out for the summer, parents may be looking for amusements for their children in New York City.
Here is a sampling of children's activities, compiled by Dulcie Leimbach, scheduled for the summer.
Dates and times are subject to change.
All Ages
July


Beyond the Usual Catch: Shark or Skate
THERE is more to fish than swordfish, tuna, salmon and flounder.
But for some cooks, venturing beyond these common varieties is a daunting prospect.
Trying a new kind of fish, like trying to cook a vegetable that is not part of the normal repertory, takes confidence.
Some understanding of the texture of fish and a familiarity with the timing required when cooking it are necessary.


Michaela Harel, A Pianist, Is Wed
Michaela Harel, a concert pianist, and Douglas Bruce McLagan, a record producer, were married last evening at Temple Emanu-El in New York by Rabbi David M. Posner.
The bride is the daughter of Laura Harel of New York and the late Dr.
Aron Harel.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Bruce McLagan of Hinsdale, Ill.
The bride studied at the Juilliard School, graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in music from the University of Southern California.
She is keeping her name.
Her mother teaches French at the Bronx High School of Science.
Her father was a psychiatrist.


The Cultivated Gardener; Oriental Vegetables for Eating This Fall
I don't know about you, but my first flush of garden passion is over, and it's not even July.
I know, there is no perfect garden.
But this isn't some little thing.
This is slugs eating all the Duet dahlias.
This is a potato patch so emaciated, Giacommetti might have planted it. (I misjudged the shade a certain tree would cast, and half of my garden is tall and skinny.)
Yet I soldier on, reminding myself of the good things: crunchy snap peas before the trellis fell down, pungent arugula before it bolted in the heat, lovely pale purple poppies grown, without a hitch, from seed sown in February.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate


This Week: A Beetle Juice
Here's a homemade Japanese beetle repellent that Margaret O'Malley of Wayne, Pa., swears by:
Collect a handful of Japanese beetles, add to half a cup of water with a drop of dish detergent; grind up in a blender.
Pour into a garden sprayer, add about a quart of water, apply to plants.
"It works wonderfully," Mrs.
O'Malley says.
"Beetles disappear for the remainder of the season."


15-Year-Old Wounded in Shooting After Traffic Accident in Bronx
Fifteen-year-old Manuel Monroe was in the passenger seat next to his stepfather in a double-parked car in the Bronx on Friday night when a van backed into it, knocking its bumper off, the police and witnesses said yesterday.
The two drivers got out and exchanged a few words, and the van driver agreed to give the stepfather $25 for damages.
But instead of reaching for the money when he got back into his van, the driver pulled out a gun, leaned out the window, fired five times and roared off.
The youth was left with a gunshot wound to the head.


Store Move Is Feared
THE recent announcement that Abraham &amp; Straus will open a new store in the Roosevelt Field shopping mall next year is sending shock waves through Hempstead Village, where officials and residents fear that the new store means that A. &amp; S.  will close its store on Fulton Avenue.
A. &amp; S. said it had no immediate plans to move.
But Mayor James A. Garner said it was his understanding that the store had begun talks to sell its site.


Device to Track Stolen Cars Raises Questions
ON a Tuesday night late last year, John Natoli of Belleville parked his 1990 Jeep Cherokee on the street in front of his house.
By the next morning, the vehicle was gone.
Mr.
Natoli reported the theft to the Belleville police.
Moments later, radio antennas scattered throughout the state activated a small transmitter hidden in Mr.
Natoli's vehicle.


Goodwill Bid Not Realistic
To the Sports Editor:
An item in "Sports People" (The Times, June 4) mentions the New York City Sports Commission's effort to bid on the 1998 Goodwill Games.


Commercial Property: Downtown Hotels; Bond, Vista, Marriott -- Now, Comes the Millenium
ONE HUNDRED and thirty years passed between the opening of the Bond Hotel on Chambers Street in 1851 and that of the next downtown hotel, the Vista International at the World Trade Center.
Ten years passed between the opening of the Vista and that of the Marriott Financial Center on West Street, between Albany and Carlisle Streets, last January.


Theater's Godfather Reaches Entr'acte
It tells you something about Lloyd Richards that when asked to assess his career in the American theater, one that spans nearly half a century, he tells a story about
other
people.
"John Guare once said to me, 'I have needs as a playwright,' " says Mr.
Richards.
" 'I need a place where I can work, but I also need to have my picture in the newspapers.' What he was saying was that he wanted to be a playwright and to be acknowledged as a playwright. He wanted a life in the theater."


Mutual Funds; A Sparkling Half for Real Estate
In the first half of this year, the stock market has had good news for nearly all investors, with the average stock fund gaining 14.3 percent.
The small-stock rally picked up steam as the group rose 23.7 percent through June 27, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.
Among specialty funds, which invest in narrow market sectors, the financial-services group led with a 29.0 percent gain, and the health-and-biotechnology group, which rose 27.4 percent, was close behind.


Spices for a Budget Stew: Aspirins and Catnaps
City Hall was again a tableau of chanting, hand-shaking, and sign waving by protesters yesterday as the Dinkins administration and the New York City Council struggled to adopt a city budget for the fiscal year that starts tomorrow.
Those affected by that budget -- public school children, city agency commissioners, environmentalists, gay rights and housing rights advocates -- swarmed around City Hall yesterday as they have in recent weeks.
But as the negotiating clock ticked closer to the deadline of 12:01 A.M. tomorrow, the protests gained a new sense of urgency and in some cases were tinged with bitterness.


Gooden and Blue: Color Is Irrelevant
To the Sports Editor:
While John Bury (Mailbox, June 16,) finds "tacit racism" in the comparison of Yankee draft choice Brien Taylor to Dwight Gooden and Vida Blue -- a comparison by which Bury "knew that he was black" -- I read the same comparison and thought only that Taylor must be a great prospect.
Seeing his photograph was the first time I knew that he was black.
I wonder, who's the tacit racist?  GEORGE HELD New York


Mouse Whiskers and the Potter's Art
Wielding brushes made of mouse whiskers dipped in pots of brilliant pigments, majolica artisans emblazoned plates, jars and jugs with exquisitely detailed mythological and historical scenes.
Examples of these vessels are exhibited along with other pieces of tin-glazed earthenware embellished with portraits and emblems in "The Art of the Italian Renaissance Potter," at the J. Paul Getty Museum, through 1991.
Compared to "Majolica," the 1989 exhibition of 450 pieces at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Getty's presentation of five major pieces is tiny but choice.
The basic types of majolica decoration are represented in the show and supplemented in nearby galleries, where an additional 22 pieces are on permanent display.
Most of the museum's majolica holdings were acquired in 1984 through the purchase of a collection assembled by Rainer Zietz, a German dealer based in London.


Sports of The Times; Birthday Greetings At Ringside
MIKE TYSON is 25 years old today, prime time for a fighter, but he seems stalled in some twilight age.
He isn't getting better, or prettier, or, most important, scarier.
Otherwise, Happy Birthday, Mike.
Tyson's 12-round decision over Razor Ruddock on Friday night was hardly vintage Tyson.
He has forgotten how to bob and weave, how to fight defensively out of a peek-a-boo.
He rarely throws combinations of punches in those deadly flurries that drove opponents stumbling into the ropes.
There were no big knockdown punches.


LEGISLATORS REACH PACT WITH CUOMO ON RESTORING CUTS


Political Talk
Giuliani Maneuverings
Rudolph W. Giuliani, who prematurely announced his 1993 mayoral candidacy to a gossip columnist at a cocktail party and then backtracked on his statement last week, is nevertheless laying the groundwork for a City Hall run by taking sides in an unusual struggle for control of the comatose Brooklyn Republican organization.


Ms. Gittis Weds David Neil Katz
Marjorie Anne Gittis, a daughter of Sondra Gittis of Philadelphia and Howard Gittis of New York, was married last evening in Philadelphia to David Neil Katz, the son of Barbara Katz of Lafayette Hill, Pa., and Joel Katz of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Allan Fuchs officiated at the Rittenhouse Hotel.
Mrs.
Katz, 24 years old, teaches the second grade at the Oak Lane Day School in Blue Bell, Pa.
She graduated from Boston University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in education from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a vice chairman of MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Holdings and of its subsidiary the Revlon Group in New York.
Her mother is on the staff of Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania.


Topics of The Times; Speaker Miller's Secret Fund
New York State's Assembly Speaker, Mel Miller, facing Federal mail fraud charges stemming from his work as a private attorney, has set up a special fund to raise money for his defense.
That's unobjectionable.
But his refusal to disclose the fund's contributions and expenditures is quite another matter.
Mr.
Miller has a big say in the budget and other policy decisions.
The public has a stake in knowing who's funneling money to him, and how much.
That's true even though the checks are made out to a legal defense fund instead of a campaign committee.


Ted and Joe, 1941: June 30
Neither Ted Williams nor Joe Dimaggio played today.
Both teams had the day off.  *4&gt;No game


The World Over, Women's Progress Is Uneven; Inequality at the U.N.
To the Editor:
You report June 16 on "The World's Women 1970-90," a United Nations publication, described as "the first global attempt to measure women's place in society statistically," and which concludes that sex discrimination remains pervasive throughout the world.
You quote Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar's statement that despite regional gains by women, "the majority still lag far behind men in power, wealth and opportunity."


FASTBALLS FROM THE EDGE
I enjoyed Bruce Buschel's article about America's greatest (and, at times, strangest) pitcher, Roger Clemens of the Boston Red Sox ("Fastballs From the Edge," June 2.) As Buschel says, Clemens backs his 97 m.p.h. fastball with 100 percent attitude, a truly vicious combination.
Although, at times, Clemens's emotions appear to get the better of him, his statistics prove otherwise.
In Boston, they say, if he pitches, the Red Sox will win!
PETER MOST
Los Angeles


Volcano's Eruption in Philippines May Counteract Global Warming
A global warming trend that began in the 1980's and has continued into 1991 could be offset over the next few years by atmospheric cooling caused by the eruption this month of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines, scientists say.
The major factor at work in the climatic effect is not the familiar dust cloud, but a chemical reaction.
Volcanic eruptions spew out vast quantities of sulfur dioxide gas that later combine with water to form tiny supercooled droplets.


Leslie A. Smith Weds James C. Hunter
Leslie Ann Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Smith of McLean, Va., was married yesterday in McLean to James Colbath Hunter, the son of Mrs.
Kaiser Marston of Charlottesville, Va., and David K. Hunter of Washington Crossing, Pa.
The Rev.
Douglas W. McCaleb performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
The bride, 27 years old, is the director of marketing for Washington Technology, a biweekly business newspaper published by her mother, Esther Smith, in Tyson's Corner, Va.
She graduated from the University of Virginia, as did her husband.
Her father, who retired last year as a major general in the Army, was the director of operations for the Army and the director of military support for the Defense Department.
He is the director of emergency response for the Science Applications International Corporation, a Government contractor in McLean.


Jane Mitchell and Matthew Eppley Are Married
Jane Elizabeth Mitchell, a daughter of Mrs.
Tilton Smith Mitchell of Tunkhannock, Pa., and the late Mr.
Mitchell, was married in Tunkhannock on June 22 to Dr.
Matthew John Eppley, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Eppley of Elyria, Ohio.
The Rev.
William Reid officiated at the First United Methodist Church.
Both graduated from Swarthmore College.
Mrs.
Eppley, 26 years old, is the director of operations for the Corporate Capital Leasing Group in West Chester, Pa.
Her mother heads Tilton Mitchell Stone, a building products company founded by her husband.


Miss Young Weds Jeffrey Knetsch
Kathryn Margaret Young, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Young of London and Cutchogue, L.I., was married yesterday in Paoli, Pa., to Jeffrey Michael Knetsch, a son of Jack L. Knetsch of North Vancouver, British Columbia, and the late Marilyn B. Knetsch.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Richard A. Norris at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.
The bride, 29 years old and a graduate of William Smith College, is an administrative assistant at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.
Her father is the chairman and managing director in London of Union Texas Petroleum Ltd., an oil exploration concern in Houston.
The bridegroom, 34, is an associate in the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
A graduate of the University of Virginia, he received a law degree from the University of Southern California.
His father is a professor of economics at Simon Fraser University in Burnaby, British Columbia.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Arriving in 2 1/2 Minutes AS cars wait in line revving their engines as if it's the start of the Indianapolis 500, Michelle Clark, a wisp of a 14-year-old, stands before them.
"You," she daintily points to a car.
Her hand bends towards her in more of a question than a command but the car whizzes past and she points to another.
It's another day on the Shelter Island South Ferry and another start to a Clark ferry career.
For almost 200 years the Clarks of Shelter Island have owned and operated the South Ferry .
They also once owned the North Ferry, which runs to and from Greenport, but that is in different hands now.


Studying Business? Why Stick to Just One Continent?
Marieke Bax, a 30-year-old Dutch M.B.A. student, said it would have been foolish to attend a Dutch business school when there are institutions like Insead nestled here in a famous forest 40 miles south of Paris.
"I'm Dutch so I didn't want to go to a Dutch business school," she said.
"I wanted to go to a school with an international flavor."


Barbara Keating, Accountant, Wed
Barbara Anne Keating and Lieut.
John William Alter 3d of the Navy were married yesterday at St.
John's Roman Catholic Church in Darien, Conn., by the Rev.
Henry A. Albeke.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kevin S. Keating of Darien.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alter Jr. of Potomac, Md.
The bride and bridegroom, 23 years old, graduated cum laude from Villanova University in 1989.
She is an accountant with Kaiser, Scherer &amp; Schlegel in Washington.
Her father is an assistant treasurer at Pfizer in New York.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
The Universal Passion
Octavio Paz, winner of the 1990 Nobel Prize in Literature, reflects in his acceptance speech on the elusive meanings and broad influence of the concept of modernity.
This is from "In Search of the Present" (Harvest/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, paper).


Garden Centers Breed Floral Conformity
To the Editor:
If Caroline Seebohm takes offense at the similarity of flowers in suburban yards in "Gardeners of America, Unite!" (Op-Ed, June 11), she's wrong to blame the gardeners or even mail-order catalogue nurseries.


Europeans Lift South Africa Sports Boycott
Leaders of the European Community said today that member countries would lift their sports boycott of South Africa because "important progress" has been made in abolishing apartheid.
The British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said contacts would be resumed with South Africans in sports that had been desegregated.
Boycotts imposed by countries in the 1970's and 1980's have barred South Africans from competing in international sports events, including the Olympic Games.


Making a Difference; Adding Muscle to Play Europe's Retailing Game
Since becoming chairman of Carrefour, a French supermarket chain, a year ago, Michel Bon has shown himself to be an expert at Europe's new retailing rules.
As food-processing companies like Unilever and BSN grow, Mr.
Bon has increased Carrefour's bulk to give it more leverage with its suppliers.
Last week, Mr.
Bon announced an $800 million deal in which Carrefour acquired control of Euromarche, a big competitor.
This transforms Carrefour into France's largest food retailer, with revenues of more than 100 billion francs, or about $16.6 billion.
"For us what counts is turnover," Mr.
Bon, 47, said.
"When the turnover is there, the margin is there."


Julia Fiske and D. J. Hogan Jr. to Wed
September wedding plans for Julia Woodruff Fiske and David James Hogan Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hogan of Westport, Conn., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Bogardus Fiske of Greens Farms, Conn.
Miss Fiske, 22 years old, graduated in May from Clark University.
Her father, formerly the education editor of The New York Times is a Montgomery Fellow in residence at Dartmouth College.
He is the author of the "Fiske Guide to Colleges."


More Funds Needed for Both Nursing Homes and Home Care; A Slur on Nurses
To the Editor:
I am a registered nurse who has worked in nursing homes more than 15 years.
I take exception to one aspect in particular of "The Nursing Home Rip-Off," the Op-Ed article by Mary Johnson.


Beside the Sea


NEARING THE BUDGET WALL: Political Memo; New York City Council Revises Power Balance
The world at City Hall has turned upside down.
The New York City Council has put the Mayor on the defensive in their battle of the budget, usurped his presumptive right to set the agenda, pinched his managerial prerogatives and forced him to defend the city agencies that are the heart of his power.


Beth Merold and Philip Gerson, Lawyers, Married
Beth Warren Merold, a lawyer for the Boston publisher Little, Brown &amp; Company, and Philip Bennett Gerson, a lawyer with the firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin in New York, were married yesterday in Houghton Memorial Chapel at Wellesley College.
The Rev.
Lincoln Holmes, a Unitarian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony.
Mrs.
Gerson, a Wellesley graduate, has a law degree from the Boston University School of Law, as does her husband.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry W. Merold of Phoenix.
Her father, now retired, was a manager of administration for Honeywell Inc. in Phoenix.


Nina Phillips and Kai Hedbabny Wed
Nina Phillips, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren H. Phillips of Bridgehampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Kai Michael Hedbabny, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Klaus Hedbabny of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Harris Riordan-Hendlin, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the bride's parents' home.
The bride, who is keeping her name, works in New York as the East Coast director of creative development for Interscope Communications, a Los Angeles film production company.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father is chairman of Dow Jones &amp; Company.
Her mother, Barbara Phillips, is a writer.


Marquetry Wins Gold Cup in an Upset
Bobby Frankel knows the Hollywood Park surface as well as anyone.
He has won more races here than any trainer except Charlie Whittingham.
Frankel, who also reads the newspapers, knew that Chris McCarron wasn't about to set the pace in today's $1 million Hollywood Gold Cup with Farma Way.
Frankel told jockey David Flores to take Marquetry, a 27-1 shot, to the front, hoping the speed-biased main track would help his horse.
He was right.


Safeguarding a Company's Reputation
To the Editor:
"Realizing the Benefits of a Good Name" (Forum, June 16) proposes a new corporate position, a chief reputation officer who would report either to the chief executive or to the board.
Trouble is, there's already a chief reputation officer -- the chief executive.
If a chief executive needs input before making a decision affecting the company's reputation, presumably he can get good advice from the chief communicator of the company.


Lectures Are Not The Remedy
To the Editor:
What ails classical music is new music (its total aural alienation of audiences, young and old) and early music (its trendy and calculated alienation of mass audiences).


SOVIET REFORMISTS WEIGH BREAKAWAY
Momentum for forming a nationwide political movement to oppose the Communist Party appeared to grow today as a senior adviser and confidante to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said that party hard-liners had been considering whether to investigate him and possibly purge him from the party.
"I reserve the right to make the necessary decision," said the adviser, Aleksandr Yakovlev, referring to his right to quit in answer to the party hard-liners, who have been alarmed by reports that Mr.
Yakovlev has been privately encouraging the formation of a full-fledged anti-Communist political opposition.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
PARIS UNDERGROUND
By Tamara Hovey. Illustrated. 90 pp. New York: Orchard Books. $14.95. (Ages 8-11)


Relocated


Ruling Irish Party Hit Hard in Local Voting
Prime Minister Charles J. Haughey's party has suffered a rebuff in local elections, dropping nine percentage points below its standing six years ago, preliminary returns indicated today.
Mr.
Haughey's Fianna Fail party, long the dominant party in Ireland, garnered 37 percent of the vote in local government elections on Thursday, down from 46 percent in 1985.


Travel Advisory; Concert Series At Tuscan Villas
For music lovers traveling through Tuscany, a concert series titled "Encounters in the Land of Siena" promises an opportunity to hear chamber music in an outdoor-salon atmosphere.
The concerts, July 20, 21, 24, 27 and 30 and Aug. 3, will take place in the courtyards of notable villas.
Among them are the Palazzo Piccolomini in the city of Pienza; the rose-colored medieval castle at La Foce, and the two grand farmhouses known as the Chiarentana and the Fattoria dell'Amorosa.


Modern Concerns Intrude on Quaint Bellport
FOR as far back as many Bellport residents can remember, the tiny waterfront village has remained the same.
Aong Bellport Lane, where most of the homes are more than 100 years old, is white with green shutters, and has a front porch and a white picket fence.
A sleepy village all winter long, Bellport becomes a walking, biking and boating community in the summer as the population soars with seasonal guests.
Although no longer the popular vacation community that it was in the early 1900's, Bellport has continued to have a special appeal for artists.
In recent years it has also become a summer residence for a growing number of New Yorkers in the fashion industry, particularly models, and, more recently, photographers.


Hospital's Staff Eases Fear That Follows Pain
LAURIE FREMAINT has memories of being hospitalized as a child.
"I remember a very stern nurse who wouldn't give me a pillow," Mrs.
Fremaint said.
"I was in the hospital to have my tonsils out."
Her son, Carlos, 10, will very likely have different memories of his stay at the Westchester County Medical Center here.
Chances are, he will recall a friendly pediatric staff concerned about his emotional needs as well as his medical ones.


120 Indonesians Are Missing In a Shipwreck Off Malaysia
Rescue workers searched the Straits of Malacca today for more than 120 Indonesians feared dead after two ships collided on Wednesday night, news reports said.
Most of the missing were illegal immigrants who had been deported from Malaysia.
Thirteen survivors were found clinging to wreckage.
An Indonesian trawler had collided with an unidentified ship near Batu Pahat, 150 miles southwest of Kuala Lumpur.


Visions of Truth, Smuggled Out of Hell
Not many exhibitions in recent memory have told a more moving story than "Seeing Through 'Paradise': Artists and the Terezin Concentration Camp," at the Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street, in lower Manhattan (through Aug. 2).
The show includes about 100 works by 17 artists who, as Nazi prisoners, were forced to churn out propagandistic images depicting the town of Terezin in northern Bohemia, where they were held, as a model Jewish ghetto.
Surreptitiously they also used the art materials supplied to them to record the actual horrors of life there, horrors that the Nazis wanted to conceal from the outside world at all costs.
And so, Joseph Spier, a Dutch prisoner, drew a coffeehouse, a theater, a hospital garden and other sites for a propaganda album that the Nazis published.
His touristic images seem all the more convincing for being so matter-of-fact, and only the existence of alternative drawings -- by Spier himself and also by artists like Leo Haas, Helga Weissova Hoskova, Fritz Taussig, known as Fritta, Karel Fleischmann and Frantisek Petr Kien -- reveals just how elaborate was the Nazi hoax.


Making a Difference; A Bank With Roots Deep in the South
When John G. Medlin Jr., chairman of the Wachovia Corporation, boasts of making money the old-fashioned way, he means it.
One of the South's most venerable banks, it is also one of the nation's most profitable, because of a conservative strategy of prudent lending and rational growth.
In keeping with that strategy, Wachovia announced last week that it was acquiring the South Carolina National Corporation in a $835 million stock swap.
This will give Wachovia, which has operations in Georgia and North Carolina, a new base in South Carolina and a strong presence throughout the Southeast.
The combined company will be the nation's 18th largest bank, with assets of nearly $33 billion.


Tech Notes; Conquering the Paper Peak
Its truck drivers are still subject to highway speed limits, but Consolidated Freightways Inc. has put its paperwork into warp drive.
It is using optical scanning to covert bills of lading and delivery receipts into digital images that can be shipped to customers in minutes rather than days.
Each of the 75,000 shipments Consolidated handles daily generates a batch of documents that have to be collected, filed and, until recently, pulled out of filing cabinets when needed.
Under the new system, documents from the company's 950 terminals are collected at 48 regional centers.
Once there, they are fed into scanning machines.


More Schools Being Run by Local Panels
Although no other school system in America has gone as far as Chicago's in turning over control of schools to local committees, more and more urban districts are seeking to let schools manage themselves.
New York City, Dade County, Fla., which includes Miami, Rochester, Los Angeles and Denver are among the growing number of districts that have in the last three years embraced school-based management.
And in the only statewide effort to date, Kentucky officials approved legislation last year forcing the state's 176 school districts to use the plan in at least one school by July 1.


Dryfoos Is Facing New Questions On Personal Use of Donated Money
Councilman Robert J. Dryfoos of Manhattan, who has become the target of a Federal grand jury investigation, faces eviction from his expensive office suite, garnishment of his official salary and new questions about using publicly raised money for personal purposes.
Records indicate that Mr.
Dryfoos tapped an unusual $170,000 fund that he set up to defray the costs of his expanded "councilmanic duties" to pay more than $10,000 in overdue maintenance charges for his co-op apartment on the East Side.


Sculptures That Announce Themselves With a Blaze of Light
MUSEUMS customarily highlight aspects of their permanent collections in addition to staging shows drawn from outside sources.
But now that poverty is sweeping the scene, such "excerpt" shows are growing more numerous.
This may not do much for the box office, but it should certainly separate the men from the boys -- that is to say, the visitors interested in art from those merely anxious to keep on top of what's new.


The Need to Record Living Wills
Re: "Living Wills: Difficult Challenges," June 9:
Reverence for life can cause one to seek its prolongation at any emotional or financial cost or, conversely, to accept its natural limits and termination.


Good News About Native Dogwoods
THE dogwood has been magnificent this year.
Especially beautiful was the May-blooming native dogwood, which belongs to the Northeastern woodlands, where it is an understory tree.
Woodlands are often polka dotted with the white of its magnificent splendor.
Another distinction is its horizontal branching, which makes the tree look as though it is growing in layers.
Gaining in popularity is the kousa dogwood, which has just finished blooming.
Unlike the native species (Cornus florida), which blooms before the leaves come out, the kousa dogwood blooms in June, and the somewhat larger flowers sit on top of the foliage.
The kousa's popularity is for good reason.


Keen Observation Pays Off for Author
MELPOMENE GILMAN is not an ordinary woman.
She is a seductive beauty, alternatively charming and difficult, sensitive and fierce.
She is also a minister, married for the third time to James, an art historian, who has his own mixed palette of emotional conflicts and moods.


New Careers: Up the Down Staircase
Recently I was in Philadelphia to see Meredith Monk's "Atlas." This visionary opera won't be coming to impoverished, conservative New York despite engagements all over the country and in Europe, but that's another sad story for another time.
In the cast was a bass named Wilbur Pauley.
Mr.
Pauley crops up in the most unlikely variety of places these days, from the New York City Opera to Carnegie Hall, singing the title role in excerpts from Mussorgsky's "Boris Godunov," to the most exotic arenas of downtown performance art.
The bold vagaries of his career set me to thinking.
He first appeared in New York 10 years ago, singing early music, and soon graduated to big-hall "Messiahs" and Bach Passions.
His reviews, mostly friendly, noted his big booming voice, his musicality and his enormous potential despite a need for further refinement.


Campus Life: Washington; Medical Students Get a View of Life As Rural Doctors
Fifty-four medical students at the University of Washington are taking a break from book work this summer to get a taste of life as country doctors.
The students are participating in the university's Rural and Underserved Opportunities Program, which sends students to work with physicians primarily in small rural communities after their first year of medical school.


The Executive Life; Dirty Shirts at the 6:18, Clean Collars Tonight
It's 6:18 on a Tuesday morning, and the Greenwich, Conn., train station is bustling.
Cars drop off sleepy-eyed commuters, who dash to the newsstand, coins and monogrammed briefcases in hand, before heading to the Manhattan-bound platform.
Some commuters, however, carry something more.
James Carrier, a salesman with Reuters Information Services, races in with an armful of crumpled shirts.
"No starch," he blurts to an attendant at the blue-and-white booth just inside the station's entrance.
"See you tonight."


Sports People: PRO HOCKEY; Blues Sign Oates And Raise Prices
The St.
Louis Blues yesterday signed second-team All-Star center ADAM OATES to a two-year contract extension through the 1994-95 National Hockey League season.
Oates was third in the league in scoring last season with 115 points despite missing 19 games with a pulled abdominal muscle.
He ranked second to WAYNE GRETZKY in assists, with 90, and points per game, 1.89.


The Nation; Is the Vote, Too, Wasted On Youth?
WHEN 18-, 19- and 20-year-olds won the right to vote 20 years ago today, proponents heralded the ratification of the 26th Amendment as a sure remedy for the alienation of the nation's youth.
With a direct role in the political process, they reasoned, young people would no longer feel disconnected.
"We will gain a group of enthusiastic, sensitive, idealistic and vigorous new voters," Senator Edward M. Kennedy said at the time.


Results Plus
GOLF Couples Leads by 1


Bachauer Competition Names Four Winners
The Gina Bachauer International Piano Competition has announced its 1991 winners.
They are Avner Arad, age 24, from Haifa, Israel; Adrian Oetiker, 23, from St.
Gallen, Switzerland; Mikhail Yanovitsky, 26, of Leningrad, and Myra Choi, 14, from Northridge, Calif.
Mr.
Arad and Mr.
Oetiker are each to receive $9,800 in full scholarships to the Juilliard School for the 1991-92 academic year, with additional stipends for living expenses.
Mr.
Yanovitsky is to receive a full scholarship, and Ms.
Choi, a student in the pre-college division, receives $3,800 covering that division's full tuition.


Ms. Donaldson Has Wedding
Kimberly Eames Donaldson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Donaldson of New York, was married in Ridgefield, Conn., yesterday to John Eric Plym Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Plym of Vero Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
John R. Gilchrist performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Donaldson-Plym, 24 years old, graduated from Yale University.
She is an art director at Grey Advertising in New York.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the New York Stock Exchange.


THE KUWAITI INFERNO
By ironic coincidence, Sebastiao Salgado's superb photo essay "The Kuwaiti Inferno" (June 9) appeared the day before the Operation Welcome Home parade in New York City.
The Salgado photos are indeed classics and certainly photography at its best.
But more than that, they are a reminder that, long after the ticker tape has been swept from city streets, we shall be dealing with the consequences of a victory which is far from that for the environment.
DAVID H. WOOD
Nantucket Island, Mass.


Campus Life: UMass; On-Campus Cable: Movies, Weather And Study Skills
When work began two years ago to install a modern telecommunications system at the Amherst campus of the University of Massachusetts, Joseph A. Zannini, executive director of the school's housing services office, spent a few extra pennies per foot to couple cable television wires with the miles of telephone lines that were pulled through the school's 41 residence halls.
Today, Mr.
Zannini's vision of an on-campus cable network, bringing students educational and informative programming, is a reality.
Students can tune in everything from a bulletin board listing dining hall menus, corporate recuiting sessions and coming events at the fine arts center, to a video clip on which the campus police and the county District Attorney explain the legal consequences of a drunken-driving arrest.


Joanne Itskovitz Is Wed To Douglas Dalton Reed
Joanne Itskovitz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold D. Itskovitz of Mount Kisco, N.Y., was married yesterday to Douglas Dalton Reed, the son of Mrs.
William Avery of Toronto and Douglas N. Reed of Eden, N.Y.
Rabbi Albert Sturmer and the Rev.
Melvin Hawthorne, the chaplain at the Church Center of the United Nations, officiated at the Lyndhurst estate in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 31 years old, is a product manager at Dialog Information Services in Palo Alto, Calif.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
The bridegroom, 28, graduated from Princeton University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. degree from Stanford University.
In July, he is to join the Syntex Corporation, a pharmaceutical company in Palo Alto, as a financial analyst.


Men's Undershirts: Out From Under, Into the Sunshine of Prints and Colors
Not long ago, a man could rely on being banished from his own dinner table if he was not wearing a shirt over his undershirt.
These days men are wearing jackets over undershirts, instead of shirts, even to fancy restaurants.
And sometimes undershirts are being marched right into the office, especially on getaway Fridays.
"This is a street fashion that caught on for its comfort and ease of care," said Chip Tolbert, a spokesman for the Men's Fashion Association, a trade group.
He was at his desk wearing a white T-shirt under his suit jacket.
He says that the man who wears a T-shirt to work is the same man who might wear a shirt buttoned to the neck but without a tie or, in winter, a turtleneck.


RECORD BRIEFS
Stevie Wonder: 'Music From the Movie "Jungle Fever" '
Motown 6291; CD and cassette.


SMALL COMPROMISE ON CITY TAX PLAN
The Dinkins administration and the New York City Council took the first halting steps yesterday toward a budget compromise on increased taxes as both sides worked against a deadline of 12:01 A.M. tomorrow for the adoption of a recession-scarred city budget.
The movement came on a day of frenzied maneuvering at City Hall that featured angry demonstrations outside and nonstop meetings and lobbying inside, aimed at reversing the dismissals of thousands of city workers last week and searing cuts in basic city services.


The Budget Battles
NEW YORK  New York City: Cards were still held close to the vest as tomorrow's 12:01 A.M. deadline neared.
The Dinkins administration and City Council leaders groped toward a compromise.
But each side, as well as the municipal unions, seemed to hold back from making it clear how much they would give.


A Milestone in the Fight for Gay Rights: A Quiet Suburban Life
The man seeking to become the first openly gay member of the California Congressional delegation lives in a suburban tract house here, not in a restored Victorian in San Francisco's Castro district or a funky bungalow in West Hollywood.
Like suburbanites everywhere, he worries about his mortgage payments, chats with the neighbors about their roses, enjoys a weekend barbecue and goes to the city less often than he intended when he traded the urban bustle for the proverbial picket fence.


Mary Walsh Wed To Keith Connors
Mary Catherine Walsh, a daughter of Thomas J. Walsh of Cranford, N.J., and the late Susan Bermingham Walsh, was married yesterday in Cranford to Keith Joseph Connors, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Connors of Plandome, L.I.
The Rev.
Warren Hall and the Rev.
John H. Joyce, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 27 years old, is a technical sales consultant to the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company in Newark.
A graduate of Rutgers University, she is studying for a master's degree in telecommunications management at Polytechnic University, Hawthorne, N.Y.
Her father, who is retired, was a marketing representative for International Business Machines in Princeton, N.J.


Iraq's Kurds Reject Autonomy Deal As Allied Plan Stirs Some Confidence
Kurdish leaders in northern Iraq said today that they had rejected an autonomy deal offered by Baghdad and would demand the renegotiation of critical points, raising new uncertainty about the fate of their followers as American and allied protection is reduced in Iraq.
The Kurdish quest for greater autonomy, however, apparently reflects confidence that the proposed creation of an allied force in neighboring Turkey will force President Saddam Hussein into new concessions, according to members of the exiled Iraqi opposition alliance meeting in Damascus, Syria.


Style Makers; Camella Ehlke, Clothing Designer
At 555 Soul, a small Lower East Side store, young people are creating fashions and accessories that reflect downtown night life.
The store, at 151 Ludlow Street, near Houston Street, offers the work of artists, designers and musicians of various racial, ethnic, social and economic backgrounds.
They borrow from African, California surf, urban rap and 60's psychedelic styles.


Sports People: BASKETBALL; Reeves Wants Hearing
KHALID REEVES'S lawyer said Friday that the basketball player would reject a second settlement offer by the University of Arizona and demand completion of a code-of-conduct hearing concerning his possible suspension.
Reeves, a freshman guard last season for the nationally ranked Wildcats, has been accused by a 23-year-old female student of rape early this year.
Law enforcement officials declined to prosecute him after a Tucson police investigation, but the dean of students' office conducted its own inquiry and recommended that Reeves be suspended for a year for violating the student code of conduct.


Wraps and Twists To Adorn the Hair
The car top is down, the bicycle is flying.
In summer, keeping wisps of hair out of one's eyes is a goal.
And if function can be achieved fashionably, so much the better.
Thousands of hair ornaments -- wraps, bows, bands, clips, clamps, twists, ties, snoods and sticks -- are on display at Block Pharmacy, 1282 Third Avenue (74th Street).
Half of the store's 6,200 square feet is given over to hair accessories.


Gregory Donat Weds Suzanne Cregan
Suzanne Elizabeth Cregan, a New York architect, and Gregory Stephen Donat, a screen writer, were married last evening at the Beekman Tower in New York.
Rabbi Charles Lippman and the Rev.
Bonnie Anne Perry, an Episcopal priest, performed the interfaith ceremony.
Mrs.
Donat, 30 years old, is a graduate of Smith College and received a master's degree in architecture from Carnegie-Mellon University.
She works for Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Cregan of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
Her father is the vice president of A. Willard Ivers Inc., a shipping brokerage in New York.


Ripken and Milligan Spend Summer Day on (Short) Porch
Cal Ripken and Randy Milligan took advantage of the short porch in left field for home runs today, and Roy Smith won his first game since June 7 as the Baltimore Orioles beat the Boston Red Sox, 7-3.
Smith (4-1) got relief help from Kevin Hickey, Mark Williamson and Mike Flanagan as Baltimore won for the sixth time in eight games.


Beyond the Usual Catch: Shark or Skate
THERE is more to fish than swordfish, tuna, salmon and flounder.
But for some cooks, venturing beyond these common varieties is a daunting prospect.
Trying a new kind of fish, like trying to cook a vegetable that is not part of the normal repertory, takes confidence.
Some understanding of the texture of fish and a familiarity with the timing required when cooking it are necessary.


Stalin's Englishmen
THE CAMBRIDGE SPIES
The Untold Story of Maclean, Philby, and Burgess in America.
By Verne W. Newton.
Illustrated. 448 pp.
New York: Madison Books. $24.95.


Different Words, But Bias the Same
To the Sports Editor:
To put Joseph C. Smith's letter (Mailbox, June 16) into its proper perspective, one only has to substitute the words "white" for "straight" and "black" for "gay." We then read: "Most coaches of white programs let their potential recruits know that their team does not tolerate blacks. This may seem like black bias to Lipsyte, but it is necessary information to the white player."


Holiday at Caramoor Focuses on Show Tunes
TO many Americans, Independence Day means fireworks, but the Caramoor Festival prefers to say it with music, as in Thursday's Fourth of July "Broadway Celebration." Robert Fisher will be the guest conductor of the Orchestra of St.
Luke's, while Rebecca Luker, Kim Criswell and Kevin Anderson sing a variety of favorites from "West Side Story." "Guys and Dolls," "Babes in Arms" and lots more.
Friday at 9 P.M., it is back to the classics in Katonah, as Caramoor's resident Cassatt String Quartet plays Mozart, Mendelssohn and Brahms, while next Sunday at 5:30 P.M., the Tokyo String Quartet arrives with Mozart, Schumann and the unfairly neglected Fourth Quartet of Alexander von Zemlinsky.


Albany Leaders Trying to Count Prospective Votes on Gay Rights
Assembly leaders are counting votes to determine whether this could be the year that they pass a comprehensive gay-rights bill to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
Even if it is approved in the Assembly, which is controlled by the Democrats, the bill faces a difficult road in the State Senate, where the Republicans hold a majority.
But gay-rights supporters say they believe that passage in the Assembly would send a powerful message to the Senate and to gay and lesbian New Yorkers.


Travel Advisory; Cooking Lessons In Hawaii in July
Chefs from Asia and the United States will offer cooking lessons and tastings at the second annual Cuisines of the Sun at a resort on the Big Island of Hawaii from July 13 to 17.
The event, which features the cooking styles of sunny climates, will be at the Mauna Lani Bay Hotel and Bungalows.
The chefswill focus on Asian cuisines -- which use lots of grain, fresh fruit and vegetables -- and their influence on American cooking.
Four beverage makers from the United States and Australia will be on hand to demonstrate which beverages go with the various cuisines.


Postings: Joint Effort In Brooklyn; 19 Brick Rowhouses With Stoops
In an attempt to create affordable housing that conforms to the historic architecture of its neighborhood, a consortium of builders is completing work on 19 three-story brick rowhouses in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn.
Each building has only one apartment to a floor.
And, like many 19th-century rowhouses and brownstones in Williamsburg, Fort Greene, Brooklyn Heights, Clinton Hill and other nearby neighborhoods, each has its own stoop.


Take the Momentum Back From Japan
To the Editor:
If ever an article enraged me to the core, it was "When the Corporate Lab Goes to Japan" (April 28).


Ms. Wojciechowski Weds
Kathleen G. Wojciechowski, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Wojciechowski of Barnesville, Md., was married yesterday to Jonathan P. Grussing, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul J. Grussing of Downers Grove, Ill.
The Rev.
Americo DiNorcia and the Rev.
Roger Grussing, a Presbyterian minister and the bridegroom's uncle, officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Rose in Gaithersburg, Md.
Mrs.
Grussing, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and recently received an M.B.A. degree from Dartmouth College.
Her husband, also 27, graduated from Dartmouth.
He is an associate at the First Boston Corporation in New York.


Debra Packman and Mark Landis Are Married
Debra Beth Packman, a product coordinator in New York, and Mark Bennett Landis, a vice president at the First Boston Corporation, were married last evening at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y.
Rabbi Simeon Glaser officiated.
Mrs.
Landis, 28 years old and a graduate of Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., works at MMS International, a McGraw-Hill financial market services company.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan B. Packman of West Hartford, Conn.
Her father is a stategic planner in the manufacturing division at United Technologies Corporation in Hartford.


Adding to Arrau's Legacy
Claudio Arrau, the great Chilean-born pianist who died June 9 at the age of 88, was a prolific recording artist for most of his long career and remained so until his final days.
For close to 30 years, he recorded for Philips Classics.
The last releases before his death were of eight Beethoven sonatas, issued in 1990 on CD only: Opp. 26, 28 and 49, Nos. 1 and 2 (426 256), and Opp. 90, 101 and 14, Nos. 1 and 2 (426 314).
Other Arrau recordings will be issued by Philips on half a dozen compact disks in the coming months.
The repertory will include more Beethoven sonatas, Schubert's Sonata, D. 894, and his "Fantasia," "Klavierstucke" as well as works by Debussy and Bach..
St.
Paul and Wolff


Laura Simone and Peter Unger Marry
Laura Methe Simone, a daughter of Raymond Simone of New York and Susan M. Simone of Tiburon, Calif., was married yesterday in Great Falls, Va., to Peter Van Buren Unger, the son of Polly Taylor Unger of Cincinnati and the late Sherman Edward Unger.
Judge Daniel F. O'Flaherty of General District Court in Alexandria, Va., officiated at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Mittelstaedt, the bride's aunt and uncle.
Mrs.
Unger, 30 years old, is a staff lawyer for the Securities and Exchange Commission, serving as a Congressional fellow for banking and securities matters in the office of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley and received a J.D. from New York Law School.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is president of Pogue Simone Hanley, a real-estate concern in New York.


BEST SELLERS: June 30, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
6
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
2
4
16
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A lawyer's firm is engaged in secret activities.
3
1
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
4
3
8
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
5
1
66
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
6
10
2
THE RUSTLERS OF WEST FORK, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $18.) A frontier novel featuring Hopalong Cassidy, first published in 1951. (LP)
7
5
8
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
8
7
3
VORTEX, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $21.95.) A war in southern Africa, sometime in the future.
9
6
9
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) On the trail of an insurance scam.
10
9
5
IMMORTALITY, by Milan Kundera. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) Through the lives of characters in 19th-century Weimar and present-day Paris, the author reflects on contemporary life.
11 *
15
9
THE NOVEL, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $23.) The lives of writers and editors. (LP)
12
1
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
13
1
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The disappearance of a couple sailing off Bermuda raises a question: is a fabled creature from the deep responsible?
14
12
12
THE SEERESS OF KELL, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) A fantasy novel.
15
14
2
A SOLDIER OF THE GREAT WAR, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $24.95.) An elderly Italian professor recalls a life spent as soldier, hero, deserter, lover and family man.
16 *
11
7
THE CROWN OF COLUMBUS, by Michael Dorris and Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $21.95.) A couple find understanding on a Caribbean trip.
17 *
13
6
HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT, by Whitney Otto. (Villard, $18.) The reminiscences of eight women, members of a quilting circle.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
7
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How the President and his high military commanders made their decisions during the first two years of the Bush Administration.
2
2
32
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
3
4
4
COUNSEL TO THE PRESIDENT, by Clark Clifford with Richard Holbrooke. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the lawyer who served as adviser to several generations of Democrats.
4
14
2
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America, past, present and future.
5
6
3
REAL PONIES DON'T GO OINK! by Patrick F. McManus. (Holt, $16.95.) A humorist's essays about life's foibles at home and in the great outdoors.
6
8
4
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events and machinations that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
7
1
PAUL HARVEY'S FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH, edited by Paul Harvey Jr. (Bantam, $15.) Anecdotes told by the radio broadcaster.
8
7
7
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
9 *
3
10
NANCY REAGAN, by Kitty Kelley. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized biography of the former First Lady.
10
13
6
MY FAVORITE SUMMER 1956, by Mickey Mantle and Phil Pepe. (Doubleday, $18.95.) The recollections of the former New York Yankee.
11
5
4
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
12
1
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
13
9
2
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
14
1
MUHAMMAD ALI, by Thomas Hauser. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) The life and times of the legendary prizefighter and international figure.
15
1
BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) Two former F.B.I. agents report on the downfall of Paul Castellano, head of the Gambino crime family.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
34
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
2
115
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's advice about how to make a personal fortune.
3
4
77
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
4
5
21
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
5
25
FINANCIAL SELF-DEFENSE, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) Ways to manage your money.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE BIRTH OF THE MODERN: World Society 1815-1830, by Paul Johnson. (HarperCollins, $35.) A tasty social history, spiced with gossip and anecdote, of the 15 years Mr.
Johnson argues were the changingest ever, what with steam power, cheap books, mass advertising, rebellions, uprisings and middle-class
arrivisme
.
THE TATTERED CLOAK: And Other Novels, by Nina Berberova. (Knopf, $21.) Actually six novellas or longish stories by a Russian emigre, most of them brilliantly impressionistic evocations of the Russian enclave in Paris before and during World War II.
THE ARROW OF TIME: A Voyage Through Science to Solve Time's Greatest Mystery, by Peter Coveney and Roger Highfield. (Fawcett Columbine, $22.50.) A physicist and a science editor take on the directionality of time in the light of current research.
THE OUTLAW STATE: Saddam Hussein's Quest for Power and the Gulf Crisis, by Elaine Sciolino. (John Wiley &amp; Sons, $22.95.) A popular history, by a reporter for The Times, of the rise to power and methods of control of Mr.
Hussein in his state and the region.
I REMEMBER BALANCHINE: Recollections of the Ballet Master by Those Who Knew Him, by Francis Mason. (Doubleday, $25.) Eighty-four people -- some famous, many not -- relate what Balanchine was to them, giving a real sense of his achievement.
THE ACCIDENT, by David Plante. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $18.95.) Mr.
Plante's 12th novel is a relentlessly compressed little story of moral analysis about faith and loss of faith, with the mystery of God's intentions for humanity at its center.
PAUL SCOTT: A Life of the Author of "The Raj Quartet," by Hilary Spurling. (Norton, $24.95.) A thorough, thoughtful treatment of the conflicted man whose success waited for the end of his career.


Hempstead Pins Hopes on 'Inch by Inch' Turnaround on Main St.
LEONE BAUME, with her eyes darting so as not to miss any move or nuance, strode across the lobby of the Nassau Terminal Building in Hempstead Village with the determination and grace of an iron butterfly.
Ms.
Baume was surveying the territory she manages and defending her turf.
"You see this elevator?" she asked.
"It's totally open and all glass. No one can hurt anyone in here. Look at those trees in the lobby. They all have slender trunks. No one can hide behind them."


CRIME
With some 30,000 men and women on the New York Police Department payroll, there's a high statistical probability that sooner or later one of them will write a police procedural.
Michael Grant, a 23-year veteran who made lieutenant before he retired to Florida, gets a good one off his chest with LINE OF DUTY (Doubleday, $20).
The action starts in the streets, with the almost casual killing of a Harlem drug kingpin.
But when a sharp-eyed squad commander named Brian Shannon notices an execution-style pattern in three seemingly unrelated homicides, the detectives dash indoors to punch lists into their computers and feed paper ("sixty-ones, DD5's, forensic reports, M.E. reports, the works") to their superiors.
For his trouble, Shannon is teamed with a smooth inside operator from the despised Internal Affairs Division and put in charge of a secret investigation into a police department's worst fear -- a death squad of "killer cops on the loose."


Talking: Relocation; Helping Transferees Who Rent
A growing number of corporate transferees are choosing to rent rather than buy a home at their new assignment, a situation that is creating new challenges for the transferees and their employers.
"For the first time I am hearing about people getting benefits that were never discussed before," said Priscilla Toomey, senior vice president at Prudential Relocation Management in White Plains, which handles the housing needs of corporate transferees.
Demand for help with rental relocation among Prudential's 400 corporate clients rose by 25 percent in the last two years, she said.
In the past, the company had provided help mainly in buying and selling homes.


The World; An Insurgency Seeks to Become a Nation
ASMARA, Ethiopia
ON a sidewalk bench shaded by ancient palms in this city of terra cotta villas and imposing churches, a farmer, Sayfe Kedane, 65 years old, dressed in peasant clothes, and his 27-year-old son, Tesfa Ezge Sayfe, an AK-47 assault rifle on his lap and grenades wrapped around his waist, sat talking.
There had been warm embraces and awkward silences.
They hadn't seen each other in nine years, since Mr.
Tesfa fled his village and went to the hills to fight the Ethiopian Army.
Last month, thousands of guerrillas like Mr.
Tesfa returned triumphantly to Asmara, the Italian-style capital of the Ethiopian province of Eritrea and the dream target of their 30-year war aimed at returning Eritrea to its colonial borders.
The Ethiopian Army fled quietly on May 24, releasing a mood of exhilaration among Asmara residents, long weary of humiliation and terror at the hands of a corrupt Ethiopian military.


Anne Doerschuck Weds Whitney Gray
Anne Parish Doerschuck, a daughter of Mrs.
Henry H. Hunter of New Canaan, Conn., and the late John Doerschuck, was married in New Canaan yesterday to Whitney Waterman Gray, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard K. Gray of New Canaan.
The Rev.
Roland M. Jones officiated at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Doerschuck-Gray, 28 years old, graduated from the Russell Sage College School of Nursing and is a nurse in the New Canaan area.
Her father was the president of Fairfield Investors Services.


New York Consul General Takes Israeli Message to Minorities
When the small contingent representing the Israeli Army marched up Broadway in the Persian Gulf victory parade this month, Staff Sgt.
Gim Salomon was hard to miss.
One of the 40,000 Ethiopian Jews in Israel, he was the sole black marching with the unit.
The Israeli Consul General in New York, Uriel Savir, said Sergeant Salomon symbolized Israel's commitment to minority people everywhere.
In a city where relations between Jews and other minorities, particularly blacks, are often tense, Mr.
Savir is trying to meet minority groups and explain Israel's role in world affairs.
He has made closer ties between Israel and minorities in the city a focus of his activities.


Campus Life: U.C., Davis; Veterinary School Joins New Trend In Surgery Courses
Veterinary students seeking to learn surgical techniques but who object to operating on healthy animals will soon have an alternative at the University of California at Davis School of Veterinary Medicine.
In two votes last week, the faculty members of the only veterinary school in California overwhelmingly endorsed an interim arrangement for present students and, eventually, a permanent alternative to the school's existing courses in surgery.


Fiddles and Fireworks in a Week for Americana
THE Charles Ives Center for the Arts in Danbury is waiting until the Fourth of July to begin its summer season with a "Pops and Fireworks" concert.
Skitch Henderson will lead the orchestra in a long list of American favorites, from a Sousa March trilogy on through the conductor's own transcription of Irving Berlin's "God Bless America." Among the highlights in between are William Kroll's "Banjo and Fiddle," with Helen Armstrong the guest violinist, a Cole Porter medley and, with the assistance of the Connecticut Choral Society, Randall Thompson's "Gift Outright."
The rest of the season has a considerably lighter musical focus than in summers past, with only one all-Mozart concert, on Aug. 3, and the annual Marian Anderson Award Benefit on Sept. 1 to uphold the classical traditions.
Otherwise the roster focuses primarily on jazz, pop and theatrical ventures, among them the cabaret singer Susannah McCorkle (July 19), the rock group Blood, Sweat and Tears (July 27), Harry Belafonte (Aug. 10) and an evening of music by Cole Porter and Jerome Kern (Aug. 17).


Pain, but No Gain
Fatties of the world, take heart.
Just when you were in despair over your inability to lose weight comes new evidence that may let you rationalize an extra scoop of ice cream.
Actually, there were two surprising bits of evidence last week, so make that a double scoop.
The first surprise came in The Journal of the American Medical Association.
Some mean-spirited statisticians calculated how much longer people would live if every American reduced fat intake to the level recommended by the Federal Government and major health organizations.
That would add a whopping 60 million years of life for the nation as a whole.
But it only averages out to three or four months longer life expectancy, usually tacked on after age 65.


Poetry Is Ambush
Andrei Codrescu is one of those poets who had best be taken strictly at his word.
If "Belligerence" is what he puts on the cover of his latest collection of poems, then belligerent he means to be.
"In the irruptive mode / I wear no hat / &amp; hate what I see / in the rearview mirror," he warns in the opening lines of the title poem, which are also the opening lines of the book, BELLIGERENCE: New Poems (Coffee House Press, Paper, $8.95).
For Mr.
Codrescu, poetry is ambush, an outsider's weapon for upsetting "order / and the authority spent /establishing it." His baleful pronouncements -- on such subjects as television, bureaucracy and "the failure of internationalism" -- deliberately provoke.


A Ballroom's Specialty: Best Bare Foot Forward
If all the naked feet that danced, jumped, exercised, or simply strode across the maple floor of Dick Shea's Barefoot Ballroom in the last 19 years were lined up side by side -- well, there'd be a lot of toes.
The policy of the premises is simple: no liquor, no smoking, no shoes.
Celeste Carlucci uses the same space for her aerobic full-body workout to live music two evenings a week and the same rules apply -- no socks, no shoes.


Budget Deadlines in 2 Capitals
In Hartford, the House of Representatives passed a spending plan but not a tax to pay for it.
In Trenton, the Senate called off a session with Democrats still divided over whether to approve layoffs.
Articles, page 20.


Poetry at a Gallop
WAKING
By Tom Sleigh. 98 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Cloth, $20.
Paper, $8.95.
LIVING WILLS
New &amp; Selected Poems.
By Cynthia Macdonald. 147 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.95.
OPERATION MEMORY
By David Lehman. 87 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Cloth, $17.50.
Paper, $9.95.


Hop Fever


Headliners; Easy to Hate, but Hard to Stifle
STATE Senator Roy M. Goodman declared war on wailing car alarms last week, and at first glance seemed to have chosen the easiest target in town.
He was accompanied by experts in audiology, criminology and psychology who explained how car alarms ruin people's sleep (even those who aren't awakened are jarred out of the deepest phase), probably decrease children's learning ability, and generally diminish the quality of life for everyone except car thieves -- who, to judge from studies and crime statistics, don't seem to mind them at all.
But in some ways the Senator's attack was as notable for what it ignored.
He did not try to ban the alarms altogether, nor did he propose eliminating an indirect government subsidy for them.
The alarms may be horrendously unpopular, but they remain the beneficiary of a classic tenet in special-interest politics: What the legislature giveth, it rarely taketh away.
The problem dates back a decade to an obscure New York State law requiring insurers to give 10 percent discounts to policyholders who install anti-theft devices.


Marlene Van Dyk, A Lawyer, Is Wed
Marlene Van Dyk and Ward Arnel Greenberg, who are both lawyers, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Wilbert Van Dyk, the father of the bride, officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Peter McGeary, an Anglican priest who is the bridegroom's brother-in-law.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from Calvin College in Grand Rapids, Mich., and the University of Michigan Law School.
She was until recently an associate at the firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts in Stamford, Conn.
Her father, a minister of the Christian Reformed Church, is the academic dean and an associate professor in homiletics at Calvin Theological Seminary in Grand Rapids.
Her mother, Elaine Van Dyk, is a kindergarten teacher in Grand Rapids.


With Soaring Taxes Forecast, Development Can Offer Relief
FOR Westchester homeowners who complain about soaring property taxes, the worst may be yet to come: a possible 30 percent increase in real-estate taxes by the end of the decade.
That was one of the major findings of a new economic study, prepared by the White Plains office of BDO Seidman, an international accounting firm, which showed that Westchester will face higher taxes unless more is done to promote new business development.


Edith S. McBean and John S. Newberry 4th Wed
Edith Starkey McBean, a daughter of Peter McBean of San Francisco and Mrs.
David Weatherby of Evenlode, Gloucestershire, England, was married in Newport, R.I., yesterday to John Stoughton Newberry 4th, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Cammann Newberry of Boston.
Canon Lorne Coyle performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Newberry, 39 years old, is an outreach coordinator at the Animal Medical Center of New York.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is a rancher and a director of the Newhall Land and Farming Company in Valencia, Calif.


Summer in the City: An Adventurer's Guide
With school out for the summer, parents may be looking for amusements for their children in New York City.
Here is a sampling of children's activities, compiled by Dulcie Leimbach, scheduled for the summer.
Dates and times are subject to change.
All Ages
July


Teresa Denning, Manager, Weds
Teresa Elaine Denning, the daughter of Mrs.
Howard F. Denning of Warwick, R.I., and the late Mr.
Denning, was married yesterday at the Manning Chapel at Brown University in Providence, R.I., to Edward Dennis Sevilla, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eduardo Sevilla of Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
The Rev.
John Denning, a Roman Catholic priest and a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 31 years old, is a manager in the business analysis group at American Express Travel Related Services in New York.
She graduated from Brown and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her mother retired as a science specialist with the Warwick elementary schools.
Her father was a research chemist.


Meica M. O'Mara To Wed in August
Mr. and Mrs.
John M. O'Mara of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Meica Murray O'Mara to Miguel de Beistegui, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Juan de Beistegui of Paris.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss O'Mara, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in French literature from New York University.
She was a member of the New York Junior Assembly in 1983.
Her father is the chairman of the executive committee of Quality Care Systems, a health-care cost-containment company in New York.


Review/Dance; Bearden Company Offers 'Homage to Mary Lou'
The Nanette Bearden Contemporary Dance Theater's 15th-anniversary celebration on Wednesday night at the Theater of the Riverside Church ended with a happy sense of family on both sides of the proscenium.
There were cheers not only for the smiling dancers in this mostly black modern-dance troupe, but also for a number of black show business stars of earlier eras who were acknowledged in the audience.
But what came before was distressing.
There is rich material in the music of Mary Lou Williams, the jazz pianist and composer whose work and life were touched upon in "Homage to Mary Lou," the first of three programs in this anniversary season, which ended Friday night.
There was some interesting choreography in the rather hodgepodge, three-act suite of dances, set to Miss Williams's music by Alvin Ailey, Talley Beatty, Fred Benjamin, Eleanor Harris, Dianne McIntyre, Mama Lu Parks and Walter Rutledge.


Marijke E. Mars Weds S. J. Doyle
Marijke Elizabeth Mars, a daughter of Virginia C. Mars and Forrest E. Mars Jr., both of McLean, Va., was married yesterday to Stephen J. Doyle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Doyle of Ashland, Va.
The Rev.
Stephen Doyle, a Roman Catholic priest and an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at the Washington Cathedral.
The bride, 26 years old and a Duke University graduate, is keeping her name.
She is the regional manager in Los Angeles for Kal Kan Foods Inc., a pet food company.
Her father is a president of the Mars food and candy company in McLean.


Martha Oliver Is Wed
Martha Teel Oliver and Jeffrey Calrow Crater, Congressional aides in Washington, were married there yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church by the Rev.
Dr.
Edward H. Kryder.
Ms.
Oliver, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, is a research assistant for the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and a law student at Georgetown University.
She graduated from Middlebury College, as did her husband, a special assistant to the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee of the same House panel.
The bride is a daughter of R. Spencer Oliver of Washington, the chief counsel to the House Foreign Affairs Committee, and Mrs.
Ralph D. Calvert of Annapolis, Md.
Mr.
Crater, 26, is a son of Mrs.
Henry A. Jandl of Richmond and the late David H. Crater.


CONSEQUENCES
Pogrebin's Hers column was a brave piece, and those of us who remember the times and share the experience are richer for reading it.
BETSY NOLAN
New York, N.Y.


A Pretty Car Is Like a Melody
IN a way, I suppose, designing a car is like writing a song; you don't know whether or not it will be a hit until the deejays start to send it out.
I know that I wouldn't have a clue, and I base the knowledge on a lifetime of wrongheadedness.
There was, for instance, the time in the Navy when I thought a buddy's brand-new 1957 Chevy had all the good looks of a drill instructor.
I didn't tell him so, but I was relieved when the '58 came along to win my heart.
The '57, of course, has since become the premier Chevrolet, while its successor can be found, if at all, in the company of junkyard dogs.


CONSEQUENCES
It is understandable, given the political and cultural climate of the 1950's, that unwed motherhood was a dismal prospect and adoption equally unappealing to Pogrebin.
However, the dramatic changes in social mores and attitudes which now enable single women to consider raising their children are similarly transforming the prospects for adoptees and their families in promising ways.
Pogrebin refers several times to the dread she felt in imagining her child being raised by "strangers." It was the universal practice of closed or confidential adoption (which terminates all contact with birth parents and adoptive parents) that led to the feeling that children placed for adoption were being raised by strangers.
The inability of birth parents to gain assurance of their child's well being; of adoptive parents to develop an empathic relationship toward the biological parents of their child and, most importantly, of adopted children to have access to their biological heritage is an estranging legacy.


In Summer, It's Crickets, Not Gunfire
Doris Valentine's grandchildren live in the South Bronx not far from Orchard Beach, but most of them learned to swim in a backyard pool about 300 miles away, in Eden, N.Y.
Since the mid-1970's, nine of Mrs.
Valentine's grandchildren have made the trip to the rural town about 25 miles south of Buffalo to spend part of their summers with Joan and Orville Chatwood and their four children.


Dollar Zooms Up and Away
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
137.45
138.90
152.20
per Dollar
German Mark
1.8105
1.8020
1.6610
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1417
1.1433
1.1633
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6220
1.6265
1.7490
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$368.00
$365.50
$357.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Sports People: TRACK AND FIELD; Kingdom vs. Nehemiah
ROGER KINGDOM'S ailing knee is well enough for him to face RENALDO NEHEMIAH in the high hurdles at the New York Games on July 20.
A spokesman for Mita, the meet sponsor, said yesterday that Kingdom had entered.
Kingdom passed up the United States championships earlier this month, still recovering from knee surgery, and missed a chance to qualify for the American team going to the world championships in Tokyo in August.
Nehemiah qualified.
So did JACK PIERCE, who will also compete in the New York Games, along with TONY DEES.


Style Makers; James O'Halloran and Kevin Foley, Toothbrush Designers
Two architects designing a toothbrush is not an everyday occurrence.
But when the whole thing started, James O'Halloran and Kevin Foley were working in Tortola in the British Virgin Islands, where, Mr.
O'Halloran said, "wacky things" happen.
Still, unlike many offbeat ideas, this one came to fruition.
In 1984, the Radius, a toothbrush with a large head and a sophisticated, easy-to-hold handle angled for optimum cleaning of the gumline, was introduced.
"If it has style, it comes from its functional aspect," said Mr.
O'Halloran, who lists Cher, Sting, and Tommy Tune among its users.


West Cork's Wild Peninsulas
IN the language of history and legend, the lure of the West of Ireland has always had a magical quality.
The English, who never succeeded at bringing the western reaches of the island under their authority, believed that the farther one traveled beyond the limits of the Crown's jurisdiction the less the rules of civilization applied.
Enveloping the southwestern corner of Ireland, County Cork spreads out from the republic's second largest commercial city, Cork.
But its western peninsulas -- the Mizen and the Beara -- retain their wild aspect, and unlike the more famous Ring of Kerry to the north, the ring routes that edge their jutting cliffs and sheltered harbors have not yet become worn paths of tourism.
West Cork, sometimes known as West Carbery in the ancient baronial nomenclature, has always been a land unto itself.
The soft southwestern climate maintained by the Gulf Stream nurtures palm trees, banks of fuchsia and rhododendrons and midwinter wildflowers along a ragged coastline formed of limestone and slate.
Boiling seas at Dursey Island, Sheep's Head and Three Castle Head menace shipping while guarding the graceful bays -- they are really drowned valleys -- of Bantry, Dunmanus and Roaringwater.


A New Company Promises a New Voice
WITH theaters in attrition, the arts in crisis and the economy in recession, what sort of time is this for a new professional theater company to be springing up?
"We're not thinking about all that," said Steven Bloom, who with William MacNeil is co-founder and co-artistic director of the Rivoli Stage Company, the new resident company of the William Carlos Williams Center for the Arts.
"We're taking a chance. Our voice is different and we're not doing what others are doing. And our unique position makes it worthwhile to attempt."


Good News About Native Dogwoods
THE dogwood has been magnificent this year.
Especially beautiful was the May-blooming native dogwood,which belongs to the Northeastern woodlands, where it is an understory tree.
Woodlands are often polka dotted with the white of its magnificent splendor.
Another distinction is its horizontal branching, which makes the tree look as though it is growing in layers.
Gaining in popularity is the kousa dogwood, which has just finished blooming.
Unlike the native species (Cornus florida), which blooms before the leaves come out, the kousa dogwood blooms in June, and the somewhat larger flowers sit on top of the foliage.
The kousa's popularity is for good reason.


A Pair of Musical Showcases Served With Picnics or Four-Course Meals
WHAT do current productions of a scruffy rock opera about the last seven days in the life of Jesus and a squeaky clean operetta about nuns, a family that sings together and the rise of the Nazis, have in common?
The struggle of good against evil and a sense of divine purpose, of course.
But more important, when grappling with exalted themes, you get to eat something.
At the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport, audiences attending performances of "Jesus Christ Superstar" are advised to bring their own picnics, "however simple, however elaborate." And at Connecticut's Broadway Theater, formerly the Darien Dinner Theater, a four-course meal is served before "The Sound of Music" goes on, but it does not include schnitzel with noodles.


A Block of Cool in a Heatwave


Asia Society Impresario Helps Tradition Survive
Each year since 1970, Beate Gordon has left her cluttered office at the Asia Society to search for treasures.
Braving monsoons and the vagaries of local plane schedules, she has sought authentic folk arts all over Asia and introduced them to Americans.
"It's hard to think of anybody who's had a greater influence in opening American eyes to Asian cultures and values," said Robert Oxnam, president of the society.
"She almost single-handedly began bringing the greatest dancers, musicians and actors from cultures across Asia to American audiences who had never seen or appreciated them."


BUSINESS DIARY/June 23-28
THE ECONOMNY Congress Finds It's Easier to Criticize on Savings and Loan Bailout


Make the Free-Trade Vision a Reality
With the end of the Cold War, trade has displaced security as the centerpiece of relations between the United States and Latin America..
Yet there is not one organization with the mandate and expertise to exercise leadership on inter-American trade issues.
This is a vacuum that now should be filled by the governments of the Americas.
President Bush set off a flurry of activity a year ago, when he put forth the vision of a Western Hemisphere free-trade area.
Country after country in Latin America declared interest in free trade with the United States -- and six have signed bilateral or multilateral "framework agreements" with Washington providing for regular discussion on key issues.
The proposal has also reinvigorated existing trade pacts throughout Latin America; prompted Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay to work toward a common market, and spurred other nations to begin free-trade talks.
All this activity surely will accelerate now that fast-track authority for United States trade negotiations has been renewed.


Jori A. Meltzer Weds
Jori A. Meltzer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter T. Meltzer of New York, and Jonathan E. Wolfe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Wolfe of Syosset, L.I., were married in New York last evening by Rabbi Judah Nadich at the Rainbow Room.
Mrs.
Wolfe, 25 years old, and her husband, 26, are graduates of Georgetown University.
She is an account executive at Gavin Anderson Doremus, a public-relations concern, and Mr.
Wolfe is a junior foreign currency trader at Credit Suisse, both in New York.


Mutual Funds; Return Patterns, by Sector
By nature, sector funds, which invest in single industries, are far more exposed to swings in the economy than broadly based stock funds.
Some sectors fare relatively well in recessions, and others do not.
Or a sector may do poorly early in a recession but then jump back quickly when the economy begins to look better.
For instance, utilities funds tend to perform relatively well in down markets because utility stocks pay high dividends and their revenues resist recession.


Morocco and Polisario Front Accept Sept. 6 Sahara Truce
Morocco and the Polisario Front guerrilla movement have accepted Sept. 6 as the date for a permanent cease-fire after more than 15 years of conflict over the Western Sahara, the United Nations said Friday night.
The statement was issued here after two days of informal talks between representatives of the two sides and the United Nations special representative for the North African territory, Johannes Manz of Switzerland.


At Strategic Arms Talks, Accord Proves Elusive
Amid fears that the nearly completed Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty may die stillborn, American and Soviet negotiators resumed talks in Geneva last Wednesday on the resolution of some technical snags blocking agreement.
Unless a final accord is reached soon, some experts fear, a major opportunity will be lost.
The treaty would sharply reduce ballistic missile warheads -- the Soviets' by 48 percent, the Americans' by 35 percent -- and institute verification procedures that would include surprise inspections of missile warheads, bombers and storage sites.


For the Nations of Eastern Europe, The U.S. Is More Symbol Than Model
SECRETARY OF STATE James A. Baker 3d received two very different receptions in his visits to the Eastern European neighbors Yugoslavia and Albania last weekend.
In Yugoslavia, his appeal to the leaders of Slovenia and Croatia not to secede fell on deaf ears and Mr.
Baker was bluntly told that his advice was neither valued nor desired.
A day later Mr.
Baker went to Albania, where he was received by 300,000 Albanians who cheered his every utterance and made him an honorary citizen.
The contrasting receptions reflect America's paradoxical role in the world today.
On the one hand, as the Albanians attested, America is still an incredibly powerful symbol of certain basic values -- freedom, democracy, self-determination and economic opportunity -- that tantalize the long-suppressed peoples of Eastern Europe.
The Albanians who poured out to receive Mr.
Baker did so with an almost religious fervor, armed with crudely made paper American flags and placards that were more passionate than grammatical: "Welcome Mr. Becker," said one, "Welcome Mr. Beaker," said another.
They were never quite sure what his name was, but then it didn't really matter, because for them he was no more a person than the papier-mache Statue of Liberty that Chinese students erected two years ago in Tiananmen Square.


Their Finest Hour
In the early morning hours of Aug. 25, 1940, a lone German aircraft dropped the first bombs on London, and so began the assault on the city known to history as the blitz.
Germany's major assault began on Sept. 7 when nearly 1,000 airplanes, one-third of them bombers, making up a formation one and a half miles high covering 800 square miles, appeared over the skies of England.
For 76 days wave after wave of bombers destroyed the city's docks and warehouses, office buildings, shops and homes.
THE BLITZ: The Photography of George Rodger (Penguin, Paper, $16.95), a collection of the Life photographer's striking black and white shots, shows Londoners calmly going about their everyday lives in the face of incredible adversity.
A news vendor refuses to take shelter during a raid; a shopkeeper carefully sweeps up broken glass and rubble; a mailman on his rounds finds many addresses have vanished during the night; a resident carefully salvages what he can from his blitzed home, and volunteers hand out the inevitable cups of tea to shocked victims of the bombing.
These pictures of a city under siege portray a brave and resolute people who never gave defeat a thought and showed a stubborn determination to stand up for their right to be a free nation.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The bottom two rows of bricks at the base of the chimney in my basement are painted.
There is a white powdery substance on the basement floor that seems to be coming out of the mortar on the third and fourth rows above this.
The house is about 50 years old.
What is causing this powder to form?
A.
This is efflorescence, a white residue that is formed by excess alkaline salts in the masonry.
It is usually caused by a moisture condition in the brickwork, and so you should check the chimney structure on the outside.
Start by inspecting the chimney cap at the very top.
If it is cracked or missing entirely, it should be repaired.
If this is not the problem, then it is likely that some mortar joints on the outside, or possibly all of them, need tuck-pointing, which is not unusual after 50 years.
This calls for scraping out the old mortar to a depth of a half-inch and then replacing with fresh mortar.


Toxic Pollution At Military Sites Is Posing a Crisis
On the eve of a vote for a second round of military base closings, the Defense Department is running into serious trouble selling or leasing installations already scheduled to be shut because of toxic contamination at the sites.
The military industry has produced the most toxic pollution in the country and virtually every military installation has been extensively contaminated by the hazardous byproducts of activities like repairing aircraft and making weapons and by the disregard of safe practices for disposing of waste.


Despite Their Setbacks, Slovenes Remain Defiant
Slovenes appeared firm today in their resolve to resist despite a Yugoslav Army blitz that largely succeeded in returning Slovenia's border crossings to federal control.
Throughout Slovenia today, people expressed disgust at what they insisted on calling an occupation by a foreign army instead of a civil war.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
COBBLESTONE LEADERSHIP  Majority Rule, Minority Power.
By James MacGregor Burns with L. Marvin Overby.
University of Oklahoma, $17.95.


Look at Gay Bias Was Overdue
To the Sports Editor:
Finally, The Times is tackling a serious issue left unexamined for too long: gay bias in sports.


It's All In the Context
To the Editor:
Janet Maslin's defense of "Thelma and Louise" against charges of "toxic feminism" is an able apology  [ "Lay Off Thelma and Louise," June 16 ] .
Accusations that toxic feminism has emerged in "Thelma and Louise" are nonsense, and not because the movie's body count pales beside more conventional Hollywood product.
The difference is not in numbers but in context.


Campus Life: Iowa; Auditor's Report Says $58,011 Was Misspent
The Iowa State Auditors Office concluded last week that $58,011.16 has been misappropriated from the University of Iowa's office of campus programs over the last six years.
The auditor's report, issued on Thursday, named Kevin G. Taylor, former director of the programs office, as the only person to have had access to the money.
The report by Richard Johnson, a state auditor, also offered recommendations to strengthen administrators' control over student funds, including limits on the amount of money that can be paid out of university cash accounts.


From Manhattan, Summertime Fare
LEN ALLISON and Karen Hubert Allison are doing the Manhattan-to-Shelter Island shuffle again this summer.
Last season, they split their time between Huberts, their Park Avenue restaurant, and the Chequit Inn on Shelter Island.
A lot has happened in the Allisons' lives this past year.
They closed Hubert's; opened Onda, a more modestly priced SoHo establishment, and have now leased the dining room at the Dering Harbor Inn for another summer on Shelter Island.


Miss Clark Weds Hugh Robertson
Elizabeth Chapman Clark, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Chapman Clark of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday at the Reformed Church in Bronxville to Elihu Fowler Robertson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick S. Robertson Jr. of Norfolk, Va.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard J. Lichti performed the cermony.
The bride, 31 years old, received a master's degree in education earlier this month from Harvard University.
She graduated from Williams College and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a vice president of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, the investment bankers in New York.
Her mother, Ruthann Clark, is the guidance director at the Masters School in Dobbs Ferry.


The Conservative Majority Solidifies
JUSTICE Thurgood Marshall's warning in a dissenting opinion last Thursday morning that the Supreme Court's new majority had launched a "far-reaching assault upon this Court's precedents" was not only a bitter reflection on the term that had just ended.
It was also a prediction about the Court's future.
Barely three hours later, Justice Marshall's announcement of his decision to retire underscored just how accurate that prediction is likely to prove.
Justice David H. Souter's arrival on the Court last October had already cemented a majority with an eager appetite for overturning precedents, at least in the area of criminal law.
The Court overturned five of its own precedents this term, all in the area of criminal defendants' rights.


Legislative Impasse
For the last two months, Congress and President Bush have devoted a lot of energy to civil rights legislation.
But Thursday's collapse of an effort by moderate Republican senators to broker a compromise left the two sides no closer, politically, to agreement than they were six months ago.
But some things have changed since the House passed one version of the bill on June 5, amid one of the most mean-spirited debates of the year.
That was an exercise in questioning motives and saying as little as possible about how the legislation would work and why one kind of lawyers' language was better than another.


The Battle of the Heart Drugs/A special report.; Two Remedies That Save Lives: Doctors Prescribe the Costly One
Two drugs for treating people with heart attacks are equally effective in saving lives, according to two important studies.
One drug costs $2,200 a dose, and the other $76 to $300.
Which should be used?
In most countries, doctors usually choose the less expensive drug, known as streptokinase.
But American doctors mostly prefer the expensive one, known as T.P.A.
Although some doctors have switched to streptokinase in recent months, many say there are theoretical reasons to believe that T.P.A. is better despite the recent studies.


Kerry Celentano Weds
Kerry A. Celentano, a daughter of Mr. and John A. Celentano Jr. of New York, was married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York to Brian J. Frawley, the son of Johanna Sepe of Somers, N.Y., and Franklyn Frawley of New York.
The Rev.
John E. Halborg officiated.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated from Fordham University and is studying there for a master's degree in social work.
The bridegroom, 25, is a paralegal at the New York law firm of Fischetti &amp; Russo.
A graduate of Fordham, he is to enter the Thomas Cooley School of Law in Lansing, Mich., in January.


The World Over, Women's Progress Is Uneven
To the Editor:
In any assessment of human rights in the Middle East, the rights of women must be taken into account.


Latin America
To the Editor: I visited Brazil and Chile at the end of March and beginning of April.
Since Latin America is a somewhat unusual destination, because rampant inflation makes the postage denominations sky high and because the stamps are colorful and interesting, I thought it would be amusing to send postcards.
I gathered addresses of friends and family, bought lots of cards, wrote messages, went to post offices in Rio de Janeiro and Santiago, asked about airmail rates to the United States, paid almost $1 per card for postage, placed the stamps on myself, marked each card airmail and mailed them myself.
It has been about two months and not a single card has arrived.
The explanation cannot be that
all
the cards were misaddressed.
I suspect that the explanation is either inefficiency or corruption.
It is possible that the postal departments simply take your money and never bother to send the cards.
THEORDORE J. JACOBS Washington


Postings: 18 Projects; Home Subsidies For 633 Families
The Federal Home Loan Bank of New York, which lends money to banks that provide housing mortgages in New York, New Jersey, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, has plans to add 18 new subsidized affordable housing projects to the 54 it has already helped finance in its operating area.
The new projects, ten in New York State, seven in New Jersey and one in Puerto Rico, will provide ownership or rental opportunities for 633 low- and moderate-income families by combining below-cost mortgages, funneled through participating local banks, with state and local housing programs to subsidize each unit by $2,000 to $14,000


Blind on Antarctica
The now-you-see-him, now-you-don't "environment President" has struck again.
Last year President Bush promised Congress that he would press for a long-term ban on commercial activity in Antarctica.
Last weekend he allowed his negotiators to reject such a ban -- disappointing America's allies and embarrassing himself.
At issue was a painfully drafted protocol to the Antarctic Treaty that would prohibit mining and drilling in the world's largest wilderness for 50 years.
The ban could then be lifted only if all 26 nations with full voting rights concurred.


President Trims List of Court Candidates
President Bush said today that he had narrowed his list of candidates to succeed the retiring Justice Thurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court.
On the first tee of his second round of golf during a long weekend at his summer estate here, Mr.
Bush said: "It's narrowing. It's narrowed today." But the President said he had not yet made a decision.


18-Year-Old Is Shot to Death
An 18-year-old Brooklyn man was shot to death on a street corner "in a dispute over a girl," the police said.
Basil Seixas, of 94 East 43d Street, was shot in the chest at 9:35 P.M.
Friday at Troy and Church Avenues in the Flatbush section, said Sgt.
Ed Burns, a police spokesman.
He was taken to Kings County Hospital where he was pronounced dead.


Sam Fry Jr., 82, Dies; A Champion in Bridge
Sam Fry Jr., one of the top-ranked bridge players in the United States, died on Friday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old.
He had been suffering from pneumonia, his wife, Camilla, said.


Good News About Native Dogwoods
THE dogwood has been magnificent this year.
Especially beautiful was the May-blooming native dogwood,which belongs to the Northeastern woodlands, where it is an understory tree.
Woodlands are often polka dotted with the white of its magnificent splendor.
Another distinction is its horizontal branching, which makes the tree look as though it is growing in layers.
Gaining in popularity is the kousa dogwood, which has just finished blooming.
Unlike the native species (Cornus florida), which blooms before the leaves come out, the kousa dogwood blooms in June, and the somewhat larger flowers sit on top of the foliage.
The kousa's popularity is for good reason.


'Chutzpah'
To the Editor:
Sidney Zion writes that "no Jew has ever sought the nomination for President or even Vice President from a major party." This is incorrect; Milton J. Shapp, the Governor of Pennsylvania from 1971 to 1979, campaigned in the Presidential primaries for the 1976 Democratic nomination.
ANITA M. HARRIS Cambridge, Mass.


New York Beckons Summer's Young Visitors
With school out for the summer, parents may be looking for amusements for their children in New York City.
Here is a sampling of children's activities, compiled by Dulcie Leimbach, scheduled for the summer.
Dates and times are subject to change.
All Ages
July


Our Peculiar Culture
To the Editor:
Anthony Gottlieb, who reviewed two books by the philosopher Richard Rorty (June 2), combines an extraordinary literary flair with an extremely ordinary mind.
That Mr. Rorty is, in fact,
not
a relativist, but that Mr.
Gottlieb takes him to be a relativist par excellence, testifies to Mr.
Gottlieb's deficient grasp of central matters.
Mr.
Rorty has never pretended that there are no such things as truths, nor that truths are made true because cultures believe them.
Mr.
Rorty is quite clear that truths are true because they describe the world accurately.
His point, though, is that descriptions of the world are always
our
descriptions, and the world can be described in whatever indefinite number of ways we may successfully come up with, pursuant to our various projects and interests.


The Life and Strange Career of a Mole Hunter
COLD WARRIOR
James Jesus Angleton: The CIA's Master Spy Hunter.
By Tom Mangold.
Illustrated. 462 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.95.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Granby, Conn. 225,000
196 North Granby Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; country kitchen with pantry, horse barn and pasture, 10 acres; taxes $2,800.
Stamford, Conn. 315,000
119 Janes Lane
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; sun room, large deck, 1.7 acres; taxes $3,906.
West Hartford, Conn. 205,000
1170 Farmington Avenue
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 38-year-old cape cod; family room with wood stove in-law apartment with separate entrance, 60- by 150-foot lot; taxes $3,190.
Bedford, N.Y. 628,500
2 Falcon Woods Court
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; formal dining room, family room, playroom, exercise room; taxes $10,000.
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 347,500
59 Butternut Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old split-level; family room, patio, study, fireplace, cathedral ceiling, balcony; taxes $7,378.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 365,000
11 Gray Rock Park Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split-level; sunken living room, 3 fireplaces, 2 family rooms, patio, 1 acre; taxes $7,146.
OTHER AREAS Park Ridge, N.J. 182,000
178 Park Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 53-year-old Cape Cod; patio, new kitchen, fireplace; taxes $3,689.
Hillsdale, N.J. 192,000
221 Raymond Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; 2-zone heat, 1-year homeowner's warranty, large property; taxes $4,037.
Massapequa, L.I. 183,000
133 Unqua Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $3,700.


'Chutzpah'
To the Editor:
Like Alan M. Dershowitz, I am a former yeshiva boy from Brooklyn now living in Cambridge, Mass.
I feel an unspoken affinity with him every time I see him on the street.
Yet the suggestion that American Jews ought to emulate the abrasive personality of Mr.
Dershowitz seems to me ludicrous at best.
If Jews in America need anything, it is a more profound and less conflicted relation to their Jewishness.
The author of "Chutzpah" would probably agree, but he sees fit to prescribe the exact form that our Jewish identity should take -- namely, his own brand of ivy-covered bombast.
If Alan Dershowitz chooses to define himself as a Jew in terms of an exaggerated assertiveness, then so be it.
I find that sad, but it is his prerogative -- just leave the rest of us to our own self-understanding.
Also, I'm no psychologist, but if someone feels the need to write a book chastening others for their supposed insecurities, doesn't that tell us something about his?


Wife, Kids and Dull Career
BOOMFELL
By Douglas Hobbie. 281 pp. New York: A John Macrae Book/Henry Holt &amp; Company.


Travel Advisory; East Anglia Plans Reunion
A celebration of the the 50th anniversary of the arrival of United States forces in England in 1942 -- called Return to England 1992 -- is being planned by England's East Anglia Tourist Board.
The concentration of half a million American servicemen in the East Anglian counties of Norfolk and Suffolk and neighboring areas during World War II resulted in lasting friendships and some 60,000 marriages, the board says.
A program of events starting in May next year will include air shows, Glenn Miller-style concerts and memorial services.
Prince Andrew has agreed to be patron of the reunion.


Postings: From Condos to Leases; Asian Foods in Flushing
When Farrington Associates first planned its retail condominium project in Flushing, Queens, two years ago, the goal of many merchants there was to own their store spaces.
Since then a glut of commercial condominiums and economic uncertainty have nearly halted the demand for retail condos.
Rather than scrap their plans, the developers decided to rework the concept for their two-story, 20,000-square-foot building at 3505 Farrington Street, at Northern Boulevard.
Instead of selling stores, the builders will lease stalls, at $1,000 a month, to sellers of Asian foods.
The basement will hold a 25-stall food court and the developers are negotiating deals that would put an Asian-style supermarket on the main floor and a banquet hall on the second floor.


Miss the War? Here's How to Catch Up.
I missed the war.
I was out of town.
As my telephone machine said from mid-December to early March, "I can't answer the phone. Right now, I'm in, or near, Antarctica." Of course I knew the basics of what had happened.
While I was on board the U.S.
Coast Guard icebreaker Polar Sea on my way to and from Antarctica (I was researching a book on the Southern Ocean), a news summary of a page or two appeared every few days.
Live radio news and days-old television tapes reached McMurdo Station in Antarctica, where I spent several weeks.
So I knew when the gulf war started; I knew about the bombing and the Scud missiles hitting Israel; I knew when the ground war started and when it ended.
You might say I was the recipient of precision surgical dispensing of news, instead of the saturation coverage that was dropped on the folks at home.


